
Title:      Burmese Days
Author:     George Orwell


'This desert inaccessible
Under the shade of melancholy boughs'

As you like it.

1

U Po Kyin, Sub-divisional Magistrate of Kyauktada, in Upper Burma,
was sitting in his veranda.  It was only half past eight, but the
month was April, and there was a closeness in the air, a threat of
the long, stifling midday hours.  Occasional faint breaths of wind,
seeming cool by contrast, stirred the newly drenched orchids that
hung from the eaves.  Beyond the orchids one could see the dusty,
curved trunk of a palm tree, and then the blazing ultramarine sky.
Up in the zenith, so high that it dazzled one to look at them, a
few vultures circled without the quiver of a wing.

Unblinking, rather like a great porcelain idol, U Po Kyin gazed out
into the fierce sunlight.  He was a man of fifty, so fat that for
years he had not risen from his chair without help, and yet shapely
and even beautiful in his grossness; for the Burmese do not sag and
bulge like white men, but grow fat symmetrically, like fruits
swelling.  His face was vast, yellow and quite unwrinkled, and his
eyes were tawny.  His feet--squat, high-arched feet with the toes
all the same length--were bare, and so was his cropped head, and he
wore one of those vivid Arakanese longyis with green and magenta
checks which the Burmese wear on informal occasions.  He was
chewing betel from a lacquered box on the table, and thinking about
his past life.

It had been a brilliantly successful life.  U Po Kyin's earliest
memory, back in the eighties, was of standing, a naked pot-bellied
child, watching the British troops march victorious into Mandalay.
He remembered the terror he had felt of those columns of great
beef-fed men, red-faced and red-coated; and the long rifles over
their shoulders, and the heavy, rhythmic tramp of their boots.  He
had taken to his heels after watching them for a few minutes.  In
his childish way he had grasped that his own people were no match
for this race of giants.  To fight on the side of the British, to
become a parasite upon them, had been his ruling ambition, even as
a child.

At seventeen he had tried for a Government appointment, but he had
failed to get it, being poor and friendless, and for three years
he had worked in the stinking labyrinth of the Mandalay bazaars,
clerking for the rice merchants and sometimes stealing.  Then when
he was twenty a lucky stroke of blackmail put him in possession of
four hundred rupees, and he went at once to Rangoon and bought his
way into a Government clerkship.  The job was a lucrative one
though the salary was small.  At that time a ring of clerks were
making a steady income by misappropriating Government stores, and
Po Kyin (he was plain Po Kyin then: the honorific U came years
later) took naturally to this kind of thing.  However, he had too
much talent to spend his life in a clerkship, stealing miserably in
annas and pice.  One day he discovered that the Government, being
short of minor officials, were going to make some appointments from
among the clerks.  The news would have become public in another
week, but it was one of Po Kyin's qualities that his information
was always a week ahead of everyone else's.  He saw his chance and
denounced all his confederates before they could take alarm.  Most
of them were sent to prison, and Po Kyin was made an Assistant
Township Officer as the reward of his honesty.  Since then he had
risen steadily.  Now, at fifty-six, he was a Sub-divisional
Magistrate, and he would probably be promoted still further and
made an acting Deputy Commissioner, with Englishmen as his equals
and even his subordinates.

As a magistrate his methods were simple.  Even for the vastest
bribe he would never sell the decision of a case, because he knew
that a magistrate who gives wrong judgments is caught sooner or
later.  His practice, a much safer one, was to take bribes from
both sides and then decide the case on strictly legal grounds.
This won him a useful reputation for impartiality.  Besides his
revenue from litigants, U Po Kyin levied a ceaseless toll, a sort
of private taxation scheme, from all the villages under his
jurisdiction.  If any village failed in its tribute U Po Kyin took
punitive measures--gangs of dacoits attacked the village, leading
villagers were arrested on false charges, and so forth--and it was
never long before the amount was paid up.  He also shared the
proceeds of all the larger-sized robberies that took place in the
district.  Most of this, of course, was known to everyone except U
Po Kyin's official superiors (no British officer will ever believe
anything against his own men) but the attempts to expose him
invariably failed; his supporters, kept loyal by their share of the
loot, were too numerous.  When any accusation was brought against
him, U Po Kyin simply discredited it with strings of suborned
witnesses, following this up by counter-accusations which left him
in a stronger position than ever.  He was practically invulnerable,
because he was too fine a judge of men ever to choose a wrong
instrument, and also because he was too absorbed in intrigue ever
to fail through carelessness or ignorance.  One could say with
practical certainty that he would never be found out, that he would
go from success to success, and would finally die full of honour,
worth several lakhs of rupees.

And even beyond the grave his success would continue.  According to
Buddhist belief, those who have done evil in their lives will spend
the next incarnation in the shape of a rat, a frog or some other
low animal.  U Po Kyin was a good Buddhist and intended to provide
against this danger.  He would devote his closing years to good
works, which would pile up enough merit to outweigh the rest of his
life.  Probably his good works would take the form of building
pagodas.  Four pagodas, five, six, seven--the priests would tell
him how many--with carved stonework, gilt umbrellas and little
bells that tinkled in the wind, every tinkle a prayer.  And he
would return to the earth in male human shape--for a woman ranks
at about the same level as a rat or a frog--or at best as some
dignified beast such as an elephant.

All these thoughts flowed through U Po Kyin's mind swiftly and for
the most part in pictures.  His brain, though cunning, was quite
barbaric, and it never worked except for some definite end; mere
meditation was beyond him.  He had now reached the point to which
his thoughts had been tending.  Putting his smallish, triangular
hands on the arms of his chair, he turned himself a little way
round and called, rather wheezily:

'Ba Taik!  Hey, Ba Taik!'

Ba Taik, U Po Kyin's servant, appeared through the beaded curtain
of the veranda.  He was an under-sized, pock-marked man with a
timid and rather hungry expression.  U Po Kyin paid him no wages,
for he was a convicted thief whom a word would send to prison.  As
Ba Taik advanced he shikoed, so low as to give the impression that
he was stepping backwards.

'Most holy god?' he said.

'Is anyone waiting to see me, Ba Taik?'

Ba Taik enumerated the visitors upon his fingers:  'There is the
headman of Thitpingyi village, your honour, who has brought
presents, and two villagers who have an assault case that is to be
tried by your honour, and they too have brought presents.  Ko Ba
Sein, the head clerk of the Deputy Commissioner's office, wishes to
see you, and there is Ali Shah, the police constable, and a dacoit
whose name I do not know.  I think they have quarrelled about some
gold bangles they have stolen.  And there is also a young village
girl with a baby.'

'What does she want?' said U Po Kyin.

'She says that the baby is yours, most holy one.'

'Ah.  And how much has the headman brought?'

Ba Taik thought it was only ten rupees and a basket of mangoes.

'Tell the headman,' said U Po Kyin, 'that it should be twenty
rupees, and there will be trouble for him and his village if the
money is not here tomorrow.  I will see the others presently.  Ask
Ko Ba Sein to come to me here.'

Ba Sein appeared in a moment.  He was an erect, narrow-shouldered
man, very tall for a Burman, with a curiously smooth face that
recalled a coffee blancmange.  U Po Kyin found him a useful tool.
Unimaginative and hardworking, he was an excellent clerk, and Mr
Macgregor, the Deputy Commissioner, trusted him with most of his
official secrets.  U Po Kyin, put in a good temper by his thoughts,
greeted Ba Sein with a laugh and waved to the betel box.

'Well, Ko Ba Sein, how does our affair progress?  I hope that, as
dear Mr Macgregor would say'--U Po Kyin broke into English--'"eet
ees making perceptible progress"?'

Ba Sein did not smile at the small joke.  Sitting down stiff and
long-backed in the vacant chair, he answered:

'Excellently, sir.  Our copy of the paper arrived this morning.
Kindly observe.'

He produced a copy of a bilingual paper called the Burmese Patriot.
It was a miserable eight-page rag, villainously printed on paper as
bad as blotting paper, and composed partly of news stolen from the
Rangoon Gazette, partly of weak Nationalist heroics.  On the last
page the type had slipped and left the entire sheet jet black, as
though in mourning for the smallness of the paper's circulation.
The article to which U Po Kyin turned was of a rather different
stamp from the rest.  It ran:


In these happy times, when we poor blacks are being uplifted by the
mighty western civilization, with its manifold blessings such as
the cinematograph, machine-guns, syphilis, etc., what subject
could be more inspiring than the private lives of our European
benefactors?  We think therefore that it may interest our readers
to hear something of events in the up-country district of
Kyauktada.  And especially of Mr Macgregor, honoured Deputy
Commissioner of said district.

Mr Macgregor is of the type of the Fine Old English Gentleman, such
as, in these happy days, we have so many examples before our eyes.
He is 'a family man' as our dear English cousins say.  Very much a
family man is Mr Macgregor.  So much so that he has already three
children in the district of Kyauktada, where he has been a year,
and in his last district of Shwemyo he left six young progenies
behind him.  Perhaps it is an oversight on Mr Macgregor's part that
he has left these young infants quite unprovided for, and that some
of their mothers are in danger of starvation, etc., etc., etc.


There was a column of similar stuff, and wretched as it was, it was
well above the level of the rest of the paper.  U Po Kyin read the
article carefully through, holding it at arm's length--he was long-
sighted--and drawing his lips meditatively back, exposing great
numbers of small, perfect teeth, blood-red from betel juice.

'The editor will get six months' imprisonment for this,' he said
finally.

'He does not mind.  He says that the only time when his creditors
leave him alone is when he is in prison.'

'And you say that your little apprentice clerk Hla Pe wrote this
article all by himself?  That is a very clever boy--a most
promising boy!  Never tell me again that these Government High
Schools are a waste of time.  Hla Pe shall certainly have his
clerkship.'

'You think then, sir, that this article will be enough?'

U Po Kyin did not answer immediately.  A puffing, labouring noise
began to proceed from him; he was trying to rise from his chair.
Ba Taik was familiar with this sound.  He appeared from behind the
beaded curtain, and he and Ba Sein put a hand under each of U Po
Kyin's armpits and hoisted him to his feet.  U Po Kyin stood for a
moment balancing the weight of his belly upon his legs, with the
movement of a fish porter adjusting his load.  Then he waved Ba
Taik away.

'Not enough,' he said, answering Ba Sein's question, 'not enough by
any means.  There is a lot to be done yet.  But this is the right
beginning.  Listen.'

He went to the rail to spit out a scarlet mouthful of betel, and
then began to quarter the veranda with short steps, his hands
behind his back.  The friction of his vast thighs made him waddle
slightly.  As he walked he talked, in the base jargon of the
Government offices--a patchwork of Burmese verbs and English
abstract phrases:

'Now, let us go into this affair from the beginning.  We are going
to make a concerted attack on Dr Veraswami, who is the Civil
Surgeon and Superintendent of the jail.  We are going to slander
him, destroy his reputation and finally ruin him for ever.  It will
be rather a delicate operation.'

'Yes, sir.'

'There will be no risk, but we have got to go slowly.  We are not
proceeding against a miserable clerk or police constable.  We are
proceeding against a high official, and with a high official, even
when he is an Indian, it is not the same as with a clerk.  How does
one ruin a clerk?  Easy; an accusation, two dozen witnesses,
dismissal and imprisonment.  But that will not do here.  Softly,
softly, softly is my way.  No scandal, and above all no official
inquiry.  There must be no accusations that can be answered, and
yet within three months I must fix it in the head of every European
in Kyauktada that the doctor is a villain.  What shall I accuse him
of?  Bribes will not do, a doctor does not get bribes to any
extent.  What then?'

'We could perhaps arrange a mutiny in the jail,' said Ba Sein.
'As superintendent, the doctor would be blamed.'

'No, it is too dangerous.  I do not want the jail warders firing
their rifles in all directions.  Besides, it would be expensive.
Clearly, then, it must be disloyalty--Nationalism, seditious
propaganda.  We must persuade the Europeans that the doctor holds
disloyal, anti-British opinions.  That is far worse than bribery;
they expect a native official to take bribes.  But let them suspect
his loyalty even for a moment, and he is ruined.'

'It would be a hard thing to prove,' objected Ba Sein.  'The doctor
is very loyal to the Europeans.  He grows angry when anything is
said against them.  They will know that, do you not think?'

'Nonsense, nonsense,' said U Po Kyin comfortably.  'No European
cares anything about proofs.  When a man has a black face,
suspicion IS proof.  A few anonymous letters will work wonders.  It
is only a question of persisting; accuse, accuse, go on accusing--
that is the way with Europeans.  One anonymous letter after
another, to every European in turn.  And then, when their
suspicions are thoroughly aroused--'  U Po Kyin brought one short
arm from behind his back and clicked his thumb and finger.  He
added:  'We begin with this article in the Burmese Patriot.  The
Europeans will shout with rage when they see it.  Well, the next
move is to persuade them that it was the doctor who wrote it.'

'It will be difficult while he has friends among the Europeans.
All of them go to him when they are ill.  He cured Mr Macgregor of
his flatulence this cold weather.  They consider him a very clever
doctor, I believe.'

'How little you understand the European mind, Ko Ba Sein!  If the
Europeans go to Veraswami it is only because there is no other
doctor in Kyauktada.  No European has any faith in a man with a
black face.  No, with anonymous letters it is only a question of
sending enough.  I shall soon see to it that he has no friends
left.'

'There is Mr Flory, the timber merchant,' said Ba Sein.  (He
pronounced it 'Mr Porley'.)  'He is a close friend of the doctor.
I see him go to his house every morning when he is in Kyauktada.
Twice he has even invited the doctor to dinner.'

'Ah, now there you are right.  If Flory were a friend of the doctor
it could do us harm.  You cannot hurt an Indian when he has a
European friend.  It gives him--what is that word they are so fond
of?--prestige.  But Flory will desert his friend quickly enough
when the trouble begins.  These people have no feeling of loyalty
towards a native.  Besides, I happen to know that Flory is a
coward.  I can deal with him.  Your part, Ko Ba Sein, is to watch
Mr Macgregor's movements.  Has he written to the Commissioner
lately--written confidentially, I mean?'

'He wrote two days ago, but when we steamed the letter open we
found it was nothing of importance.'

'Ah well, we will give him something to write about.  And as soon
as he suspects the doctor, then is the time for that other affair I
spoke to you of.  Thus we shall--what does Mr Macgregor say?  Ah
yes, "kill two birds with one stone".  A whole flock of birds--ha,
ha!'

U Po Kyin's laugh was a disgusting bubbling sound deep down in his
belly, like the preparation for a cough; yet it was merry, even
childlike.  He did not say any more about the 'other affair', which
was too private to be discussed even upon the veranda.  Ba Sein,
seeing the interview at an end, stood up and bowed, angular as a
jointed ruler.

'Is there anything else your honour wishes done?' he said.

'Make sure that Mr Macgregor has his copy of the Burmese Patriot.
You had better tell Hla Pe to have an attack of dysentery and stay
away from the office.  I shall want him for the writing of the
anonymous letters.  That is all for the present.'

'Then I may go, sir?'

'God go with you,' said U Po Kyin rather abstractedly, and at once
shouted again for Ba Taik.  He never wasted a moment of his day.
It did not take him long to deal with the other visitors and to
send the village girl away unrewarded, having examined her face and
said that he did not recognize her.  It was now his breakfast time.
Violent pangs of hunger, which attacked him punctually at this hour
every morning, began to torment his belly.  He shouted urgently:

'Ba Taik!  Hey, Ba Taik!  Kin Kin!  My breakfast!  Be quick, I am
starving.'

In the living-room behind the curtain a table was already set out
with a huge bowl of rice and a dozen plates containing curries,
dried prawns and sliced green mangoes.  U Po Kyin waddled to the
table, sat down with a grunt and at once threw himself on the food.
Ma Kin, his wife, stood behind him and served him.  She was a thin
woman of five and forty, with a kindly, pale brown, simian face.
U Po Kyin took no notice of her while he was eating.  With the bowl
close to his nose he stuffed the food into himself with swift,
greasy fingers, breathing fast.  All his meals were swift,
passionate and enormous; they were not meals so much as orgies,
debauches of curry and rice.  When he had finished he sat back,
belched several times and told Ma Kin to fetch him a green Burmese
cigar.  He never smoked English tobacco, which he declared had no
taste in it.

Presently, with Ba Taik's help, U Po Kyin dressed in his office
clothes, and stood for a while admiring himself in the long mirror
in the living-room.  It was a wooden-walled room with two pillars,
still recognizable as teak-trunks, supporting the roof-tree, and it
was dark and sluttish as all Burmese rooms are, though U Po Kyin
had furnished it 'Ingaleik fashion' with a veneered sideboard and
chairs, some lithographs of the Royal Family and a fire-
extinguisher.  The floor was covered with bamboo mats, much
splashed by lime and betel juice.

Ma Kin was sitting on a mat in the corner, stitching an ingyi.
U Po Kyin turned slowly before the mirror, trying to get a glimpse
of his back view.  He was dressed in a gaungbaung of pale pink
silk, an ingyi of starched muslin, and a paso of Mandalay silk,
a gorgeous salmon-pink brocaded with yellow.  With an effort he
turned his head round and looked, pleased, at the paso tight and
shining on his enormous buttocks.  He was proud of his fatness,
because he saw the accumulated flesh as the symbol of his
greatness.  He who had once been obscure and hungry was now fat,
rich and feared.  He was swollen with the bodies of his enemies;
a thought from which he extracted something very near poetry.

'My new paso was cheap at twenty-two rupees, hey, Kin Kin?' he
said.

Ma Kin bent her head over her sewing.  She was a simple, old-
fashioned woman, who had learned even less of European habits than
U Po Kyin.  She could not sit on a chair without discomfort.  Every
morning she went to the bazaar with a basket on her head, like a
village woman, and in the evenings she could be seen kneeling in
the garden, praying to the white spire of the pagoda that crowned
the town.  She had been the confidante of U Po Kyin's intrigues for
twenty years and more.

'Ko Po Kyin,' she said, 'you have done very much evil in your
life.'

U Po Kyin waved his hand.  'What does it matter?  My pagodas will
atone for everything.  There is plenty of time.'

Ma Kin bent her head over her sewing again, in an obstinate way she
had when she disapproved of something that U Po Kyin was doing.

'But, Ko Po Kyin, where is the need for all this scheming and
intriguing?  I heard you talking with Ko Ba Sein on the veranda.
You are planning some evil against Dr Veraswami.  Why do you wish
to harm that Indian doctor?  He is a good man.'

'What do you know of these official matters, woman?  The doctor
stands in my way.  In the first place he refuses to take bribes,
which makes it difficult for the rest of us.  And besides--well,
there is something else which you would never have the brains to
understand.'

'Ko Po Kyin, you have grown rich and powerful, and what good has it
ever done you?  We were happier when we were poor.  Ah, I remember
so well when you were only a Township Officer, the first time we
had a house of our own.  How proud we were of our new wicker
furniture, and your fountain-pen with the gold clip!  And when the
young English police-officer came to our house and sat in the best
chair and drank a bottle of beer, how honoured we thought
ourselves!  Happiness is not in money.  What can you want with more
money now?'

'Nonsense, woman, nonsense!  Attend to your cooking and sewing and
leave official matters to those who understand them.'

'Well, I do not know.  I am your wife and have always obeyed you.
But at least it is never too soon to acquire merit.  Strive to
acquire more merit, Ko Po Kyin!  Will you not, for instance, buy
some live fish and set them free in the river?  One can acquire
much merit in that way.  Also, this morning when the priests came
for their rice they told me that there are two new priests at the
monastery, and they are hungry.  Will you not give them something,
Ko Po Kyin?  I did not give them anything myself, so that you might
acquire the merit of doing it.'

U Po Kyin turned away from the mirror.  The appeal touched him a
little.  He never, when it could be done without inconvenience,
missed a chance of acquiring merit.  In his eyes his pile of merit
was a kind of bank deposit, everlastingly growing.  Every fish set
free in the river, every gift to a priest, was a step nearer
Nirvana.  It was a reassuring thought.  He directed that the basket
of mangoes brought by the village headman should be sent down to
the monastery.

Presently he left the house and started down the road, with Ba Taik
behind him carrying a file of papers.  He walked slowly, very
upright to balance his vast belly, and holding a yellow silk
umbrella over his head.  His pink paso glittered in the sun like a
satin praline.  He was going to the court, to try his day's cases.



2


At about the time when U Po Kyin began his morning's business, 'Mr
Porley' the timber merchant and friend of Dr Veraswami, was leaving
his house for the Club.

Flory was a man of about thirty-five, of middle height, not ill
made.  He had very black, stiff hair growing low on his head, and
a cropped black moustache, and his skin, naturally sallow, was
discoloured by the sun.  Not having grown fat or bald he did not
look older than his age, but his face was very haggard in spite of
the sunburn, with lank cheeks and a sunken, withered look round the
eyes.  He had obviously not shaved this morning.  He was dressed in
the usual white shirt, khaki drill shorts and stockings, but
instead of a topi he wore a battered Terai hat, cocked over one
eye.  He carried a bamboo stick with a wrist-thong, and a black
cocker spaniel named Flo was ambling after him.

All these were secondary expressions, however.  The first thing
that one noticed in Flory was a hideous birthmark stretching in a
ragged crescent down his left cheek, from the eye to the corner
of the mouth.  Seen from the left side his face had a battered,
woebegone look, as though the birthmark had been a bruise--for it
was a dark blue in colour.  He was quite aware of its hideousness.
And at all times, when he was not alone, there was a sidelongness
about his movements, as he manoeuvred constantly to keep the
birthmark out of sight.

Flory's house was at the top of the maidan, close to the edge of
the jungle.  From the gate the maidan sloped sharply down, scorched
and khaki-coloured, with half a dozen dazzling white bungalows
scattered round it.  All quaked, shivered in the hot air.  There
was an English cemetery within a white wall half-way down the hill,
and near by a tiny tin-roofed church.  Beyond that was the European
Club, and when one looked at the Club--a dumpy one-storey wooden
building--one looked at the real centre of the town.  In any town
in India the European Club is the spiritual citadel, the real seat
of the British power, the Nirvana for which native officials and
millionaires pine in vain.  It was doubly so in this case, for it
was the proud boast of Kyauktada Club that, almost alone of Clubs
in Burma, it had never admitted an Oriental to membership.  Beyond
the Club, the Irrawaddy flowed huge and ochreous glittering like
diamonds in the patches that caught the sun; and beyond the river
stretched great wastes of paddy fields, ending at the horizon in a
range of blackish hills.

The native town, and the courts and the jail, were over to the
right, mostly hidden in green groves of peepul trees.  The spire of
the pagoda rose from the trees like a slender spear tipped with
gold.  Kyauktada was a fairly typical Upper Burma town, that had
not changed greatly between the days of Marco Polo and 1910, and
might have slept in the Middle Ages for a century more if it had
not proved a convenient spot for a railway terminus.  In 1910 the
Government made it the headquarters of a district and a seat of
Progress--interpretable as a block of law courts, with their army
of fat but ravenous pleaders, a hospital, a school and one of those
huge, durable jails which the English have built everywhere between
Gibraltar and Hong Kong.  The population was about four thousand,
including a couple of hundred Indians, a few score Chinese and
seven Europeans.  There were also two Eurasians named Mr Francis
and Mr Samuel, the sons of an American Baptist missionary and a
Roman Catholic missionary respectively.  The town contained no
curiosities of any kind, except an Indian fakir who had lived for
twenty years in a tree near the bazaar, drawing his food up in a
basket every morning.

Flory yawned as he came out of the gate.  He had been half drunk
the night before, and the glare made him feel liverish.  'Bloody,
bloody hole!' he thought, looking down the hill.  And, no one
except the dog being near, he began to sing aloud, 'Bloody, bloody,
bloody, oh, how thou art bloody' to the tune of 'Holy, holy, holy,
oh how Thou art holy ' as he walked down the hot red road, swishing
at the dried-up grasses with his stick.  It was nearly nine o'clock
and the sun was fiercer every minute.  The heat throbbed down on
one's head with a steady, rhythmic thumping, like blows from an
enormous bolster.  Flory stopped at the Club gate, wondering
whether to go in or to go farther down the road and see Dr
Veraswami.  Then he remembered that it was 'English mail day' and
the newspapers would have arrived.  He went in, past the big tennis
screen, which was overgrown by a creeper with starlike mauve
flowers.

In the borders beside the path swaths of English flowers--phlox and
larkspur, hollyhock and petunia--not yet slain by the sun, rioted
in vast size and richness.  The petunias were huge, like trees
almost.  There was no lawn, but instead a shrubbery of native trees
and bushes--gold mohur trees like vast umbrellas of blood-red
bloom, frangipanis with creamy, stalkless flowers, purple
bougainvillea, scarlet hibiscus and the pink Chinese rose, bilious-
green crotons, feathery fronds of tamarind.  The clash of colours
hurt one's eyes in the glare.  A nearly naked mali, watering-can in
hand, was moving in the jungle of flowers like some large nectar-
sucking bird.

On the Club steps a sandy-haired Englishman, with a prickly
moustache, pale grey eyes too far apart, and abnormally thin calves
to his legs, was standing with his hands in the pockets of his
shorts.  This was Mr Westfield, the District Superintendent of
Police.  With a very bored air he was rocking himself backwards and
forwards on his heels and pouting his upper lip so that his
moustache tickled his nose.  He greeted Flory with a slight
sideways movement of his head.  His way of speaking was clipped and
soldierly, missing out every word that well could be missed out.
Nearly everything he said was intended for a joke, but the tone of
his voice was hollow and melancholy.

'Hullo, Flory me lad.  Bloody awful morning, what?'

'We must expect it at this time of year, I suppose,' Flory said.
He had turned himself a little sideways, so that his birthmarked
cheek was away from Westfield.

'Yes, dammit.  Couple of months of this coming.  Last year we
didn't have a spot of rain till June.  Look at that bloody sky,
not a cloud in it.  Like one of those damned great blue enamel
saucepans.  God!  What'd you give to be in Piccadilly now, eh?'

'Have the English papers come?'

'Yes.  Dear old Punch, Pink'un and Vie Parisienne.  Makes you
homesick to read 'em, what?  Let's come in and have a drink before
the ice all goes.  Old Lackersteen's been fairly bathing in it.
Half pickled already.'

They went in, Westfield remarking in his gloomy voice, 'Lead on,
Macduff.'  Inside, the Club was a teak-walled place smelling of
earth-oil, and consisting of only four rooms, one of which
contained a forlorn 'library' of five hundred mildewed novels, and
another an old and mangy billiard-table--this, however, seldom
used, for during most of the year hordes of flying beetles came
buzzing round the lamps and littered themselves over the cloth.
There were also a card-room and a 'lounge' which looked towards the
river, over a wide veranda; but at this time of day all the
verandas were curtained with green bamboo chicks.  The lounge was
an unhomelike room, with coco-nut matting on the floor, and wicker
chairs and tables which were littered with shiny illustrated
papers.  For ornament there were a number of 'Bonzo' pictures, and
the dusty skulls of sambhur.  A punkah, lazily flapping, shook dust
into the tepid air.

There were three men in the room.  Under the punkah a florid, fine-
looking, slightly bloated man of forty was sprawling across the
table with his head in his hands, groaning in pain.  This was Mr
Lackersteen, the local manager of a timber firm.  He had been badly
drunk the night before, and he was suffering for it.  Ellis, local
manager of yet another company, was standing before the notice-
board studying some notice with a look of bitter concentration.  He
was a tiny wiry-haired fellow with a pale, sharp-featured face and
restless movements.  Maxwell, the acting Divisional Forest Officer,
was lying in one of the long chairs reading the Field, and
invisible except for two large-boned legs and thick downy forearms.

'Look at this naughty old man,' said Westfield, taking Mr
Lackersteen half affectionately by the shoulders and shaking him.
'Example to the young, what?  There but for the grace of God and
all that.  Gives you an idea what you'll be like at forty.'

Mr Lackersteen gave a groan which sounded like 'brandy'.

'Poor old chap,' said Westfield, 'regular martyr to booze, eh?
Look at it oozing out of his pores.  Reminds me of the old colonel
who used to sleep without a mosquito net.  They asked his servant
why and the servant said:  "At night, master too drunk to notice
mosquitoes; in the morning, mosquitoes too drunk to notice master."
Look at him--boozed last night and then asking for more.  Got a
little niece coming to stay with him, too.  Due tonight, isn't she,
Lackersteen?'

'Oh, leave that drunken sot alone,' said Ellis without turning
round.  He had a spiteful Cockney voice.  Mr Lackersteen groaned
again, '---- the niece!  Get me some brandy, for Christ's sake.'

'Good education for the niece, eh?  Seeing uncle under the table
seven times a week.  Hey, butler!  Bringing brandy for Lackersteen
master!'

The butler, a dark, stout Dravidian with liquid, yellow-irised eyes
like those of a dog, brought the brandy on a brass tray.  Flory and
Westfield ordered gin.  Mr Lackersteen swallowed a few spoonfuls of
brandy and sat back in his chair, groaning in a more resigned way.
He had a beefy, ingenuous face, with a toothbrush moustache.  He
was really a very simple-minded man, with no ambitions beyond
having what he called 'a good time'.  His wife governed him by the
only possible method, namely, by never letting him out of her sight
for more than an hour or two.  Only once, a year after they were
married, she had left him for a fortnight, and had returned
unexpectedly a day before her time, to find Mr Lackersteen, drunk,
supported on either side by a naked Burmese girl, while a third up-
ended a whisky bottle into his mouth.  Since then she had watched
him, as he used to complain, 'like a cat over a bloody mousehole'.
However, he managed to enjoy quite a number of 'good times', though
they were usually rather hurried ones.

'My Christ, what a head I've got on me this morning,' he said.
'Call that butler again, Westfield.  I've got to have another
brandy before my missus gets here.  She says she's going to cut my
booze down to four pegs a day when our niece gets here.  God rot
them both!' he added gloomily.

'Stop playing the fool, all of you, and listen to this,' said Ellis
sourly.  He had a queer wounding way of speaking, hardly ever
opening his mouth without insulting somebody.  He deliberately
exaggerated his Cockney accent, because of the sardonic tone it
gave to his words.  'Have you seen this notice of old Macgregor's?
A little nosegay for everyone.  Maxwell, wake up and listen!'

Maxwell lowered the Field.  He was a fresh-coloured blond youth of
not more than twenty-five or six--very young for the post he held.
With his heavy limbs and thick white eyelashes he reminded one of a
cart-horse colt.  Ellis nipped the notice from the board with a
neat, spiteful little movement and began reading it aloud.  It had
been posted by Mr Macgregor, who, besides being Deputy Commissioner,
was secretary of the Club.

'Just listen to this.  "It has been suggested that as there are as
yet no Oriental members of this club, and as it is now usual to
admit officials of gazetted rank, whether native or European, to
membership of most European Clubs, we should consider the question
of following this practice in Kyauktada.  The matter will be open
for discussion at the next general meeting.  On the one hand it may
be pointed out"--oh, well, no need to wade through the rest of it.
He can't even write a notice without an attack of literary
diarrhoea.  Anyway, the point's this.  He's asking us to break all
our rules and take a dear little nigger-boy into this Club. DEAR Dr
Veraswami, for instance.  Dr Very-slimy, I call him.  That WOULD be
a treat, wouldn't it?  Little pot-bellied niggers breathing garlic
in your face over the bridge-table.  Christ, to think of it!  We've
got to hang together and put our foot down on this at once.  What
do you say, Westfield?  Flory?'

Westfield shrugged his thin shoulders philosophically.  He had sat
down at the table and lighted a black, stinking Burma cheroot.

'Got to put up with it, I suppose,' he said.  'B--s of natives are
getting into all the Clubs nowadays.  Even the Pegu Club, I'm told.
Way this country's going, you know.  We're about the last Club in
Burma to hold out against 'em.'

'We are; and what's more, we're damn well going to go on holding
out.  I'll die in the ditch before I'll see a nigger in here.'
Ellis had produced a stump of pencil.  With the curious air of
spite that some men can put into their tiniest action, he re-pinned
the notice on the board and pencilled a tiny, neat 'B. F.' against
Mr Macgregor's signature--'There, that's what I think of his idea.
I'll tell him so when he comes down.  What do YOU say, Flory?'

Flory had not spoken all this time.  Though by nature anything but
a silent man, he seldom found much to say in Club conversations.
He had sat down at the table and was reading G. K. Chesterton's
article in the London News, at the same time caressing Flo's head
with his left hand.  Ellis, however, was one of those people who
constantly nag others to echo their own opinions.  He repeated his
question, and Flory looked up, and their eyes met.  The skin round
Ellis's nose suddenly turned so pale that it was almost grey.  In
him it was a sign of anger.  Without any prelude he burst into a
stream of abuse that would have been startling, if the others had
not been used to hearing something like it every morning.

'My God, I should have thought in a case like this, when it's a
question of keeping those black, stinking swine out of the only
place where we can enjoy ourselves, you'd have the decency to back
me up.  Even if that pot-bellied greasy little sod of a nigger
doctor IS your best pal. _I_ don't care if you choose to pal up
with the scum of the bazaar.  If it pleases you to go to
Veraswami's house and drink whisky with all his nigger pals, that's
your look-out.  Do what you like outside the Club.  But, by God,
it's a different matter when you talk of bringing niggers in here.
I suppose you'd like little Veraswami for a Club member, eh?
Chipping into our conversation and pawing everyone with his sweaty
hands and breathing his filthy garlic breath in our faces.  By god,
he'd go out with my boot behind him if ever I saw his black snout
inside that door.  Greasy, pot-bellied little--!' etc.

This went on for several minutes.  It was curiously impressive,
because it was so completely sincere.  Ellis really did hate
Orientals--hated them with a bitter, restless loathing as of
something evil or unclean.  Living and working, as the assistant of
a timber firm must, in perpetual contact with the Burmese, he had
never grown used to the sight of a black face.  Any hint of
friendly feeling towards an Oriental seemed to him a horrible
perversity.  He was an intelligent man and an able servant of his
firm, but he was one of those Englishmen--common, unfortunately--
who should never be allowed to set foot in the East.

Flory sat nursing Flo's head in his lap, unable to meet Ellis's
eyes.  At the best of times his birthmark made it difficult for him
to look people straight in the face.  And when he made ready to
speak, he could feel his voice trembling--for it had a way of
trembling when it should have been firm; his features, too,
sometimes twitched uncontrollably.

'Steady on,' he said at last, sullenly and rather feebly.  'Steady
on.  There's no need to get so excited. _I_ never suggested having
any native members in here.'

'Oh, didn't you?  We all know bloody well you'd like to, though.
Why else do you go to that oily little babu's house every morning,
then?  Sitting down at table with him as though he was a white man,
and drinking out of glasses his filthy black lips have slobbered
over--it makes me spew to think of it.'

'Sit down, old chap, sit down,' Westfield said.  'Forget it.  Have
a drink on it.  Not worth while quarrelling.  Too hot.'

'My God,' said Ellis a little more calmly, taking a pace or two up
and down, 'my God, I don't understand you chaps.  I simply don't.
Here's that old fool Macgregor wanting to bring a nigger into this
Club for no reason whatever, and you all sit down under it without
a word.  Good God, what are we supposed to be doing in this
country?  If we aren't going to rule, why the devil don't we clear
out?  Here we are, supposed to be governing a set of damn black
swine who've been slaves since the beginning of history, and
instead of ruling them in the only way they understand, we go and
treat them as equals.  And you silly b--s take it for granted.
There's Flory, makes his best pal a black babu who calls himself
a doctor because he's done two years at an Indian so-called
university.  And you, Westfield, proud as Punch of your knock-
kneed, bribe-taking cowards of policemen.  And there's Maxwell,
spends his time running after Eurasian tarts.  Yes, you do,
Maxwell; I heard about your goings-on in Mandalay with some smelly
little bitch called Molly Pereira.  I suppose you'd have gone and
married her if they hadn't transferred you up here?  You all seem
to LIKE the dirty black brutes.  Christ, I don't know what's come
over us all.  I really don't.'

'Come on, have another drink,' said Westfield.  'Hey, butler!  Spot
of beer before the ice goes, eh?  Beer, butler!'

The butler brought some bottles of Munich beer.  Ellis presently
sat down at the table with the others, and he nursed one of the
cool bottles between his small hands.  His forehead was sweating.
He was sulky, but not in a rage any longer.  At all times he was
spiteful and perverse, but his violent fits of rage were soon over,
and were never apologized for.  Quarrels were a regular part of the
routine of Club life.  Mr Lackersteen was feeling better and was
studying the illustrations in La Vie Parisienne.  It was after nine
now, and the room, scented with the acrid smoke of Westfield's
cheroot, was stifling hot.  Everyone's shirt stuck to his back with
the first sweat of the day.  The invisible chokra who pulled the
punkah rope outside was falling asleep in the glare.

'Butler!' yelled Ellis, and as the butler appeared, 'go and wake
that bloody chokra up!'

'Yes, master.'

'And butler!'

'Yes, master?'

'How much ice have we got left?'

''Bout twenty pounds, master.  Will only last today, I think.  I
find it very difficult to keep ice cool now.'

'Don't talk like that, damn you--"I find it very difficult!"  Have
you swallowed a dictionary?  "Please, master, can't keeping ice
cool"--that's how you ought to talk.  We shall have to sack this
fellow if he gets to talk English too well.  I can't stick servants
who talk English.  D'you hear, butler?'

'Yes, master,' said the butler, and retired.

'God!  No ice till Monday,' Westfield said.  'You going back to the
jungle, Flory?'

'Yes.  I ought to be there now.  I only came in because of the
English mail.'

'Go on tour myself, I think.  Knock up a spot of Travelling
Allowance.  I can't stick my bloody office at this time of year.
Sitting there under the damned punkah, signing one chit after
another.  Paper-chewing.  God, how I wish the war was on again!'

'I'm going out the day after tomorrow,' Ellis said.  'Isn't that
damned padre coming to hold his service this Sunday?  I'll take
care not to be in for that, anyway.  Bloody knee-drill.'

'Next Sunday,' said Westfield.  'Promised to be in for it myself.
So's Macgregor.  Bit hard on the poor devil of a padre, I must say.
Only gets here once in six weeks.  Might as well get up a
congregation when he does come.'

'Oh, hell!  I'd snivel psalms to oblige the padre, but I can't
stick the way these damned native Christians come shoving into our
church.  A pack of Madrassi servants and Karen school-teachers.
And then those two yellow-bellies, Francis and Samuel--they call
themselves Christians too.  Last time the padre was here they had
the nerve to come up and sit on the front pews with the white men.
Someone ought to speak to the padre about that.  What bloody fools
we were ever to let those missionaries loose in this country!
Teaching bazaar sweepers they're as good as we are.  "Please, sir,
me Christian same like master."  Damned cheek.'

'How about that for a pair of legs?' said Mr Lackersteen, passing
La Vie Parisienne across.  'You know French, Flory; what's that
mean underneath?  Christ, it reminds me of when I was in Paris, my
first leave, before I married.  Christ, I wish I was there again!'

'Did you hear that one about "There was a young lady of Woking"?'
Maxwell said.  He was rather a silent youth, but, like other
youths, he had an affection for a good smutty rhyme.  He completed
the biography of the young lady of Woking, and there was a laugh.
Westfield replied with the young lady of Ealing who had a peculiar
feeling, and Flory came in with the young curate of Horsham who
always took every precaution.  There was more laughter.  Even Ellis
thawed and produced several rhymes; Ellis's jokes were always
genuinely witty, and yet filthy beyond measure.  Everyone cheered
up and felt more friendly in spite of the heat.  They had finished
the beer and were just going to call for another drink, when shoes
creaked on the steps outside.  A booming voice, which made the
floorboards tingle, was saying jocosely:

'Yes, most distinctly humorous.  I incorporated it in one of those
little articles of mine in Blackwood's, you know.  I remember, too,
when I was stationed at Prome, another quite--ah--diverting
incident which--'

Evidently Mr Macgregor had arrived at the Club.  Mr Lackersteen
exclaimed, 'Hell!  My wife's there,' and pushed his empty glass as
far away from him as it would go.  Mr Macgregor and Mrs Lackersteen
entered the lounge together.

Mr Macgregor was a large, heavy man, rather past forty, with a
kindly, puggy face, wearing gold-rimmed spectacles.  His bulky
shoulders, and a trick he had of thrusting his head forward,
reminded one curiously of a turtle--the Burmans, in fact, nicknamed
him 'the tortoise'.  He was dressed in a clean silk suit, which
already showed patches of sweat beneath the armpits.  He greeted
the others with a humorous mock-salute, and then planted himself
before the notice-board, beaming, in the attitude of a schoolmaster
twiddling a cane behind his back.  The good nature in his face was
quite genuine, and yet there was such a wilful geniality about him,
such a strenuous air of being off duty and forgetting his official
rank, that no one was ever quite at ease in his presence.  His
conversation was evidently modelled on that of some facetious
schoolmaster or clergyman whom he had known in early life.  Any
long word, any quotation, any proverbial expression figured in his
mind as a joke, and was introduced with a bumbling noise like 'er'
or 'ah', to make it clear that there was a joke coming.  Mrs
Lackersteen was a woman of about thirty-five, handsome in a
contourless, elongated way, like a fashion plate.  She had a
sighing, discontented voice.  The others had all stood up when she
entered, and Mrs Lackersteen sank exhaustedly into the best chair
under the punkah, fanning herself with a slender hand like that of
a newt.

'Oh dear, this heat, this heat!  Mr Macgregor came and fetched me
in his car. SO kind of him.  Tom, that wretch of a rickshaw-man is
pretending to be ill again.  Really, I think you ought to give him
a good thrashing and bring him to his senses.  It's too terrible to
have to walk about in this sun every day.'

Mrs Lackersteen, unequal to the quarter-mile walk between her house
and the Club, had imported a rickshaw from Rangoon.  Except for
bullock-carts and Mr Macgregor's car it was the only wheeled
vehicle in Kyauktada, for the whole district did not possess ten
miles of road.  In the jungle, rather than leave her husband alone,
Mrs Lackersteen endured all the horrors of dripping tents,
mosquitoes and tinned food; but she made up for it by complaining
over trifles while in headquarters.

'Really I think the laziness of these servants is getting too
shocking,' she sighed.  'Don't you agree, Mr Macgregor?  We seem
to have no AUTHORITY over the natives nowadays, with all these
dreadful Reforms, and the insolence they learn from the newspapers.
In some ways they are getting almost as bad as the lower classes at
home.'

'Oh, hardly as bad as that, I trust.  Still, I am afraid there is
no doubt that the democratic spirit is creeping in, even here.'

'And such a short time ago, even just before the war, they were so
NICE and respectful!  The way they salaamed when you passed them on
the road--it was really quite charming.  I remember when we paid
our butler only twelve rupees a month, and really that man loved us
like a dog.  And now they are demanding forty and fifty rupees, and
I find that the only way I can even KEEP a servant is to pay their
wages several months in arrears.'

'The old type of servant is disappearing,' agreed Mr Macgregor.
'In my young days, when one's butler was disrespectful, one sent
him along to the jail with a chit saying "Please give the bearer
fifteen lashes".  Ah well, eheu fugaces!  Those days are gone for
ever, I am afraid.'

'Ah, you're about right there,' said Westfield in his gloomy way.
'This country'll never be fit to live in again.  British Raj is
finished if you ask me.  Lost Dominion and all that.  Time we
cleared out of it.'

Whereat there was a murmur of agreement from everyone in the room,
even from Flory, notoriously a Bolshie in his opinions, even from
young Maxwell, who had been barely three years in the country.  No
Anglo-Indian will ever deny that India is going to the dogs, or
ever has denied it--for India, like Punch, never was what it was.

Ellis had meanwhile unpinned the offending notice from behind Mr
Macgregor's back, and he now held it out to him, saying in his sour
way:

'Here, Macgregor, we've read this notice, and we all think this
idea of electing a native to the Club is absolute--' Ellis was
going to have said 'absolute balls', but he remembered Mrs
Lackersteen's presence and checked himself--'is absolutely uncalled
for.  After all, this Club is a place where we come to enjoy
ourselves, and we don't want natives poking about in here.  We like
to think there's still one place where we're free of them.  The
others all agree with me absolutely.'

He looked round at the others.  'Hear, hear!' said Mr Lackersteen
gruffly.  He knew that his wife would guess that he had been
drinking, and he felt that a display of sound sentiment would
excuse him.

Mr Macgregor took the notice with a smile.  He saw the 'B. F.'
pencilled against his name, and privately he thought Ellis's manner
very disrespectful, but he turned the matter off with a joke.  He
took as great pains to be a good fellow at the Club as he did to
keep up his dignity during office hours.  'I gather,' he said,
'that our friend Ellis does not welcome the society of--ah--his
Aryan brother?'

'No, I do not,' said Ellis tartly.  'Nor my Mongolian brother.  I
don't like niggers, to put it in one word.'

Mr Macgregor stiffened at the word 'nigger', which is discountenanced
in India.  He had no prejudice against Orientals; indeed, he was
deeply fond of them.  Provided they were given no freedom he thought
them the most charming people alive.  It always pained him to see
them wantonly insulted.

'Is it quite playing the game,' he said stiffly, 'to call these
people niggers--a term they very naturally resent--when they are
obviously nothing of the kind?  The Burmese are Mongolians, the
Indians are Aryans or Dravidians, and all of them are quite
distinct--'

'Oh, rot that!' said Ellis, who was not at all awed by Mr
Macgregor's official status.  'Call them niggers or Aryans or what
you like.  What I'm saying is that we don't want to see any black
hides in this Club.  If you put it to the vote you'll find we're
against it to a man--unless Flory wants his DEAR pal Veraswami,' he
added.

'Hear, hear!' repeated Mr Lackersteen.  'Count on me to blackball
the lot of 'em.'

Mr Macgregor pursed his lips whimsically.  He was in an awkward
position, for the idea of electing a native member was not his own,
but had been passed on to him by the Commissioner.  However, he
disliked making excuses, so he said in a more conciliatory tone:

'Shall we postpone discussing it till the next general meeting?  In
the meantime we can give it our mature consideration.  And now,' he
added, moving towards the table, 'who will join me in a little--ah--
liquid refreshment?'

The butler was called and the 'liquid refreshment' ordered.  It was
hotter than ever now, and everyone was thirsty.  Mr Lackersteen was
on the point of ordering a drink when he caught his wife's eye,
shrank up and said sulkily 'No.'  He sat with his hands on his
knees, with a rather pathetic expression, watching Mrs Lackersteen
swallow a glass of lemonade with gin in it.  Mr Macgregor, though
he signed the chit for drinks, drank plain lemonade.  Alone of the
Europeans in Kyauktada, he kept the rule of not drinking before
sunset.

'It's all very well,' grumbled Ellis, with his forearms on the
table, fidgeting with his glass.  The dispute with Mr Macgregor had
made him restless again.  'It's all very well, but I stick to what
I said.  No natives in this Club!  It's by constantly giving way
over small things like that that we've ruined the Empire.  The
country's only rotten with sedition because we've been too soft
with them.  The only possible policy is to treat 'em like the dirt
they are.  This is a critical moment, and we want every bit of
prestige we can get.  We've got to hang together and say, "WE ARE
THE MASTERS, and you beggars--"' Ellis pressed his small thumb down
as though flattening a grub--'"you beggars keep your place!"'

'Hopeless, old chap,' said Westfield.  'Quite hopeless.  What can
you do with all this red tape tying your hands?  Beggars of natives
know the law better than we do.  Insult you to your face and then
run you in the moment you hit 'em.  Can't do anything unless you
put your foot down firmly.  And how can you, if they haven't the
guts to show fight?'

'Our burra sahib at Mandalay always said,' put in Mrs Lackersteen,
'that in the end we shall simply LEAVE India.  Young men will not
come out here any longer to work all their lives for insults and
ingratitude.  We shall just GO.  When the natives come to us
begging us to stay, we shall say, "No, you have had your chance,
you wouldn't take it.  Very well, we shall leave you to govern
yourselves."  And then, what a lesson that will teach them!'

'It's all this law and order that's done for us,' said Westfield
gloomily.  The ruin of the Indian Empire through too much legality
was a recurrent theme with Westfield.  According to him, nothing
save a full-sized rebellion, and the consequent reign of martial
law, could save the Empire from decay.  'All this paper-chewing and
chit-passing.  Office babus are the real rulers of this country
now.  Our number's up.  Best thing we can do is to shut up shop and
let 'em stew in their own juice.'

'I don't agree, I simply don't agree,' Ellis said.  'We could put
things right in a month if we chose.  It only needs a pennyworth of
pluck.  Look at Amritsar.  Look how they caved in after that.  Dyer
knew the stuff to give them.  Poor old Dyer!  That was a dirty job.
Those cowards in England have got something to answer for.'

There was a kind of sigh from the others, the same sigh that a
gathering of Roman Catholics will give at the mention of Bloody
Mary.  Even Mr Macgregor, who detested bloodshed and martial law,
shook his head at the name of Dyer.

'Ah, poor man!  Sacrificed to the Paget M.P.s.  Well, perhaps they
will discover their mistake when it is too late.'

'My old governor used to tell a story about that,' said Westfield.
'There was an old havildar in a native regiment--someone asked him
what'd happen if the British left India.  The old chap said--'

Flory pushed back his chair and stood up.  It must not, it could
not--no, it simply should not go on any longer!  He must get out of
this room quickly, before something happened inside his head and he
began to smash the furniture and throw bottles at the pictures.
Dull boozing witless porkers!  Was it possible that they could go
on week after week, year after year, repeating word for word the
same evil-minded drivel, like a parody of a fifth-rate story in
Blackwood's?  Would none of them EVER think of anything new to say?
Oh, what a place, what people!  What a civilization is this of
ours--this godless civilization founded on whisky, Blackwood's and
the 'Bonzo' pictures!  God have mercy on us, for all of us are part
of it.

Flory did not say any of this, and he was at some pains not to show
it in his face.  He was standing by his chair, a little sidelong to
the others, with the half-smile of a man who is never sure of his
popularity.

'I'm afraid I shall have to be off,' he said.  'I've got some
things to see to before breakfast, unfortunately.'

'Stay and have another spot, old man,' said Westfield.  'Morning's
young.  Have a gin.  Give you an appetite.'

'No, thanks, I must be going.  Come on, Flo.  Good-bye, Mrs
Lackersteen.  Good-bye, everybody.'

'Exit Booker Washington, the niggers' pal,' said Ellis as Flory
disappeared.  Ellis could always be counted on to say something
disagreeable about anyone who had just left the room.  'Gone to see
Very-slimy, I suppose.  Or else sloped off to avoid paying a round
of drinks.'

'Oh, he's not a bad chap,' Westfield said.  'Says some Bolshie
things sometimes.  Don't suppose he means half of them.'

'Oh, a very good fellow, of course,' said Mr Macgregor.  Every
European in India is ex-officio, or rather ex-colore, a good
fellow, until he has done something quite outrageous.  It is an
honorary rank.

'He's a bit TOO Bolshie for my taste.  I can't bear a fellow who
pals up with the natives.  I shouldn't wonder if he's got a lick of
the tar-brush himself.  It might explain that black mark on his
face.  Piebald.  And he looks like a yellow-belly, with that black
hair, and skin the colour of a lemon.'

There was some desultory scandal about Flory, but not much, because
Mr Macgregor did not like scandal.  The Europeans stayed in the
Club long enough for one more round of drinks.  Mr Macgregor told
his anecdote about Prome, which could be produced in almost any
context.  And then the conversation veered back to the old, never-
palling subject--the insolence of the natives, the supineness of
the Government, the dear dead days when the British Raj WAS the
British Raj and please give the bearer fifteen lashes.  This topic
was never let alone for long, partly because of Ellis's obsession.
Besides, you could forgive the Europeans a great deal of their
bitterness.  Living and working among Orientals would try the
temper of a saint.  And all of them, the officials particularly,
knew what it was to be baited and insulted.  Almost every day, when
Westfield or Mr Macgregor or even Maxwell went down the street, the
High School boys, with their young, yellow faces--faces smooth as
gold coins, full of that maddening contempt that sits so naturally
on the Mongolian face--sneered at them as they went past, sometimes
hooted after them with hyena-like laughter.  The life of the Anglo-
Indian officials is not all jam.  In comfortless camps, in
sweltering offices, in gloomy dakbungalows smelling of dust and
earth-oil, they earn, perhaps, the right to be a little disagreeable.

It was getting on for ten now, and hot beyond bearing.  Flat, clear
drops of sweat gathered on everyone's face, and on the men's bare
forearms.  A damp patch was growing larger and larger in the back
of Mr Macgregor's silk coat.  The glare outside seemed to soak
somehow through the green-chicked windows, making one's eyes ache
and filling one's head with stuffiness.  Everyone thought with
malaise of his stodgy breakfast, and of the long, deadly hours that
were coming.  Mr Macgregor stood up with a sigh and adjusted his
spectacles, which had slipped down his sweating nose.

'Alas that such a festive gathering should end,' he said.  'I must
get home to breakfast.  The cares of Empire.  Is anybody coming my
way?  My man is waiting with the car.'

'Oh, thank you,' said Mrs Lackersteen; 'if you'd take Tom and me.
What a relief not to have to walk in this heat!'

The others stood up.  Westfield stretched his arms and yawned
through his nose.  'Better get a move on, I suppose.  Go to sleep
if I sit here any longer.  Think of stewing in that office all day!
Baskets of papers.  Oh Lord!'

'Don't forget tennis this evening, everyone,' said Ellis.
'Maxwell, you lazy devil, don't you skulk out of it again.  Down
here with your racquet at four-thirty sharp.'

'Apres vous, madame,' said Mr Macgregor gallantly, at the door.

'Lead on, Macduff,' said Westfield.

They went out into the glaring white sunlight.  The heat rolled
from the earth like the breath of an oven.  The flowers, oppressive
to the eyes, blazed with not a petal stirring, in a debauch of sun.
The glare sent a weariness through one's bones.  There was
something horrible in it--horrible to think of that blue, blinding
sky, stretching on and on over Burma and India, over Siam,
Cambodia, China, cloudless and interminable.  The plates of Mr
Macgregor's waiting car were too hot to touch.  The evil time of
day was beginning, the time, as the Burmese say, 'when feet are
silent'.  Hardly a living creature stirred, except men, and the
black columns of ants, stimulated by the heat, which marched
ribbon-like across the path, and the tail-less vultures which
soared on the currents of the air.



3


Flory turned to the left outside the Club gate and started down the
bazaar road, under the shade of the peepul trees.  A hundred yards
away there was a swirl of music, where a squad of Military
Policemen, lank Indians in greenish khaki, were marching back to
their lines with a Gurkha boy playing the bagpipes ahead of them.
Flory was going to see Dr Veraswami.  The doctor's house was a long
bungalow of earth-oiled wood, standing on piles, with a large
unkempt garden which adjoined that of the Club.  The back of the
house was towards the road, for it faced the hospital, which lay
between it and the river.

As Flory entered the compound there was a frightened squawk of
women and a scurrying within the house.  Evidently he had narrowly
missed seeing the doctor's wife.  He went round to the front of the
house and called up to the veranda:

'Doctor!  Are you busy?  May I come up?'

The doctor, a little black and white figure, popped from within the
house like a jack-in-the-box.  He hurried to the veranda rail,
exclaimed effusively:

'If you may come up!  Of course, of course, come up this instant!
Ah, Mr Flory, how very delightful to see you!  Come up, come up.
What drink will you have?  I have whisky, beer, vermouth and other
European liquors.  Ah, my dear friend, how I have been pining for
some cultured conversation!'

The doctor was a small, black, plump man with fuzzy hair and round,
credulous eyes.  He wore steel-rimmed spectacles, and he was
dressed in a badly fitting white drill suit, with trousers bagging
concertina-like over clumsy black boots.  His voice was eager and
bubbling, with a hissing of the s's.  As Flory came up the steps
the doctor popped back to the end of the veranda and rummaged in a
big tin ice-chest, rapidly pulling out bottles of all descriptions.
The veranda was wide and dark, with low eaves from which baskets of
fern hung, making it seem like a cave behind a waterfall of
sunlight.  It was furnished with long, cane-bottomed chairs made in
the jail, and at one end there was a book-case containing a rather
unappetizing little library, mainly books of essays, of the
Emerson-Carlyle-Stevenson type.  The doctor, a great reader, liked
his books to have what he called a 'moral meaning'.

'Well, doctor,' said Flory--the doctor had meanwhile thrust him
into a long chair, pulled out the leg-rests so that he could lie
down, and put cigarettes and beer within reach.  'Well, doctor, and
how are things?  How's the British Empire?  Sick of the palsy as
usual?'

'Aha, Mr Flory, she iss very low, very low!  Grave complications
setting in.  Septicaemia, peritonitis and paralysis of the ganglia.
We shall have to call in the specialists, I fear.  Aha!'

It was a joke between the two men to pretend that the British
Empire was an aged female patient of the doctor's.  The doctor had
enjoyed this joke for two years without growing tired of it.

'Ah, doctor,' said Flory, supine in the long chair, 'what a joy to
be here after that bloody Club.  When I come to your house I feel
like a Nonconformist minister dodging up to town and going home
with a tart.  Such a glorious holiday from THEM'--he motioned with
one heel in the direction of the Club--'from my beloved fellow
Empire-builders.  British prestige, the white man's burden, the
pukka sahib sans peur et sans reproche--you know.  Such a relief to
be out of the stink of it for a little while.'

'My friend, my friend, now come, come, please!  That iss
outrageous.  You must not say such things of honourable English
gentlemen!'

'You don't have to listen to the honourable gentlemen talking,
doctor.  I stood it as long as I could this morning.  Ellis with
his "dirty nigger", Westfield with his jokes, Macgregor with his
Latin tags and please give the bearer fifteen lashes.  But when
they got on to that story about the old havildar--you know, the
dear old havildar who said that if the British left India there
wouldn't be a rupee or a virgin between--you know; well, I couldn't
stand it any longer.  It's time that old havildar was put on the
retired list.  He's been saying the same thing ever since the
Jubilee in 'eighty-seven.'

The doctor grew agitated, as he always did when Flory criticized
the Club members.  He was standing with his plump white-clad behind
balanced against the veranda rail, and sometimes gesticulating.
When searching for a word he would nip his black thumb and
forefinger together, as though to capture an idea floating in the
air.

'But truly, truly, Mr Flory, you must not speak so!  Why iss it
that always you are abusing the pukka sahibs, ass you call them?
They are the salt of the earth.  Consider the great things they
have done--consider the great administrators who have made British
India what it iss.  Consider Clive, Warren Hastings, Dalhousie,
Curzon.  They were such men--I quote your immortal Shakespeare--
ass, take them for all in all, we shall not look upon their like
again!'

'Well, do you want to look upon their like again?  I don't.'

'And consider how noble a type iss the English gentleman!  Their
glorious loyalty to one another!  The public school spirit!  Even
those of them whose manner iss unfortunate--some Englishmen are
arrogant, I concede--have the great, sterling qualities that we
Orientals lack.  Beneath their rough exterior, their hearts are of
gold.'

'Of gilt, shall we say?  There's a kind of spurious good-fellowship
between the English and this country.  It's a tradition to booze
together and swap meals and pretend to be friends, though we all
hate each other like poison.  Hanging together, we call it.  It's
a political necessity.  Of course drink is what keeps the machine
going.  We should all go mad and kill one another in a week if it
weren't for that.  There's a subject for one of your uplift
essayists, doctor.  Booze as the cement of empire.'

The doctor shook his head.  'Really, Mr Flory, I know not what it
iss that hass made you so cynical.  It iss so most unsuitable!
You--an English gentleman of high gifts and character--to be
uttering seditious opinions that are worthy of the Burmese
Patriot!'

'Seditious?' Flory said.  'I'M not seditious.  I don't want the
Burmans to drive us out of this country.  God forbid!  I'm here to
make money, like everyone else.  All I object to is the slimy white
man's burden humbug.  The pukka sahib pose.  It's so boring.  Even
those bloody fools at the Club might be better company if we
weren't all of us living a lie the whole time.'

'But, my dear friend, what lie are you living?'

'Why, of course, the lie that we're here to uplift our poor black
brothers instead of to rob them.  I suppose it's a natural enough
lie.  But it corrupts us, it corrupts us in ways you can't imagine.
There's an everlasting sense of being a sneak and a liar that
torments us and drives us to justify ourselves night and day.  It's
at the bottom of half our beastliness to the natives.  We Anglo-
Indians could be almost bearable if we'd only admit that we're
thieves and go on thieving without any humbug.'

The doctor, very pleased, nipped his thumb and forefinger together.
'The weakness of your argument, my dear friend,' he said, beaming
at his own irony, 'the weakness appears to be, that you are NOT
thieves.'

'Now, my dear doctor--'

Flory sat up in the long chair, partly because his prickly heat
had just stabbed him in the back like a thousand needles, partly
because his favourite argument with the doctor was about to begin.
This argument, vaguely political in nature, took place as often as
the two men met.  It was a topsy-turvy affair, for the Englishman
was bitterly anti-English and the Indian fanatically loyal.  Dr
Veraswami had a passionate admiration for the English, which a
thousand snubs from Englishmen had not shaken.  He would maintain
with positive eagerness that he, as an Indian, belonged to an
inferior and degenerate race.  His faith in British justice was so
great that even when, at the jail, he had to superintend a flogging
or a hanging, and would come home with his black face faded grey
and dose himself with whisky, his zeal did not falter.  Flory's
seditious opinions shocked him, but they also gave him a certain
shuddering pleasure, such as a pious believer will take in hearing
the Lord's Prayer repeated backwards.

'My dear doctor,' said Flory, 'how can you make out that we are in
this country for any purpose except to steal?  It's so simple.  The
official holds the Burman down while the businessman goes through
his pockets.  Do you suppose my firm, for instance, could get its
timber contracts if the country weren't in the hands of the
British?  Or the other timber firms, or the oil companies, or the
miners and planters and traders?  How could the Rice Ring go on
skinning the unfortunate peasant if it hadn't the Government behind
it?  The British Empire is simply a device for giving trade
monopolies to the English--or rather to gangs of Jews and
Scotchmen.'

'My friend, it iss pathetic to me to hear you talk so.  It iss
truly pathetic.  You say you are here to trade?  Of course you are.
Could the Burmese trade for themselves?  Can they make machinery,
ships, railways, roads?  They are helpless without you.  What would
happen to the Burmese forests if the English were not here?  They
would be sold immediately to the Japanese, who would gut them and
ruin them.  Instead of which, in your hands, actually they are
improved.  And while your businessmen develop the resources of our
country, your officials are civilizing us, elevating us to their
level, from pure public spirit.  It is a magnificent record of
self-sacrifice.'

'Bosh, my dear doctor.  We teach the young men to drink whisky and
play football, I admit, but precious little else.  Look at our
schools--factories for cheap clerks.  We've never taught a single
useful manual trade to the Indians.  We daren't; frightened of the
competition in industry.  We've even crushed various industries.
Where are the Indian muslins now?  Back in the forties or
thereabouts they were building sea-going ships in India, and
manning them as well.  Now you couldn't build a seaworthy fishing
boat there.  In the eighteenth century the Indians cast guns that
were at any rate up to the European standard.  Now, after we've
been in India a hundred and fifty years, you can't make so much as
a brass cartridge-case in the whole continent.  The only Eastern
races that have developed at all quickly are the independent ones.
I won't instance Japan, but take the case of Siam--'

The doctor waved his hand excitedly.  He always interrupted the
argument at this point (for as a rule it followed the same course,
almost word for word), finding that the case of Siam hampered him.

'My friend, my friend, you are forgetting the Oriental character.
How iss it possible to have developed us, with our apathy and
superstition?  At least you have brought to us law and order.
The unswerving British Justice and the Pax Britannica.'

'Pox Britannica, doctor, Pox Britannica is its proper name.  And in
any case, whom is it pax for?  The money-lender and the lawyer.  Of
course we keep the peace in India, in our own interest, but what
does all this law and order business boil down to?  More banks and
more prisons--that's all it means.'

'What monstrous misrepresentations!' cried the doctor.  'Are not
prissons necessary?  And have you brought us nothing but prissons?
Consider Burma in the days of Thibaw, with dirt and torture and
ignorance, and then look around you.  Look merely out of this
veranda--look at that hospital, and over to the right at that
school and that police station.  Look at the whole uprush of modern
progress!'

'Of course I don't deny,' Flory said, 'that we modernize this
country in certain ways.  We can't help doing so.  In fact, before
we've finished we'll have wrecked the whole Burmese national
culture.  But we're not civilizing them, we're only rubbing our
dirt on to them.  Where's it going to lead, this uprush of modern
progress, as you call it?  Just to our own dear old swinery of
gramophones and billycock hats.  Sometimes I think that in two
hundred years all this--' he waved a foot towards the horizon--'all
this will be gone--forests, villages, monasteries, pagodas all
vanished.  And instead, pink villas fifty yards apart; all over
those hills, as far as you can see, villa after villa, with all the
gramophones playing the same tune.  And all the forests shaved
flat--chewed into wood-pulp for the News of the World, or sawn up
into gramophone cases.  But the trees avenge themselves, as the old
chap says in The Wild Duck.  You've read Ibsen, of course?'

'Ah, no, Mr Flory, alas!  That mighty master-mind, your inspired
Bernard Shaw hass called him.  It iss a pleasure to come.  But, my
friend, what you do not see iss that your civilization at its very
worst iss for us an advance.  Gramophones, billycock hats, the News
of the World--all iss better than the horrible sloth of the
Oriental.  I see the British, even the least inspired of them,
ass--ass--' the doctor searched for a phrase, and found one that
probably came from Stevenson--'ass torchbearers upon the path of
progress.'

'I don't.  I see them as a kind of up-to-date, hygienic, self-
satisfied louse.  Creeping round the world building prisons.  They
build a prison and call it progress,' he added rather regretfully--
for the doctor would not recognize the allusion.

'My friend, positively you are harping upon the subject of
prissons!  Consider that there are also other achievements of your
countrymen.  They construct roads, they irrigate deserts, they
conquer famines, they build schools, they set up hospitals, they
combat plague, cholera, leprosy, smallpox, venereal disease--'

'Having brought it themselves,' put in Flory.

'No, sir!' returned the doctor, eager to claim this distinction for
his own countrymen.  'No, sir, it wass the Indians who introduced
venereal disease into this country.  The Indians introduce
diseases, and the English cure them.  THERE iss the answer to all
your pessimism and seditiousness.'

'Well, doctor, we shall never agree.  The fact is that you like all
this modern progress business, whereas I'd rather see things a
little bit septic.  Burma in the days of Thibaw would have suited
me better, I think.  And as I said before, if we are a civilizing
influence, it's only to grab on a larger scale.  We should chuck it
quickly enough if it didn't pay.'

'My friend, you do not think that.  If truly you disapprove of the
British Empire, you would not be talking of it privately here.  You
would be proclaiming from the house-tops.  I know your character,
Mr Flory, better than you know it yourself.'

'Sorry, doctor; I don't go in for proclaiming from the housetops.
I haven't the guts.  I "counsel ignoble ease", like old Belial in
Paradise Lost.  It's safer.  You've got to be a pukka sahib or die,
in this country.  In fifteen years I've never talked honestly to
anyone except you.  My talks here are a safety-valve; a little
Black Mass on the sly, if you understand me.'

At this moment there was a desolate wailing noise outside.  Old
Mattu, the Hindu durwan who looked after the European church, was
standing in the sunlight below the veranda.  He was an old fever-
stricken creature, more like a grasshopper than a human being, and
dressed in a few square inches of dingy rag.  He lived near the
church in a hut made of flattened kerosene tins, from which he
would sometimes hurry forth at the appearance of a European, to
salaam deeply and wail something about his 'talab', which was
eighteen rupees a month.  Looking piteously up at the veranda, he
massaged the earth-coloured skin of his belly with one hand, and
with the other made the motion of putting food into his mouth.  The
doctor felt in his pocket and dropped a four-anna piece over the
veranda rail.  He was notorious for his soft-heartedness, and all
the beggars in Kyauktada made him their target.

'Behold there the degeneracy of the East,' said the doctor,
pointing to Mattu, who was doubling himself up like a caterpillar
and uttering grateful whines.  'Look at the wretchedness of hiss
limbs.  The calves of hiss legs are not so thick ass an
Englishman's wrists.  Look at hiss abjectness and servility.  Look
at hiss ignorance--such ignorance ass iss not known in Europe
outside a home for mental defectives.  Once I asked Mattu to tell
me hiss age.  "Sahib," he said, "I believe that I am ten years
old."  How can you pretend, Mr Flory, that you are not the natural
superior of such creatures?'

'Poor old Mattu, the uprush of modern progress seems to have missed
him somehow,' Flory said, throwing another four-anna piece over the
rail.  'Go on, Mattu, spend that on booze.  Be as degenerate as you
can.  It all postpones Utopia.'

'Aha, Mr Flory, sometimes I think that all you say iss but to--what
iss the expression?--pull my leg.  The English sense of humour.  We
Orientals have no humour, ass iss well known.'

'Lucky devils.  It's been the ruin of us, our bloody sense of
humour.'  He yawned with his hands behind his head.  Mattu had
shambled away after further grateful noises.  'I suppose I ought to
be going before this cursed sun gets too high.  The heat's going to
be devilish this year, I feel it in my bones.  Well, doctor, we've
been arguing so much that I haven't asked for your news.  I only
got in from the jungle yesterday.  I ought to go back the day after
tomorrow--don't know whether I shall.  Has anything been happening
in Kyauktada?  Any scandals?'

The doctor looked suddenly serious.  He had taken off his spectacles,
and his face, with dark liquid eyes, recalled that of a black
retriever dog.  He looked away, and spoke in a slightly more
hesitant tone than before.

'That fact iss, my friend, there iss a most unpleasant business
afoot.  You will perhaps laugh--it sounds nothing--but I am in
serious trouble.  Or rather, I am in danger of trouble.  It iss an
underground business.  You Europeans will never hear of it
directly.  In this place'--he waved a hand towards the bazaar--
'there iss perpetual conspiracies and plottings of which you do not
hear.  But to us they mean much.'

'What's been happening, then?'

'It iss this.  An intrigue iss brewing against me.  A most serious
intrigue which iss intended to blacken my character and ruin my
official career.  Ass an Englishman you will not understand these
things.  I have incurred the enmity of a man you probably do not
know, U Po Kyin, the Sub-divisional Magistrate.  He iss a most
dangerous man.  The damage that he can do to me iss incalculable.'

'U Po Kyin?  Which one is that?'

'The great fat man with many teeth.  Hiss house iss down the road
there, a hundred yards away.'

'Oh, that fat scoundrel?  I know him well.'

'No, no, my friend, no, no!' exclaimed the doctor quite eagerly;
'it cannot be that you know him.  Only an Oriental could know him.
You, an English gentleman, cannot sink your mind to the depth of
such ass U Po Kyin.  He iss more than a scoundrel, he iss--what
shall I say?  Words fail me.  He recalls to me a crocodile in human
shape.  He hass the cunning of the crocodile, its cruelty, its
bestiality.  If you knew the record of that man!  The outrages he
hass committed!  The extortions, the briberies!  The girls he hass
ruined, raping them before the very eyes of their mothers!  Ah, an
English gentleman cannot imagine such a character.  And thiss iss
the man who hass taken hiss oath to ruin me.'

'I've heard a good deal about U Po Kyin from various sources,'
Flory said.  'He seems a fair sample of a Burmese magistrate.
A Burman told me that during the war U Po Kyin was at work
recruiting, and he raised a battalion from his own illegitimate
sons.  Is that true?'

'It could hardly be so,' said the doctor, 'for they would not have
been old enough.  But of hiss villainy there iss no doubt.  And now
he iss determined upon ruining me.  In the first place he hates me
because I know too much about him; and besides, he iss the enemy of
any reasonably honest man.  He will proceed--such iss the practice
of such men--by calumny.  He will spread reports about me--reports
of the most appalling and untrue descriptions.  Already he iss
beginning them.'

'But would anyone believe a fellow like that against you?  He's
only a lowdown magistrate.  You're a high official.'

'Ah, Mr Flory, you do not understand Oriental cunning.  U Po Kyin
hass ruined higher officials than I.  He will know ways to make
himself believed.  And therefore--ah, it iss a difficult business!'

The doctor took a step or two up and down the veranda, polishing
his glasses with his handkerchief.  It was clear that there was
something more which delicacy prevented him from saying.  For a
moment his manner was so troubled that Flory would have liked to
ask whether he could not help in some way, but he did not, for he
knew the uselessness of interfering in Oriental quarrels.  No
European ever gets to the bottom of these quarrels; there is always
something impervious to the European mind, a conspiracy behind the
conspiracy, a plot within the plot.  Besides, to keep out of
'native' quarrels is one of the Ten Precepts of the pukka sahib.
He said doubtfully:

'What is a difficult business?'

'It iss, if only--ah, my friend, you will laugh at me, I fear.  But
it iss this: if only I were a member of your European Club!  If
only!  How different would my position be!'

'The Club?  Why?  How would that help you?'

'My friend, in these matters prestige iss everything.  It iss not
that U Po Kyin will attack me openly; he would never dare; it iss
that he will libel me and backbite me.  And whether he iss believed
or not depends entirely upon my standing with the Europeans.  It
iss so that things happen in India.  If our prestige iss good, we
rise; if bad, we fall.  A nod and a wink will accomplish more than
a thousand official reports.  And you do not know what prestige it
gives to an Indian to be a member of the European Club.  In the
Club, practically he ISS a European.  No calumny can touch him.
A Club member iss sacrosanct.'

Flory looked away over the veranda rail.  He had got up as though
to go.  It always made him ashamed and uncomfortable when it had to
be admitted between them that the doctor, because of his black
skin, could not be received in the Club.  It is a disagreeable
thing when one's close friend is not one's social equal; but it is
a thing native to the very air of India.

'They might elect you at the next general meeting,' he said.  'I
don't say they will, but it's not impossible.'

'I trust, Mr Flory, that you do not think I am asking you to
propose me for the Club?  Heaven forbid!  I know that that iss
impossible for you.  Simply I wass remarking that if I were a
member of the Club, I should be forthwith invulnerable--'

Flory cocked his Terai hat loosely on his head and stirred Flo up
with his stick.  She was asleep under the chair.  Flory felt very
uncomfortable.  He knew that in all probability, if he had the
courage to face a few rows with Ellis, he could secure Dr
Veraswami's election to the Club.  And the doctor, after all, was
his friend, indeed, almost the sole friend he had in Burma.  They
had talked and argued together a hundred times, the doctor had
dined at his house, he had even proposed to introduce Flory to his
wife--but she, a pious Hindu, had refused with horror.  They had
made shooting trips together--the doctor, equipped with bandoliers
and hunting knives, panting up hillsides slippery with bamboo
leaves and blazing his gun at nothing.  In common decency it was
his duty to support the doctor.  But he knew also that the doctor
would never ask for any support, and that there would be an ugly
row before an Oriental was got into the Club.  No, he could not
face that row!  It was not worth it.  He said:

'To tell you the truth, there's been talk about this already.  They
were discussing it this morning, and that little beast Ellis was
preaching his usual "dirty nigger" sermon.  Macgregor has suggested
electing one native member.  He's had orders to do so, I imagine.'

'Yes, I heard that.  We hear all these things.  It wass that that
put the idea into my head.'

'It's to come up at the general meeting in June.  I don't know
what'll happen--it depends on Macgregor, I think.  I'll give you my
vote, but I can't do more than that.  I'm sorry, but I simply
can't.  You don't know the row there'll be.  Very likely they will
elect you, but they'll do it as an unpleasant duty, under protest.
They've made a perfect fetish of keeping this Club all-white, as
they call it.'

'Of course, of course, my friend!  I understand perfectly.  Heaven
forbid that you should get into trouble with your European friends
on my behalf.  Please, please, never to embroil yourself!  The mere
fact that you are known to be my friend benefits me more than you
can imagine.  Prestige, Mr Flory, iss like a barometer.  Every time
you are seen to enter my house the mercury rises half a degree.'

'Well, we must try and keep it at "Set Fair".  That's about all I
can do for you, I'm afraid.'

'Even that iss much, my friend.  And for that, there iss another
thing of which I would warn you, though you will laugh, I fear.  It
iss that you yourself should beware of U Po Kyin.  Beware of the
crocodile!  For sure he will strike at you when he knows that you
are befriending me.'

'All right, doctor, I'll beware of the crocodile.  I don't fancy he
can do me much harm, though.'

'At least he will try.  I know him.  It will be hiss policy to
detach my friends from me.  Possibly he would even dare to spread
hiss libels about you also.'

'About me?  Good gracious, no one would believe anything against
ME.  Civis Romanus sum.  I'm an Englishman--quite above suspicion.'

'Nevertheless, beware of hiss calumnies, my friend.  Do not
underrate him.  He will know how to strike at you.  He iss a
crocodile.  And like the crocodile'--the doctor nipped his thumb
and finger impressively; his images became mixed sometimes--'like
the crocodile, he strikes always at the weakest spot!'

'Do crocodiles always strike at the weakest spot, doctor?'

Both men laughed.  They were intimate enough to laugh over the
doctor's queer English occasionally.  Perhaps, at the bottom of his
heart, the doctor was a little disappointed that Flory had not
promised to propose him for the Club, but he would have perished
rather than say so.  And Flory was glad to drop the subject, an
uncomfortable one which he wished had never been raised.

'Well, I really must be going, doctor.  Good-bye in case I don't
see you again.  I hope it'll be all right at the general meeting.
Macgregor's not a bad old stick.  I dare say he'll insist on their
electing you.'

'Let us hope so, my friend.  With that I can defy a hundred U Po
Kyins.  A thousand!  Good-bye, my friend, good-bye.'

Then Flory settled his Terai hat on his head and went home across
the glaring maidan, to his breakfast, for which the long morning of
drinking, smoking and talking had left him no appetite.



4


Flory lay asleep, naked except for black Shan trousers, upon his
sweat-damp bed.  He had been idling all day.  He spent approximately
three weeks of every month in camp, coming into Kyauktada for a few
days at a time, chiefly in order to idle, for he had very little
clerical work to do.

The bedroom was a large square room with white plaster walls, open
doorways and no ceiling, but only rafters in which sparrows nested.
There was no furniture except the big four-poster bed, with its
furled mosquito net like a canopy, and a wicker table and chair and
a small mirror; also some rough bookshelves, containing several
hundred books, all mildewed by many rainy seasons and riddled by
silver fish.  A tuktoo clung to the wall, flat and motionless like
a heraldic dragon.  Beyond the veranda eaves the light rained down
like glistening white oil.  Some doves in a bamboo thicket kept up
a dull droning noise, curiously appropriate to the heat--a sleepy
sound, but with the sleepiness of chloroform rather than a lullaby.

Down at Mr Macgregor's bungalow, two hundred yards away, a durwan,
like a living clock, hammered four strokes on a section of iron
rail.  Ko S'la, Flory's servant, awakened by the sound, went into
the cookhouse, blew up the embers of the woodfire and boiled the
kettle for tea.  Then he put on his pink gaungbaung and muslin
ingyi and brought the tea-tray to his master's bedside.

Ko S'la (his real name was Maung San Hla; Ko S'la was an
abbreviation) was a short, square-shouldered, rustic-looking Burman
with a very dark skin and a harassed expression.  He wore a black
moustache which curved downwards round his mouth, but like most
Burmans he was quite beardless.  He had been Flory's servant since
his first day in Burma.  The two men were within a month of one
another's age.  They had been boys together, had tramped side by
side after snipe and duck, sat together in machans waiting for
tigers that never came, shared the discomforts of a thousand camps
and marches; and Ko S'la had pimped for Flory and borrowed money
for him from the Chinese money-lenders, carried him to bed when he
was drunk, tended him through bouts of fever.  In Ko S'la's eyes
Flory, because a bachelor, was a boy still; whereas Ko S'la had
married, begotten five children, married again and become one of
the obscure martyrs of bigamy.  Like all bachelors' servants, Ko
S'la was lazy and dirty, and yet he was devoted to Flory.  He would
never let anyone else serve Flory at table, or carry his gun or
hold his pony's head while he mounted.  On the march, if they came
to a stream, he would carry Flory across on his back.  He was
inclined to pity Flory, partly because he thought him childish and
easily deceived, and partly because of the birthmark, which he
considered a dreadful thing.

Ko S'la put the tea-tray down on the table very quietly, and then
went round to the end of the bed and tickled Flory's toes.  He knew
by experience that this was the only way of waking Flory without
putting him in a bad temper.  Flory rolled over, swore, and pressed
his forehead into the pillow.

'Four o'clock has struck, most holy god,' Ko S'la said.  'I have
brought two teacups, because THE WOMAN said that she was coming.'

THE WOMAN was Ma Hla May, Flory's mistress.  Ko S'la always called
her THE WOMAN, to show his disapproval--not that he disapproved of
Flory for keeping a mistress, but he was jealous of Ma Hla May's
influence in the house.

'Will the holy one play tinnis this evening?' Ko S'la asked.

'No, it's too hot,' said Flory in English.  'I don't want anything
to eat.  Take this muck away and bring some whisky.'

Ko S'la understood English very well, though he could not speak it.
He brought a bottle of whisky, and also Flory's tennis racquet,
which he laid in a meaning manner against the wall opposite the
bed.  Tennis, according to his notions, was a mysterious ritual
incumbent on all Englishmen, and he did not like to see his master
idling in the evenings.

Flory pushed away in disgust the toast and butter that Ko S'la had
brought, but he mixed some whisky in a cup of tea and felt better
after drinking it.  He had slept since noon, and his head and all
his bones ached, and there was a taste like burnt paper in his
mouth.  It was years since he had enjoyed a meal.  All European
food in Burma is more or less disgusting--the bread is spongy stuff
leavened with palm-toddy and tasting like a penny bun gone wrong,
the butter comes out of a tin, and so does the milk, unless it is
the grey watery catlap of the dudh-wallah.  As Ko S'la left the
room there was a scraping of sandals outside, and a Burmese girl's
high-pitched voice said, 'Is my master awake?'

'Come in,' said Flory rather bad temperedly.

Ma Hla May came in, kicking off red-lacquered sandals in the
doorway.  She was allowed to come to tea, as a special privilege,
but not to other meals, nor to wear her sandals in her master's
presence.

Ma Hla May was a woman of twenty-two or -three, and perhaps five
feet tall.  She was dressed in a longyi of pale blue embroidered
Chinese satin, and a starched white muslin ingyi on which several
gold lockets hung.  Her hair was coiled in a tight black cylinder
like ebony, and decorated with jasmine flowers.  Her tiny,
straight, slender body was a contourless as a bas-relief carved
upon a tree.  She was like a doll, with her oval, still face the
colour of new copper, and her narrow eyes; an outlandish doll and
yet a grotesquely beautiful one.  A scent of sandalwood and coco-
nut oil came into the room with her.

Ma Hla May came across to the bed, sat down on the edge and put her
arms rather abruptly round Flory.  She smelled at his cheek with
her flat nose, in the Burmese fashion.

'Why did my master not send for me this afternoon?' she said.

'I was sleeping.  It is too hot for that kind of thing.'

'So you would rather sleep alone than with Ma Hla May?  How ugly
you must think me, then!  Am I ugly, master?'

'Go away,' he said, pushing her back.  'I don't want you at this
time of day.'

'At least touch me with your lips, then.  (There is no Burmese word
for to kiss.)  All white men do that to their women.'

'There you are, then.  Now leave me alone.  Fetch some cigarettes
and give me one.'

'Why is it that nowadays you never want to make love to me?  Ah,
two years ago it was so different!  You loved me in those days.
You gave me presents of gold bangles and silk longyis from
Mandalay.  And now look'--Ma Hla May held out one tiny muslin-clad
arm--'not a single bangle.  Last month I had thirty, and now all of
them are pawned.  How can I go to the bazaar without my bangles,
and wearing the same longyi over and over again?  I am ashamed
before the other women.'

'Is it my fault if you pawn your bangles?'

'Two years ago you would have redeemed them for me.  Ah, you do not
love Ma Hla May any longer!'

She put her arms round him again and kissed him, a European habit
which he had taught her.  A mingled scent of sandalwood, garlic,
coco-nut oil and the jasmine in her hair floated from her.  It was
a scent that always made his teeth tingle.  Rather abstractedly he
pressed her head back upon the pillow and looked down at her queer,
youthful face, with its high cheekbones, stretched eyelids and
short, shapely lips.  She had rather nice teeth, like the teeth of
a kitten.  He had bought her from her parents two years ago, for
three hundred rupees.  He began to stroke her brown throat, rising
like a smooth, slender stalk from the collarless ingyi.

'You only like me because I am a white man and have money,' he
said.

'Master, I love you, I love you more than anything in the world.
Why do you say that?  Have I not always been faithful to you?'

'You have a Burmese lover.'

'Ugh!'  Ma Hla May affected to shudder at the thought.  'To think
of their horrible brown hands, touching me!  I should die if a
Burman touched me!'

'Liar.'

He put his hand on her breast.  Privately, Ma Hla May did not like
this, for it reminded her that her breasts existed--the ideal of a
Burmese woman being to have no breasts.  She lay and let him do as
he wished with her, quite passive yet pleased and faintly smiling,
like a cat which allows one to stroke it.  Flory's embraces meant
nothing to her (Ba Pe, Ko S'la's younger brother, was secretly her
lover), yet she was bitterly hurt when he neglected them.
Sometimes she had even put love-philtres in his food.  It was the
idle concubine's life that she loved, and the visits to her village
dressed in all her finery, when she could boast of her position as
a 'bo-kadaw'--a white man's wife; for she had persuaded everyone,
herself included, that she was Flory's legal wife.

When Flory had done with her he turned away, jaded and ashamed, and
lay silent with his left hand covering his birthmark.  He always
remembered the birthmark when he had done something to be ashamed
of.  He buried his face disgustedly in the pillow, which was damp
and smelt of coco-nut oil.  It was horribly hot, and the doves
outside were still droning.  Ma Hla May, naked, reclined beside
Flory, fanning him gently with a wicker fan she had taken from the
table.

Presently she got up and dressed herself, and lighted a cigarette.
Then, coming back to the bed, she sat down and began stroking
Flory's bare shoulder.  The whiteness of his skin had a fascination
for her, because of its strangeness and the sense of power it gave
her.  But Flory twitched his shoulder to shake her hand away.  At
these times she was nauseating and dreadful to him.  His sole wish
was to get her out of his sight.

'Get out,' he said.

Ma Hla May took her cigarette from her mouth and tried to offer it
to Flory.  'Why is master always so angry with me when he has made
love to me?' she said.

'Get out,' he repeated.

Ma Hla May continued to stroke Flory's shoulder.  She had never
learned the wisdom of leaving him alone at these times.  She
believed that lechery was a form of witchcraft, giving a woman
magical powers over a man, until in the end she could weaken him to
a half-idiotic slave.  Each successive embrace sapped Flory's will
and made the spell stronger--this was her belief.  She began
tormenting him to begin over again.  She laid down her cigarette
and put her arms round him, trying to turn him towards her and kiss
his averted face, reproaching him for his coldness.

'Go away, go away!' he said angrily.  'Look in the pocket of my
shorts.  There is money there.  Take five rupees and go.'

Ma Hla May found the five-rupee note and stuffed it into the bosom
of her ingyi, but she still would not go.  She hovered about the
bed, worrying Flory until at last he grew angry and jumped up.

'Get out of this room!  I told you to go.  I don't want you in here
after I've done with you.'

'That is a nice way to speak to me!  You treat me as though I were
a prostitute.'

'So you are.  Out you go,' he said, pushing her out of the room by
her shoulders.  He kicked her sandals after her.  Their encounters
often ended in this way.

Flory stood in the middle of the room, yawning.  Should he go down
to the Club for tennis after all?  No, it meant shaving, and he
could not face the effort of shaving until he had a few drinks
inside him.  He felt his scrubby chin and lounged across to the
mirror to examine it, but then turned away.  He did not want to see
the yellow, sunken face that would look back at him.  For several
minutes he stood slack-limbed, watching the tuktoo stalk a moth
above the bookshelves.  The cigarette that Ma Hla May had dropped
burned down with an acrid smell, browning the paper.  Flory took a
book from the shelves, opened it and then threw it away in
distaste.  He had not even the energy to read.  Oh God, God, what
to do with the rest of this bloody evening?

Flo waddled into the room, wagging her tail and asking to be taken
for a walk.  Flory went sulkily into the little stone-floored
bathroom that gave on to the bedroom, splashed himself with
lukewarm water and put on his shirt and shorts.  He must take some
kind of exercise before the sun went down.  In India it is in some
way evil to spend a day without being once in a muck-sweat.  It
gives one a deeper sense of sin than a thousand lecheries.  In the
dark evening, after a quite idle day, one's ennui reaches a pitch
that is frantic, suicidal.  Work, prayer, books, drinking, talking--
they are all powerless against it; it can only be sweated out
through the pores of the skin.

Flory went out and followed the road uphill into the jungle.  It
was scrub jungle at first, with dense stunted bushes, and the only
trees were half-wild mangoes, bearing little turpentiny fruits the
size of plums.  Then the road struck among taller trees.  The
jungle was dried-up and lifeless at this time of year.  The trees
lined the road in close, dusty ranks, with leaves a dull olive-
green.  No birds were visible except some ragged brown creatures
like disreputable thrushes, which hopped clumsily under the bushes;
in the distance some other bird uttered a cry of 'AH ha ha!  AH ha
ha!'--a lonely, hollow sound like the echo of a laugh.  There was a
poisonous, ivy-like smell of crushed leaves.  It was still hot,
though the sun was losing its glare and the slanting light was
yellow.

After two miles the road ended at the ford of a shallow stream.
The jungle grew greener here, because of the water, and the trees
were taller.  At the edge of the stream there was a huge dead
pyinkado tree festooned with spidery orchids, and there were some
wild lime bushes with white waxen flowers.  They had a sharp scent
like bergamot.  Flory had walked fast and the sweat had drenched
his shirt and dribbled, stinging, into his eyes.  He had sweated
himself into a better mood.  Also, the sight of this stream always
heartened him; its water was quite clear, rarest of sights in a
miry country.  He crossed the stream by the stepping stones, Flo
splashing after him, and turned into a narrow track he knew, which
led through the bushes.  It was a track that cattle had made,
coming to the stream to drink, and few human beings ever followed
it.  It led to a pool fifty yards upstream.  Here a peepul tree
grew, a great buttressed thing six feet thick, woven of innumerable
strands of wood, like a wooden cable twisted by a giant.  The roots
of the tree made a natural cavern, under which the clear greenish
water bubbled.  Above and all around dense foliage shut out the
light, turning the place into a green grotto walled with leaves.

Flory threw off his clothes and stepped into the water.  It was a
shade cooler than the air, and it came up to his neck when he sat
down.  Shoals of silvery mahseer, no bigger than sardines, came
nosing and nibbling at his body.  Flo had also flopped into the
water, and she swam round silently, otter-like, with her webbed
feet.  She knew the pool well, for they often came here when Flory
was at Kyauktada.

There was a stirring high up in the peepul tree, and a bubbling
noise like pots boiling.  A flock of green pigeons were up there,
eating the berries.  Flory gazed up into the great green dome of
the tree, trying to distinguish the birds; they were invisible,
they matched the leaves so perfectly, and yet the whole tree was
alive with them, shimmering, as though the ghosts of birds were
shaking it.  Flo rested herself against the roots and growled up at
the invisible creatures.  Then a single green pigeon fluttered down
and perched on a lower branch.  It did not know that it was being
watched.  It was a tender thing, smaller than a tame dove, with
jade-green back as smooth as velvet, and neck and breast of
iridescent colours.  Its legs were like the pink wax that dentists
use.

The pigeon rocked itself backwards and forwards on the bough,
swelling out its breast feathers and laying its coralline beak upon
them.  A pang went through Flory.  Alone, alone, the bitterness of
being alone!  So often like this, in lonely places in the forest,
he would come upon something--bird, flower, tree--beautiful beyond
all words, if there had been a soul with whom to share it.  Beauty
is meaningless until it is shared.  If he had one person, just one,
to halve his loneliness!  Suddenly the pigeon saw the man and dog
below, sprang into the air and dashed away swift as a bullet, with
a rattle of wings.  One does not often see green pigeons so closely
when they are alive.  They are high-flying birds, living in the
treetops, and they do not come to the ground, or only to drink.
When one shoots them, if they are not killed outright, they cling
to the branch until they die, and drop long after one has given up
waiting and gone away.

Flory got out of the water, put on his clothes and recrossed the
stream.  He did not go home by the road, but followed a foot-track
southward into the jungle, intending to make a detour and pass
through a village that lay in the fringe of the jungle not far from
his house.  Flo frisked in and out of the undergrowth, yelping
sometimes when her long ears caught in the thorns.  She had once
turned up a hare near here.  Flory walked slowly.  The smoke of his
pipe floated straight upwards in still plumes.  He was happy and at
peace after the walk and the clear water.  It was cooler now,
except for patches of heat lingering under the thicker trees, and
the light was gentle.  Bullock-cart wheels were screaming
peacefully in the distance.

Soon they had lost their way in the jungle, and were wandering in a
maze of dead trees and tangled bushes.  They came to an impasse
where the path was blocked by large ugly plants like magnified
aspidistras, whose leaves terminated in long lashes armed with
thorns.  A firefly glowed greenish at the bottom of a bush; it was
getting twilight in the thicker places.  Presently the bullock-cart
wheels screamed nearer, taking a parallel course.

'Hey, saya gyi, saya gyi!' Flory shouted, taking Flo by the collar
to prevent her running away.

'Ba le-de?' the Burman shouted back.  There was the sound of
plunging hooves and of yells to the bullocks.

'Come here, if you please, O venerable and learned sir!  We have
lost our way.  Stop a moment, O great builder of pagodas!'

The Burman left his cart and pushed through the jungle, slicing the
creepers with his dah.  He was a squat middle-aged man with one
eye.  He led the way back to the track, and Flory climbed on to the
flat, uncomfortable bullock cart.  The Burman took up the string
reins, yelled to the bullocks, prodded the roots of their tails
with his short stick, and the cart jolted on with a shriek of
wheels.  The Burmese bullock-cart drivers seldom grease their
axles, probably because they believe that the screaming keeps away
evil spirits, though when questioned they will say that it is
because they are too poor to buy grease.

They passed a whitewashed wooden pagoda, no taller than a man and
half hidden by the tendrils of creeping plants.  Then the track
wound into the village, which consisted of twenty ruinous, wooden
huts roofed with thatch, and a well beneath some barren date-palms.
The egrets that roosted in the palms were streaming homewards over
the treetops like white flights of arrows.  A fat yellow woman with
her longyi hitched under her armpits was chasing a dog round a hut,
smacking at it with a bamboo and laughing, and the dog was also
laughing in its fashion.  The village was called Nyaunglebin--'the
four peepul trees'; there were no peepul trees there now, probably
they had been cut down and forgotten a century ago.  The villagers
cultivated a narrow strip of fields that lay between the town and
the jungle, and they also made bullock carts which they sold in
Kyauktada.  Bullock-cart wheels were littered everywhere under the
houses; massive things five feet across, with spokes roughly but
strongly carved.

Flory got off the cart and gave the driver a present of four annas.
Some brindled curs hurried from beneath the houses to sniff at Flo,
and a flock of pot-bellied, naked children, with their hair tied in
top-knots, also appeared, curious about the white man but keeping
their distance.  The village headman, a wizened, leaf-brown old
man, came out of his house, and there were shikoings.  Flory sat
down on the steps of the headman's house and relighted his pipe.
He was thirsty.

'Is the water in your well good to drink, thugyi-min?'

The headman reflected, scratching the calf of his left leg with his
right big toenail.  'Those who drink it, drink it, thakin.  And
those who do not drink it, do not drink it.'

'Ah.  That is wisdom.'

The fat woman who had chased the pariah brought a blackened
earthenware teapot and a handleless bowl, and gave Flory some pale
green tea, tasting of wood-smoke.

'I must be going, thugyi-min.  Thank you for the tea.'

'God go with you, thakin.'

Flory went home by a path that led out on to the maidan.  It was
dark now.  Ko S'la had put on a clean ingyi and was waiting in the
bedroom.  He had heated two kerosene tins of bath-water, lighted
the petrol lamps and laid out a clean suit and shirt for Flory.
The clean clothes were intended as a hint that Flory should shave,
dress himself and go down to the Club after dinner.  Occasionally
he spent the evening in Shan trousers, loafing in a chair with a
book, and Ko S'la disapproved of this habit.  He hated to see his
master behaving differently from other white men.  The fact that
Flory often came back from the Club drunk, whereas he remained
sober when he stayed at home, did not alter Ko S'la's opinion,
because getting drunk was normal and pardonable in a white man.

'The woman has gone down to the bazaar,' he announced, pleased, as
he always was when Ma Hla May left the house.  'Ba Pe has gone with
a lantern, to look after her when she comes back.'

'Good,' Flory said.

She had gone to spend her five rupees--gambling, no doubt.  'The
holy one's bath-water is ready.'

'Wait, we must attend to the dog first.  Bring the comb,' Flory
said.

The two men squatted on the floor together and combed Flo's silky
coat and felt between her toes, picking out the ticks.  It had to
be done every evening.  She picked up vast numbers of ticks during
the day, horrible grey things that were the size of pin-heads when
they got on to her, and gorged themselves till they were as large
as peas.  As each tick was detached Ko S'la put it on the floor and
carefully crushed it with his big toe.

Then Flory shaved, bathed, dressed, and sat down to dinner.  Ko
S'la stood behind his chair, handing him the dishes and fanning him
with the wicker fan.  He had arranged a bowl of scarlet hibiscus
flowers in the middle of the little table.  The meal was pretentious
and filthy.  The clever 'Mug' cooks, descendants of servants trained
by Frenchmen in India centuries ago, can do anything with food
except make it eatable.  After dinner Flory walked down to the Club,
to play bridge and get three parts drunk, as he did most evenings
when he was in Kyauktada.



5


In spite of the whisky he had drunk at the Club, Flory had little
sleep that night.  The pariah curs were baying the moon--it was
only a quarter full and nearly down by midnight, but the dogs slept
all day in the heat, and they had begun their moon-choruses
already.  One dog had taken a dislike to Flory's house, and had
settled down to bay at it systematically.  Sitting on its bottom
fifty yards from the gate, it let out sharp, angry yelps, one to
half a minute, as regularly as a clock.  It would keep this up for
two or three hours, until the cocks began crowing.

Flory lay turning from side to side, his head aching.  Some fool
has said that one cannot hate an animal; he should try a few nights
in India, when the dogs are baying the moon.  In the end Flory
could stand it no longer.  He got up, rummaged in the tin uniform
case under his bed for a rifle and a couple of cartridges, and went
out on to the veranda.

It was fairly light in the quarter moon.  He could see the dog, and
he could see his foresight.  He rested himself against the wooden
pillar of the veranda and took aim carefully; then, as he felt the
hard vulcanite butt against his bare shoulder, he flinched.  The
rifle had a heavy kick, and it left a bruise when one fired it.
The soft flesh of his shoulder quailed.  He lowered the rifle.
He had not the nerve to fire it in cold blood.

It was no use trying to sleep.  Flory got his jacket and some
cigarettes, and began to stroll up and down the garden path,
between the ghostly flowers.  It was hot, and the mosquitoes found
him out and came droning after him.  Phantoms of dogs were chasing
one another on the maidan.  Over to the left the gravestones of the
English cemetery glittered whitish, rather sinister, and one could
see the mounds near by, that were the remains of old Chinese tombs.
The hillside was said to be haunted, and the Club chokras cried
when they were sent up the road at night.

'Cur, spineless cur,' Flory was thinking to himself; without heat,
however, for he was too accustomed to the thought.  'Sneaking,
idling, boozing, fornicating, soul-examining, self-pitying cur.
All those fools at the Club, those dull louts to whom you are so
pleased to think yourself superior--they are all better than you,
every man of them.  At least they are men in their oafish way.  Not
cowards, not liars.  Not half-dead and rotting.  But you--'

He had reason to call himself names.  There had been a nasty, dirty
affair at the Club that evening.  Something quite ordinary, quite
according to precedent; but still dingy, cowardly, dishonouring.

When Flory had arrived at the Club only Ellis and Maxwell were
there.  The Lackersteens had gone to the station with the loan of
Mr Macgregor's car, to meet their niece, who was to arrive by the
night train.  The three men were playing three-handed bridge fairly
amicably when Westfield came in, his sandy face quite pink with
rage, bringing a copy of a Burmese paper called the Burmese
Patriot.  There was a libellous article in it, attacking Mr
Macgregor.  The rage of Ellis and Westfield was devilish.  They
were so angry that Flory had the greatest difficulty in pretending
to be angry enough to satisfy them.  Ellis spent five minutes in
cursing and then, by some extraordinary process, made up his mind
that Dr Veraswami was responsible for the article.  And he had
thought of a counterstroke already.  They would put a notice on the
board--a notice answering and contradicting the one Mr Macgregor
had posted the day before.  Ellis wrote it out immediately, in his
tiny, clear handwriting:

'In view of the cowardly insult recently offered to our Deputy
commissioner, we the undersigned wish to give it as our opinion
that this is the worst possible moment to consider the election of
niggers to this Club,' etc ,etc.

Westfield demurred to 'niggers'.  It was crossed out by a single
thin line and 'natives' substituted.  The notice was signed
'R. Westfield, P. W. Ellis, C. W. Maxwell, J. Flory.'

Ellis was so pleased with his idea that quite half of his anger
evaporated.  The notice would accomplish nothing in itself, but the
news of it would travel swiftly round the town, and would reach Dr
Veraswami tomorrow.  In effect, the doctor would have been publicly
called a nigger by the European community.  This delighted Ellis.
For the rest of the evening he could hardly keep his eyes from the
notice-board, and every few minutes he exclaimed in glee, 'That'll
give little fat-belly something to think about, eh?  Teach the
little sod what we think of him.  That's the way to put 'em in
their place, eh?' etc.

Meanwhile, Flory had signed a public insult to his friend.  He had
done it for the same reason as he had done a thousand such things
in his life; because he lacked the small spark of courage that was
needed to refuse.  For, of course, he could have refused if he had
chosen; and, equally of course, refusal would have meant a row with
Ellis and Westfield.  And oh, how he loathed a row!  The nagging,
the jeers!  At the very thought of it he flinched; he could feel
his birthmark palpable on his cheek, and something happening in his
throat that made his voice go flat and guilty.  Not that!  It was
easier to insult his friend, knowing that his friend must hear of
it.

Flory had been fifteen years in Burma, and in Burma one learns not
to set oneself up against public opinion.  But his trouble was
older than that.  It had begun in his mother's womb, when chance
put the blue birthmark on his cheek.  He thought of some of the
early effects of his birthmark.  His first arrival at school, aged
nine; the stares and, after a few days, shouts of the other boys;
the nickname Blueface, which lasted until the school poet (now,
Flory remembered, a critic who wrote rather good articles in the
Nation) came out with the couplet:


New-tick Flory does look rum,
Got a face like a monkey's bum,


whereupon the nickname was changed to Monkey-bum.  And the
subsequent years.  On Saturday nights the older boys used to have
what they called a Spanish Inquisition.  The favourite torture was
for someone to hold you in a very painful grip known only to a few
illuminati and called Special Togo, while someone else beat you
with a conker on a piece of string.  But Flory had lived down
'Monkey-bum' in time.  He was a liar, and a good footballer, the
two things absolutely necessary for success at school.  In his last
term he and another boy held the school poet in Special Togo while
the captain of the eleven gave him six with a spiked running shoe
for being caught writing a sonnet.  It was a formative period.

From that school he went to a cheap, third-rate public school.  It
was a poor, spurious place.  It aped the great public schools with
their traditions of High Anglicanism, cricket and Latin verses, and
it had a school song called 'The Scrum of Life' in which God
figured as the Great Referee.  But it lacked the chief virtue of
the great public schools, their atmosphere of literary scholarship.
The boys learned as nearly as possible nothing.  There was not
enough caning to make them swallow the dreary rubbish of the
curriculum, and the wretched, underpaid masters were not the kind
from whom one absorbs wisdom unawares.  Flory left school a
barbarous young lout.  And yet even then there were, and he knew
it, certain possibilities in him; possibilities that would lead to
trouble as likely as not.  But, of course, he had suppressed them.
A boy does not start his career nicknamed Monkey-bum without
learning his lesson.

He was not quite twenty when he came to Burma.  His parents, good
people and devoted to him, had found him a place in a timber firm.
They had had great difficulty in getting him the job, had paid a
premium they could not afford; later, he had rewarded them by
answering their letters with careless scrawls at intervals of
months.  His first six months in Burma he had spent in Rangoon,
where he was supposed to be learning the office side of his
business.  He had lived in a 'chummery' with four other youths who
devoted their entire energies to debauchery.  And what debauchery!
They swilled whisky which they privately hated, they stood round
the piano bawling songs of insane filthiness and silliness, they
squandered rupees by the hundred on aged Jewish whores with the
faces of crocodiles.  That too had been a formative period.

From Rangoon he had gone to a camp in the jungle, north of
Mandalay, extracting teak.  The jungle life was not a bad one, in
spite of the discomfort, the loneliness, and what is almost the
worst thing in Burma, the filthy, monotonous food.  He was very
young then, young enough for hero-worship, and he had friends among
the men in his firm.  There were also shooting, fishing, and
perhaps once in a year a hurried trip to Rangoon--pretext, a visit
to the dentist.  Oh, the joy of those Rangoon trips!  The rush to
Smart and Mookerdum's bookshop for the new novels out from England,
the dinner at Anderson's with beefsteaks and butter that had
travelled eight thousand miles on ice, the glorious drinking-bout!
He was too young to realize what this life was preparing for him.
He did not see the years stretching out ahead, lonely, eventless,
corrupting.

He acclimatized himself to Burma.  His body grew attuned to the
strange rhythms of the tropical seasons.  Every year from February
to May the sun glared in the sky like an angry god, then suddenly
the monsoon blew westward, first in sharp squalls, then in a heavy
ceaseless downpour that drenched everything until neither one's
clothes, one's bed nor even one's food ever seemed to be dry.  It
was still hot, with a stuffy, vaporous heat.  The lower jungle
paths turned into morasses, and the paddy-fields were wastes of
stagnant water with a stale, mousy smell.  Books and boots were
mildewed.  Naked Burmans in yard-wide hats of palm-leaf ploughed
the paddy-fields, driving their buffaloes through knee-deep water.
Later, the women and children planted the green seedlings of paddy,
dabbing each plant into the mud with little three-pronged forks.
Through July and August there was hardly a pause in the rain.  Then
one night, high overhead, one heard a squawking of invisible birds.
The snipe were flying southward from Central Asia.  The rains
tailed off, ending in October.  The fields dried up, the paddy
ripened, the Burmese children played hop-scotch with gonyin seeds
and flew kites in the cool winds.  It was the beginning of the
short winter, when Upper Burma seemed haunted by the ghost of
England.  Wild flowers sprang into bloom everywhere, not quite the
same as the English ones, but very like them--honeysuckle in thick
bushes, field roses smelling of pear-drops, even violets in dark
places of the forest.  The sun circled low in the sky, and the
nights and early mornings were bitterly cold, with white mists that
poured through the valleys like the steam of enormous kettles.  One
went shooting after duck and snipe.  There were snipe in countless
myriads, and wild geese in flocks that rose from the jeel with a
roar like a goods train crossing an iron bridge.  The ripening
paddy, breast-high and yellow, looked like wheat.  The Burmans went
to their work with muffled heads and their arms clasped across
their breasts, their faces yellow and pinched with the cold.  In
the morning one marched through misty, incongruous wilderness,
clearings of drenched, almost English grass and naked trees where
monkeys squatted in the upper branches, waiting for the sun.  At
night, coming back to camp through the cold lanes, one met herds of
buffaloes which the boys were driving home, with their huge horns
looming through the mist like crescents.  One had three blankets on
one's bed, and game pies instead of the eternal chicken.  After
dinner one sat on a log by the vast camp-fire, drinking beer and
talking about shooting.  The flames danced like red holly, casting
a circle of light at the edge of which servants and coolies
squatted, too shy to intrude on the white men and yet edging up to
the fire like dogs.  As one lay in bed one could hear the dew
dripping from the trees like large but gentle rain.  It was a good
life while one was young and need not think about the future or the
past.

Flory was twenty-four, and due for home leave, when the War broke
out.  He had dodged military service, which was easy to do and
seemed natural at the time.  The civilians in Burma had a
comforting theory that 'sticking by one's job' (wonderful language,
English!  'Sticking BY'--how different from 'sticking TO') was the
truest patriotism; there was even a covert hostility towards the
men who threw up their jobs in order to join the Army.  In reality,
Flory had dodged the War because the East already corrupted him,
and he did not want to exchange his whisky, his servants and his
Burmese girls for the boredom of the parade ground and the strain
of cruel marches.  The War rolled on, like a storm beyond the
horizon.  The hot, blowsy country, remote from danger, had a
lonely, forgotten feeling.  Flory took to reading voraciously, and
learned to live in books when life was tiresome.  He was growing
adult, tiring of boyish pleasures, learning to think for himself,
almost willy-nilly.

He celebrated his twenty-seventh birthday in hospital, covered from
head to foot with hideous sores which were called mud-sores, but
were probably caused by whisky and bad food.  They left little pits
in his skin which did not disappear for two years.  Quite suddenly
he had begun to look and feel very much older.  His youth was
finished.  Eight years of Eastern life, fever, loneliness and
intermittent drinking, had set their mark on him.

Since then, each year had been lonelier and more bitter than the
last.  What was at the centre of all his thoughts now, and what
poisoned everything, was the ever bitterer hatred of the atmosphere
of imperialism in which he lived.  For as his brain developed--you
cannot stop your brain developing, and it is one of the tragedies
of the half-educated that they develop late, when they are already
committed to some wrong way of life--he had grasped the truth about
the English and their Empire.  The Indian Empire is a despotism--
benevolent, no doubt, but still a despotism with theft as its final
object.  And as to the English of the East, the sahiblog, Flory had
come so to hate them from living in their society, that he was
quite incapable of being fair to them.  For after all, the poor
devils are no worse than anybody else.  They lead unenviable lives;
it is a poor bargain to spend thirty years, ill-paid, in an alien
country, and then come home with a wrecked liver and a pine-apple
backside from sitting in cane chairs, to settle down as the bore of
some second-rate Club.  On the other hand, the sahiblog are not to
be idealized.  There is a prevalent idea that the men at the
'outposts of Empire' are at least able and hardworking.  It is a
delusion.  Outside the scientific services--the Forest Department,
the Public Works Department and the like--there is no particular
need for a British official in India to do his job competently.
Few of them work as hard or as intelligently as the postmaster of a
provincial town in England.  The real work of administration is
done mainly by native subordinates; and the real backbone of the
despotism is not the officials but the Army.  Given the Army, the
officials and the businessmen can rub along safely enough even if
they are fools.  And most of them ARE fools.  A dull, decent
people, cherishing and fortifying their dullness behind a quarter
of a million bayonets.

It is a stifling, stultifying world in which to live.  It is a
world in which every word and every thought is censored.  In
England it is hard even to imagine such an atmosphere.  Everyone is
free in England; we sell our souls in public and buy them back in
private, among our friends.  But even friendship can hardly exist
when every white man is a cog in the wheels of despotism.  Free
speech is unthinkable.  All other kinds of freedom are permitted.
You are free to be a drunkard, an idler, a coward, a backbiter, a
fornicator; but you are not free to think for yourself.  Your
opinion on every subject of any conceivable importance is dictated
for you by the pukka sahibs' code.

In the end the secrecy of your revolt poisons you like a secret
disease.  Your whole life is a life of lies.  Year after year you
sit in Kipling-haunted little Clubs, whisky to right of you,
Pink'un to left of you, listening and eagerly agreeing while
Colonel Bodger develops his theory that these bloody Nationalists
should be boiled in oil.  You hear your Oriental friends called
'greasy little babus', and you admit, dutifully, that they ARE
greasy little babus.  You see louts fresh from school kicking grey-
haired servants.  The time comes when you burn with hatred of your
own countrymen, when you long for a native rising to drown their
Empire in blood.  And in this there is nothing honourable, hardly
even any sincerity.  For, au fond, what do you care if the Indian
Empire is a despotism, if Indians are bullied and exploited?  You
only care because the right of free speech is denied you.  You are
a creature of the despotism, a pukka sahib, tied tighter than a
monk or a savage by an unbreakable system of tabus.

Time passed and each year Flory found himself less at home in the
world of the sahibs, more liable to get into trouble when he talked
seriously on any subject whatever.  So he had learned to live
inwardly, secretly, in books and secret thoughts that could not be
uttered.  Even his talks with the doctor were a kind of talking to
himself; for the doctor, good man, understood little of what was
said to him.  But it is a corrupting thing to live one's real life
in secret.  One should live with the stream of life, not against
it.  It would be better to be the thickest-skulled pukka sahib who
ever hiccuped over 'Forty years on', than to live silent, alone,
consoling oneself in secret, sterile worlds.

Flory had never been home to England.  Why, he could not have
explained, though he knew well enough.  In the beginning accidents
had prevented him.  First there was the War, and after the War his
firm were so short of trained assistants that they would not let
him go for two years more.  Then at last he had set out.  He was
pining for England, though he dreaded facing it, as one dreads
facing a pretty girl when one is collarless and unshaven.  When he
left home he had been a boy, a promising boy and handsome in spite
of his birthmark; now, only ten years later, he was yellow, thin,
drunken, almost middle-aged in habits and appearance.  Still, he
was pining for England.  The ship rolled westward over wastes of
sea like rough-beaten silver, with the winter trade wind behind
her.  Flory's thin blood quickened with the good food and the smell
of the sea.  And it occurred to him--a thing he had actually
forgotten in the stagnant air of Burma--that he was still young
enough to begin over again.  He would live a year in a civilized
society, he would find some girl who did not mind his birthmark--
a civilized girl, not a pukka memsahib--and he would marry her and
endure ten, fifteen more years of Burma.  Then they would retire--
he would be worth twelve or fifteen thousand pounds on retirement,
perhaps.  They would buy a cottage in the country, surround
themselves with friends, books, their children, animals.  They
would be free for ever of the smell of pukka sahibdom.  He would
forget Burma, the horrible country that had come near ruining him.

When he reached Colombo he found a cable waiting for him.  Three
men in his firm had died suddenly of black-water fever.  The firm
were sorry, but would he please return to Rangoon at once?  He
should have his leave at the earliest possible opportunity.

Flory boarded the next boat for Rangoon, cursing his luck, and took
the train back to his headquarters.  He was not at Kyauktada then,
but at another Upper Burma town.  All the servants were waiting for
him on the platform.  He had handed them over en bloc to his
successor, who had died.  It was so queer to see their familiar
faces again!  Only ten days ago he had been speeding for England,
almost thinking himself in England already; and now back in the old
stale scene, with the naked black coolies squabbling over the
luggage and a Burman shouting at his bullocks down the road.

The servants came crowding round him, a ring of kindly brown faces,
offering presents.  Ko S'la had brought a sambhur skin, the Indians
some sweetmeats and a garland of marigolds, Ba Pe, a young boy
then, a squirrel in a wicker cage.  There were bullock carts
waiting for the luggage.  Flory walked up to the house, looking
ridiculous with the big garland dangling from his neck.  The light
of the cold-weather evening was yellow and kind.  At the gate an
old Indian, the colour of earth, was cropping grass with a tiny
sickle.  The wives of the cook and the mali were kneeling in front
of the servants' quarters, grinding curry paste on the stone slab.

Something turned over in Flory's heart.  It was one of those moments
when one becomes conscious of a vast change and deterioration in
one's life.  For he had realized, suddenly, that in his heart he was
glad to be coming back.  This country which he hated was now his
native country, his home.  He had lived here ten years, and every
particle of his body was compounded of Burmese soil.  Scenes like
these--the sallow evening light, the old Indian cropping grass, the
creak of the cartwheels, the streaming egrets--were more native to
him than England.  He had sent deep roots, perhaps his deepest, into
a foreign country.

Since then he had not even applied for home leave.  His father had
died, then his mother, and his sisters, disagreeable horse-faced
women whom he had never liked, had married and he had almost lost
touch with them.  He had no tie with Europe now, except the tie of
books.  For he had realized that merely to go back to England was
no remedy for loneliness; he had grasped the special nature of the
hell that is reserved for Anglo-Indians.  Ah, those poor prosing
old wrecks in Bath and Cheltenham!  Those tomb-like boarding-houses
with Anglo-Indians littered about in all stages of decomposition,
all talking and talking about what happened in Boggleywalah in '88!
Poor devils, they know what it means to have left one's heart in an
alien and hated country.  There was, he saw clearly, only one way
out.  To find someone who would share his life in Burma--but really
share it, share his inner, secret life, carry away from Burma the
same memories as he carried.  Someone who would love Burma as he
loved it and hate it as he hated it.  Who would help him to live
with nothing hidden, nothing unexpressed.  Someone who understood
him: a friend, that was what it came down to.

A friend.  Or a wife?  That quite impossible she.  Someone like Mrs
Lackersteen, for instance?  Some damned memsahib, yellow and thin,
scandalmongering over cocktails, making kit-kit with the servants,
living twenty years in the country without learning a word of the
language.  Not one of those, please God.

Flory leaned over the gate.  The moon was vanishing behind the dark
wall of the jungle, but the dogs were still howling.  Some lines
from Gilbert came into his mind, a vulgar silly jingle but
appropriate--something about 'discoursing on your complicated state
of mind'.  Gilbert was a gifted little skunk.  Did all his trouble,
then, simply boil down to that?  Just complicated, unmanly
whinings; poor-little-rich-girl stuff?  Was he no more than a
loafer using his idleness to invent imaginary woes?  A spiritual
Mrs Wititterly?  A Hamlet without poetry?  Perhaps.  And if so, did
that make it any more bearable?  It is not the less bitter because
it is perhaps one's own fault, to see oneself drifting, rotting, in
dishonour and horrible futility, and all the while knowing that
somewhere within one there is the possibility of a decent human
being.

Oh well, God save us from self-pity!  Flory went back to the
veranda, took up the rifle, and wincing slightly, let drive at the
pariah dog.  There was an echoing roar, and the bullet buried
itself in the maidan, wide of the mark.  A mulberry-coloured bruise
sprang out on Flory's shoulder.  The dog gave a yell of fright,
took to its heels, and then, sitting down fifty yards farther away,
once more began rhythmically baying.



6


The morning sunlight slanted up the maidan and struck, yellow as
goldleaf, against the white face of the bungalow.  Four black-
purple crows swooped down and perched on the veranda rail, waiting
their chance to dart in and steal the bread and butter that Ko S'la
had set down beside Flory's bed.  Flory crawled through the
mosquito net, shouted to Ko S'la to bring him some gin, and then
went into the bathroom and sat for a while in a zinc tub of water
that was supposed to be cold.  Feeling better after the gin, he
shaved himself.  As a rule he put off shaving until the evening,
for his beard was black and grew quickly.

While Flory was sitting morosely in his bath, Mr Macgregor, in
shorts and singlet on the bamboo mat laid for the purpose in his
bedroom, was struggling with Numbers 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 of
Nordenflycht's 'Physical Jerks for the Sedentary'.  Mr Macgregor
never, or hardly ever, missed his morning exercises.  Number 8
(flat on the back, raise legs to the perpendicular without bending
knees) was downright painful for a man of forty-three; Number 9
(flat on the back, rise to a sitting posture and touch toes with
tips of fingers) was even worse.  No matter, one must keep fit!  As
Mr Macgregor lunged painfully in the direction of his toes, a
brick-red shade flowed upwards from his neck and congested his face
with a threat of apoplexy.  The sweat gleamed on his large, tallowy
breasts.  Stick it out, stick it out!  At all costs one must keep
fit.  Mohammed Ali, the bearer, with Mr Macgregor's clean clothes
across his arm, watched through the half-open door.  His narrow,
yellow, Arabian face expressed neither comprehension nor curiosity.
He had watched these contortions--a sacrifice, he dimly imagined,
to some mysterious and exacting god--every morning for five years.

At the same time, too, Westfield, who had gone out early, was
leaning against the notched and ink-stained table of the police
station, while the fat Sub-inspector interrogated a suspect whom
two constables were guarding.  The suspect was a man of forty, with
a grey, timorous face, dressed only in a ragged longyi kilted to
the knee, beneath which his lank, curved shins were speckled with
tick-bites.

'Who is this fellow?' said Westfield.

'Thief, sir.  We catch him in possession of this ring with two
emeralds very-dear.  No explanation.  How could he--poor coolie--
own a emerald ring?  He have stole it.'

He turned ferociously upon the suspect, advanced his face tomcat-
fashion till it was almost touching the other's, and roared in an
enormous voice:

'You stole the ring!'

'No.'

'You are an old offender!'

'No.'

'You have been in prison!'

'No.'

'Turn round!' bellowed the Sub-inspector on an inspiration.  'Bend
over!'

The suspect turned his grey face in agony towards Westfield, who
looked away.  The two constables seized him, twisted him round and
bent him over; the Sub-inspector tore off his longyi, exposing his
buttocks.

'Look at this, sir!'  He pointed to some scars.  'He have been
flogged with bamboos.  He is an old offender.  THEREFORE he stole
the ring!'

'All right, put him in the clink,' said Westfield moodily, as he
lounged away from the table with his hands in his pockets.  At the
bottom of his heart he loathed running in these poor devils of
common thieves.  Dacoits, rebels--yes; but not these poor cringing
rats!  'How many have you got in the clink now, Maung Ba?' he said.

'Three, sir.'

The lock-up was upstairs, a cage surrounded by six-inch wooden
bars, guarded by a constable armed with a carbine.  It was very
dark, stifling hot, and quite unfurnished, except for an earth
latrine that stank to heaven.  Two prisoners were squatting at the
bars, keeping their distance from a third, an Indian coolie, who
was covered from head to foot with ringworm like a coat of mail.  A
stout Burmese woman, wife of a constable, was kneeling outside the
cage ladling rice and watery dahl into tin pannikins.

'Is the food good?' said Westfield.

'It is good, most holy one,' chorused the prisoners.

The Government provided for the prisoners' food at the rate of two
annas and a half per meal per man, out of which the constable's
wife looked to make a profit of one anna.

Flory went outside and loitered down the compound, poking weeds
into the ground with his stick.  At that hour there were beautiful
faint colours in everything--tender green of leaves, pinkish brown
of earth and tree-trunks--like aquarelle washes that would vanish
in the later glare.  Down on the maidan flights of small, low-
flying brown doves chased one another to and fro, and bee-eaters,
emerald-green, curvetted like slow swallows.  A file of sweepers,
each with his load half hidden beneath his garment, were marching
to some dreadful dumping-hole that existed on the edge of the
jungle.  Starveling wretches, with stick-like limbs and knees too
feeble to be straightened, draped in earth-coloured rags, they were
like a procession of shrouded skeletons walking.

The mali was breaking ground for a new flower-bed, down by the
pigeon-cote that stood near the gate.  He was a lymphatic, half-
witted Hindu youth, who lived his life in almost complete silence,
because he spoke some Manipur dialect which nobody else understood,
not even his Zerbadi wife.  His tongue was also a size too large
for his mouth.  He salaamed low to Flory, covering his face with
his hand, then swung his mamootie aloft again and hacked at the dry
ground with heavy, clumsy strokes, his tender back-muscles quivering.

A sharp grating scream that sounded like 'Kwaaa!' came from the
servants quarters.  Ko S'la's wives had begun their morning
quarrel.  The tame fighting cock, called Nero, strutted zigzag down
the path, nervous of Flo, and Ba Pe came out with a bowl of paddy
and they fed Nero and the pigeons.  There were more yells from the
servants' quarters, and the gruffer voices of men trying to stop
the quarrel.  Ko S'la suffered a great deal from his wives.  Ma Pu,
the first wife, was a gaunt hard-faced woman, stringy from much
child-bearing, and Ma Yi, the 'little wife', was a fat, lazy cat
some years younger.  The two women fought incessantly when Flory
was in headquarters and they were together.  Once when Ma Pu was
chasing Ko S'la with a bamboo, he had dodged behind Flory for
protection, and Flory had received a nasty blow on the leg.

Mr Macgregor was coming up the road, striding briskly and swinging
a thick walking-stick.  He was dressed in khaki pagri-cloth shirt,
drill shorts and a pigsticker topi.  Besides his exercises, he took
a brisk two-mile walk every morning when he could spare the time.

'Top o' the mornin' to ye!' he called to Flory in a hearty
matutinal voice, putting on an Irish accent.  He cultivated a
brisk, invigorating, cold-bath demeanour at this hour of the
morning.  Moreover, the libellous article in the Burmese Patriot,
which he had read overnight, had hurt him, and he was affecting a
special cheeriness to conceal this.

'Morning!' Flory called back as heartily as he could manage.

Nasty old bladder of lard! he thought, watching Mr Macgregor up the
road.  How his bottom did stick out in those tight khaki shorts.
Like one of those beastly middle-aged scoutmasters, homosexuals
almost to a man, that you see photographs of in the illustrated
papers.  Dressing himself up in those ridiculous clothes and
exposing his pudgy, dimpled knees, because it is the pukka sahib
thing to take exercise before breakfast--disgusting!

A Burman came up the hill, a splash of white and magenta.  It was
Flory's clerk, coming from the tiny office, which was not far from
the church.  Reaching the gate, he shikoed and presented a grimy
envelope, stamped Burmese-fashion on the point of the flap.

'Good morning, sir.'

'Good morning.  What's this thing?'

'Local letter, your honour.  Come this morning's post.  Anonymous
letter, I think, sir.'

'Oh bother.  All right, I'll be down to the office about eleven.'

Flory opened the letter.  It was written on a sheet of foolscap,
and it ran:


MR JOHN FLORY,

SIR,--I the undersigned beg to suggest and WARN to your honour
certain useful pieces of information whereby your honour will be
much profited, sir.

Sir, it has been remarked in Kyauktada your honour's great
friendship and intimacy with Dr Veraswami, the Civil Surgeon,
frequenting with him, inviting him to your house, etc.  Sir, we beg
to inform you that the said Dr Veraswami is NOT A GOOD MAN and in
no ways a worthy friend of European gentlemen.  The doctor is
eminently dishonest, disloyal and corrupt public servant.  Coloured
water is he providing to patients at the hospital and selling drugs
for own profit, besides many bribes, extortions, etc.  Two
prisoners has he flogged with bamboos, afterwards rubbing chilis
into the place if relatives do not send money.  Besides this he is
implicated with the Nationalist Party and lately provided material
for a very evil article which appeared in the Burmese Patriot
attacking Mr Macgregor, the honoured Deputy Commissioner.

He is also sleeping by force with female patients at the hospital.

Wherefore we are much hoping that your honour will ESCHEW same Dr
Veraswami and not consort with persons who can bring nothing but
evil upon your honour.

And shall ever pray for your honour's long health and prosperity.

(Signed)  A FRIEND.


The letter was written in the shaky round hand of the bazaar
letter-writer, which resembled a copybook exercise written by a
drunkard.  The letter-writer, however, would never have risen to
such a word as 'eschew'.  The letter must have been dictated by a
clerk, and no doubt it came ultimately from U Po Kyin.  From 'the
crocodile', Flory reflected.

He did not like the tone of the letter.  Under its appearance of
servility it was obviously a covert threat.  'Drop the doctor or we
will make it hot for you', was what it said in effect.  Not that
that mattered greatly; no Englishman ever feels himself in real
danger from an Oriental.

Flory hesitated with the letter in his hands.  There are two things
one can do with an anonymous letter.  One can say nothing about it,
or one can show it to the person whom it concerns.  The obvious,
the decent course was to give the letter to Dr Veraswami and let
him take what action he chose.

And yet--it was safer to keep out of this business altogether.  It
is so important (perhaps the most important of all the Ten Precepts
of the pukka sahib) not to entangle oneself in 'native' quarrels.
With Indians there must be no loyalty, no real friendship.
Affection, even love--yes.  Englishmen do often love Indians--
native officers, forest rangers, hunters, clerks, servants.  Sepoys
will weep like children when their colonel retires.  Even intimacy
is allowable, at the right moments.  But alliance, partisanship,
never!  Even to know the rights and wrongs of a 'native' quarrel is
a loss of prestige.

If he published the letter there would be a row and an official
inquiry, and, in effect, he would have thrown in his lot with the
doctor against U Po Kyin.  U Po Kyin did not matter, but there were
the Europeans; if he, Flory, were too conspicuously the doctor's
partisan, there might be hell to pay.  Much better to pretend that
the letter had never reached him.  The doctor was a good fellow,
but as to championing him against the full fury of pukka sahibdom--
ah, no, no!  What shall it profit a man if he save his own soul and
lose the whole world?  Flory began to tear the letter across.  The
danger of making it public was very slight, very nebulous.  But one
must beware of the nebulous dangers in India.  Prestige, the breath
of life, is itself nebulous.  He carefully tore the letter into
small pieces and threw them over the gate.

At this moment there was a terrified scream, quite different from
the voices of Ko S'la's wives.  The mali lowered his mamootie and
gaped in the direction of the sound, and Ko S'la, who had also
heard it, came running bareheaded from the servants' quarters,
while Flo sprang to her feet and yapped sharply.  The scream was
repeated.  It came from the jungle behind the house, and it was an
English voice, a woman's, crying out in terror.

There was no way out of the compound by the back.  Flory scrambled
over the gate and came down with his knee bleeding from a splinter.
He ran round the compound fence and into the jungle, Flo following.
Just behind the house, beyond the first fringe of bushes, there was
a small hollow, which, as there was a pool of stagnant water in it,
was frequented by buffaloes from Nyaunglebin.  Flory pushed his way
through the bushes.  In the hollow an English girl, chalk-faced,
was cowering against a bush, while a huge buffalo menaced her with
its crescent-shaped horns.  A hairy calf, no doubt the cause of the
trouble, stood behind.  Another buffalo, neck-deep in the slime of
the pool, looked on with mild prehistoric face, wondering what was
the matter.

The girl turned an agonized face to Flory as he appeared.  'Oh, do
be quick!' she cried, in the angry, urgent tone of people who are
frightened.  'Please!  Help me!  Help me!'

Flory was too astonished to ask any questions.  He hastened towards
her, and, in default of a stick, smacked the buffalo sharply on the
nose.  With a timid, loutish movement the great beast turned aside,
then lumbered off followed by the calf.  The other buffalo also
extricated itself from the slime and lolloped away.  The girl threw
herself against Flory, almost into his arms, quite overcome by her
fright.

'Oh, thank you, thank you!  Oh, those dreadful things!  What ARE
they?  I thought they were going to kill me.  What horrible
creatures!  What ARE they?'

They're only water-buffaloes.  They come from the village up
there.'

'Buffaloes?'

'Not wild buffaloes--bison, we call those.  They're just a kind of
cattle the Burmans keep.  I say, they've given you a nasty shock.
I'm sorry.'

She was still clinging closely to his arm, and he could feel her
shaking.  He looked down, but he could not see her face, only the
top of her head, hatless, with yellow hair as short as a boy's.
And he could see one of the hands on his arm.  It was long,
slender, youthful, with the mottled wrist of a schoolgirl.  It was
several years since he had seen such a hand.  He became conscious
of the soft, youthful body pressed against his own, and the warmth
breathing out of it; whereat something seemed to thaw and grow warm
within him.

'It's all right, they're gone,' he said.  'There's nothing to be
frightened of.'

The girl was recovering from her fright, and she stood a little
away from him, with one hand still on his arm.  'I'm all right,'
she said.  'It's nothing.  I'm not hurt.  They didn't touch me.  It
was only their looking so awful.'

'They're quite harmless really.  Their horns are set so far back
that they can't gore you.  They're very stupid brutes.  They only
pretend to show fight when they've got calves.'

They had stood apart now, and a slight embarrassment came over them
both immediately.  Flory had already turned himself sidelong to
keep his birthmarked cheek away from her.  He said:

'I say, this is a queer sort of introduction!  I haven't asked yet
how you got here.  Wherever did you come from--if it's not rude to
ask?'

'I just came out of my uncle's garden.  It seemed such a nice
morning, I thought I'd go for a walk.  And then those dreadful
things came after me.  I'm quite new to this country, you see.'

'Your uncle?  Oh, of course! You're Mr Lackersteen's niece.  We
heard you were coming.  I say, shall we get out on to the maidan?
There'll be a path somewhere.  What a start for your first morning
in Kyauktada!  This'll give you rather a bad impression of Burma,
I'm afraid.'

'Oh no; only it's all rather strange.  How thick these bushes grow!
All kind of twisted together and foreign-looking.  You could get
lost here in a moment.  Is that what they call jungle?'

'Scrub jungle.  Burma's mostly jungle--a green, unpleasant land, I
call it.  I wouldn't walk through that grass if I were you.  The
seeds get into your stockings and work their way into your skin.'

He let the girl walk ahead of him, feeling easier when she could
not see his face.  She was tallish for a girl, slender, and wearing
a lilac-coloured cotton frock.  From the way she moved her limbs he
did not think she could be much past twenty.  He had not noticed
her face yet, except to see that she wore round tortoise-shell
spectacles, and that her hair was as short as his own.  He had
never seen a woman with cropped hair before, except in the
illustrated papers.

As they emerged on to the maidan he stepped level with her, and she
turned to face him.  Her face was oval, with delicate, regular
features; not beautiful, perhaps, but it seemed so there, in Burma,
where all Englishwomen are yellow and thin.  He turned his head
sharply aside, though the birthmark was away from her.  He could
not bear her to see his worn face too closely.  He seemed to feel
the withered skin round his eyes as though it had been a wound.
But he remembered that he had shaved that morning, and it gave him
courage.  He said:

'I say, you must be a bit shaken up after this business.  Would you
like to come into my place and rest a few minutes before you go
home?  It's rather late to be out of doors without a hat, too.'

'Oh, thank you, I would,' the girl said.  She could not, he
thought, know anything about Indian notions of propriety.  'Is this
your house here?'

'Yes.  We must go round the front way.  I'll have the servants get
a sunshade for you.  This sun's dangerous for you, with your short
hair.'

They walked up the garden path.  Flo was frisking round them and
trying to draw attention to herself.  She always barked at strange
Orientals, but she liked the smell of a European.  The sun was
growing stronger.  A wave of blackcurrant scent flowed from the
petunias beside the path, and one of the pigeons fluttered to the
earth, to spring immediately into the air again as Flo made a grab
at it.  Flory and the girl stopped with one consent, to look at the
flowers.  A pang of unreasonable happiness had gone through them
both.

'You really mustn't go out in this sun without a hat on,' he
repeated, and somehow there was an intimacy in saying it.  He could
not help referring to her short hair somehow, it seemed to him so
beautiful.  To speak of it was like touching it with his hand.

'Look, your knee's bleeding,' the girl said.  'Did you do that when
you were coming to help me?'

There was a slight trickle of blood, which was drying, purple, on
his khaki stocking.  'It's nothing,' he said, but neither of them
felt at that moment that it was nothing.  They began chattering
with extraordinary eagerness about the flowers.  The girl 'adored'
flowers, she said.  And Flory led her up the path, talking
garrulously about one plant and another.

'Look how these phloxes grow.  They go on blooming for six months
in this country.  They can't get too much sun.  I think those
yellow ones must be almost the colour of primroses.  I haven't seen
a primrose for fifteen years, nor a wallflower, either.  Those
zinnias are fine, aren't they?--like painted flowers, with those
wonderful dead colours.  These are African marigolds.  They're
coarse things, weeds almost, but you can't help liking them,
they're so vivid and strong.  Indians have an extraordinary
affection for them; wherever Indians have been you find marigolds
growing, even years afterwards when the jungle has buried every
other trace of them.  But I wish you'd come into the veranda and
see the orchids.  I've some I must show that are just like bells of
gold--but literally like gold.  And they smell of honey, almost
overpoweringly.  That's about the only merit of this beastly
country, it's good for flowers.  I hope you're fond of gardening?
It's our greatest consolation, in this country.'

'Oh, I simply adore gardening,' the girl said.

They went into the veranda.  Ko S'la had hurriedly put on his ingyi
and his best pink silk gaungbaung, and he appeared from within the
house with a tray on which were a decanter of gin, glasses and a
box of cigarettes.  He laid them on the table, and, eyeing the girl
half apprehensively, put his hands flat together and shikoed.

'I expect it's no use offering you a drink at this hour of the
morning?' Flory said.  'I can never get it into my servant's head
that SOME people can exist without gin before breakfast.'

He added himself to the number by waving away the drink Ko S'la
offered him.  The girl had sat down in the wicker chair that Ko
S'la had set out for her at the end of the veranda.  The dark-
leaved orchids hung behind her head, with gold trusses of blossom,
breathing out warm honey-scent.  Flory was standing against the
veranda rail, half facing the girl, but keeping his birthmarked
cheek hidden.

'What a perfectly divine view you have from here,' she said as she
looked down the hillside.

'Yes, isn't it?  Splendid, in this yellow light, before the sun
gets going.  I love that sombre yellow colour the maidan has, and
those gold mohur trees, like blobs of crimson.  And those hills at
the horizon, almost black.  My camp is on the other side of those
hills,' he added.

The girl, who was long-sighted, took off her spectacles to look
into the distance.  He noticed that her eyes were very clear pale
blue, paler than a harebell.  And he noticed the smoothness of the
skin round her eyes, like a petal, almost.  It reminded him of his
age and his haggard face again, so that he turned a little more
away from her.  But he said on impulse:

'I say, what a bit of luck you coming to Kyauktada!  You can't
imagine the difference it makes to us to see a new face in these
places.  After months of our own miserable society, and an
occasional official on his rounds and American globe-trotters
skipping up the Irrawaddy with cameras.  I suppose you've come
straight from England?'

'Well, not England exactly.  I was living in Paris before I came
out here.  My mother was an artist, you see.'

'Paris!  Have you really lived in Paris?  By Jove, just fancy
coming from Paris to Kyauktada!  Do you know, it's positively
difficult, in a hole like this, to believe that there ARE such
places as Paris.'

'Do you like Paris?' she said.

'I've never even seen it.  But, good Lord, how I've imagined it!
Paris--it's all a kind of jumble of pictures in my mind; cafes and
boulevards and artists' studios and Villon and Baudelaire and
Maupassant all mixed up together.  You don't know how the names of
those European towns sound to us, out here.  And did you really
live in Paris?  Sitting in cafes with foreign art students,
drinking white wine and talking about Marcel Proust?'

'Oh, that kind of thing, I suppose,' said the girl, laughing.

'What differences you'll find here!  It's not white wine and Marcel
Proust here.  Whisky and Edgar Wallace more likely.  But if you
ever want books, you might find something you liked among mine.
There's nothing but tripe in the Club library.  But of course I'm
hopelessly behind the times with my books.  I expect you'll have
read everything under the sun.'

'Oh no.  But of course I simply adore reading,' the girl said.

'What it means to meet somebody who cares for books!  I mean books
worth reading, not that garbage in the Club libraries.  I do hope
you'll forgive me if I overwhelm you with talk.  When I meet
somebody who's heard that books exist, I'm afraid I go off like a
bottle of warm beer.  It's a fault you have to pardon in these
countries.'

'Oh, but I love talking about books.  I think reading is so
wonderful.  I mean, what would life be without it?  It's such a--
such a--'

'Such a private Alsatia.  Yes--'

They plunged into an enormous and eager conversation, first about
books, then about shooting, in which the girl seemed to have an
interest and about which she persuaded Flory to talk.  She was
quite thrilled when he described the murder of an elephant which he
had perpetrated some years earlier.  Flory scarcely noticed, and
perhaps the girl did not either, that it was he who did all the
talking.  He could not stop himself, the joy of chattering was so
great.  And the girl was in a mood to listen.  After all, he had
saved her from the buffalo, and she did not yet believe that those
monstrous brutes could be harmless; for the moment he was almost a
hero in her eyes.  When one does get any credit in this life, it is
usually for something that one has not done.  It was one of those
times when the conversation flows so easily, so naturally, that one
could go on talking forever.  But suddenly, their pleasure
evaporated, they started and fell silent.  They had noticed that
they were no longer alone.

At the other end of the veranda, between the rails, a coal-black
moustachioed face was peeping with enormous curiosity.  It belonged
to old Sammy, the 'Mug' cook.  Behind him stood Ma Pu, Ma Yi, Ko
S'la's four eldest children, an unclaimed naked child, and two old
women who had come down from the village upon the news that an
'Ingaleikma' was on view.  Like carved teak statues with footlong
cigars stuck in their wooden faces, the two old creatures gazed at
the 'Ingaleikma' as English yokels might gaze at a Zulu warrior in
full regalia.

'Those people . . .' the girl said uncomfortably, looking towards
them.

Sammy, seeing himself detected, looked very guilty and pretended to
be rearranging his pagri.  The rest of the audience were a little
abashed, except for the two wooden-faced old women.

'Dash their cheek!' Flory said.  A cold pang of disappointment went
through him.  After all, it would not do for the girl to stay on
his veranda any longer.  Simultaneously both he and she had
remembered that they were total strangers.  Her face had turned a
little pink.  She began putting on her spectacles.

'I'm afraid an English girl is rather a novelty to these people,'
he said.  'They don't mean any harm.  Go away!' he added angrily,
waving his hand at the audience, whereupon they vanished.

'Do you know, if you don't mind, I think I ought to be going,' the
girl said.  She had stood up.  'I've been out quite a long time.
They may be wondering where I've got to.'

'Must you really?  It's quite early.  I'll see that you don't have
to go home bareheaded in the sun.'

'I ought really--' she began again.

She stopped, looking at the doorway.  Ma Hla May was emerging on to
the veranda.

Ma Hla May came forward with her hand on her hip.  She had come
from within the house, with a calm air that asserted her right to
be there.  The two girls stood face to face, less than six feet
apart.

No contrast could have been stranger; the one faintly coloured as
an apple-blossom, the other dark and garish, with a gleam almost
metallic on her cylinder of ebony hair and the salmon-pink silk of
her longyi.  Flory thought he had never noticed before how dark Ma
Hla May's face was, and how outlandish her tiny, stiff body,
straight as a soldier's, with not a curve in it except the vase-
like curve of her hips.  He stood against the veranda rail and
watched the two girls, quite disregarded.  For the best part of a
minute neither of them could take her eyes from the other; but
which found the spectacle more grotesque, more incredible, there is
no saying.

Ma Hla May turned her face round to Flory, with her black brows,
thin as pencil lines, drawn together.  'Who is this woman?' she
demanded sullenly.

He answered casually, as though giving an order to a servant:

'Go away this instant.  If you make any trouble I will afterwards
take a bamboo and beat you till not one of your ribs is whole.'

Ma Hla May hesitated, shrugged her small shoulders and disappeared.
And the other, gazing after her, said curiously:

'Was that a man or a woman?'

'A woman,' he said.  'One of the servants' wives, I believe.  She
came to ask about the laundry, that was all.'

'Oh, is THAT what Burmese women are like?  They ARE queer little
creatures!  I saw a lot of them on my way up here in the train, but
do you know, I thought they were all boys.  They're just like a
kind of Dutch doll, aren't they?'

She had begun to move towards the veranda steps, having lost
interest in Ma Hla May now that she had disappeared.  He did not
stop her, for he thought Ma Hla May quite capable of coming back
and making a scene.  Not that it mattered much, for neither girl
knew a word of the other's language.  He called to Ko S'la, and Ko
S'la came running with a big oiled-silk umbrella with bamboo ribs.
He opened it respectfully at the foot of the steps and held it over
the girl's head as she came down.  Flory went with them as far as
the gate.  They stopped to shake hands, he turning a little
sideways in the strong sunlight, hiding his birthmark.

'My fellow here will see you home.  It was ever so kind of you to
come in.  I can't tell you how glad I am to have met you.  You'll
make such a difference to us here in Kyauktada.'

'Good-bye, Mr--oh, how funny!  I don't even know your name.'

'Flory, John Flory.  And yours--Miss Lackersteen, is it?'

'Yes.  Elizabeth.  Good-bye, Mr Flory.  And thank you EVER so much.
That awful buffalo.  You quite saved my life.'

'It was nothing.  I hope I shall see you at the Club this evening?
I expect your uncle and aunt will be coming down.  Good-bye for the
time being, then.'

He stood at the gate, watching them as they went.  Elizabeth--
lovely name, too rare nowadays.  He hoped she spelt it with a Z.
Ko S'la trotted after her at a queer uncomfortable gait, reaching
the umbrella over her head and keeping his body as far away from
her as possible.  A cool breath of wind blew up the hill.  It was
one of those momentary winds that blow sometimes in the cold
weather in Burma, coming from nowhere, filling one with thirst and
with nostalgia for cold sea-pools, embraces of mermaids, waterfalls,
caves of ice.  It rustled through the wide domes of the gold mohur
trees, and fluttered the fragments of the anonymous letter that
Flory had thrown over the gate half an hour earlier.



7


Elizabeth lay on the sofa in the Lackersteen's drawing-room, with
her feet up and a cushion behind her head, reading Michael Arlen's
These Charming People.  In a general way Michael Arlen was her
favourite author, but she was inclined to prefer William J. Locke
when she wanted something serious.

The drawing-room was a cool, light-coloured room with lime-washed
walls a yard thick; it was large, but seemed smaller than it was,
because of a litter of occasional tables and Benares brassware
ornaments.  It smelt of chintz and dying flowers.  Mrs Lackersteen
was upstairs, sleeping.  Outside, the servants lay silent in their
quarters, their heads tethered to their wooden pillows by the
death-like sleep of midday.  Mr Lackersteen, in his small wooden
office down the road, was probably sleeping too.  No one stirred
except Elizabeth, and the chokra who pulled the punkah outside Mrs
Lackersteen's bedroom, lying on his back with one heel in the loop
of the rope.

Elizabeth was just turned twenty-two, and was an orphan.  Her
father had been less of a drunkard than his brother Tom, but he was
a man of similar stamp.  He was a tea-broker, and his fortunes
fluctuated greatly, but he was by nature too optimistic to put
money aside in prosperous phases.  Elizabeth's mother had been an
incapable, half-baked, vapouring, self-pitying woman who shirked
all the normal duties of life on the strength of sensibilities
which she did not possess.  After messing about for years with such
things as Women's Suffrage and Higher Thought, and making many
abortive attempts at literature, she had finally taken up with
painting.  Painting is the only art that can be practised without
either talent or hard work.  Mrs Lackersteen's pose was that of an
artist exiled among 'the Philistines'--these, needless to say,
included her husband--and it was a pose that gave her almost
unlimited scope for making a nuisance of herself.

In the last year of the War Mr Lackersteen, who had managed to
avoid service, made a great deal of money, and just after the
Armistice they moved into a huge, new, rather bleak house in
Highgate, with quantities of greenhouses, shrubberies, stables and
tennis courts.  Mr Lackersteen had engaged a horde of servants,
even, so great was his optimism, a butler.  Elizabeth was sent for
two terms to a very expensive boarding-school.  Oh, the joy, the
joy, the unforgettable joy of those two terms!  Four of the girls
at the school were 'the Honourable'; nearly all of them had ponies
of their own, on which they were allowed to go riding on Saturday
afternoons.  There is a short period in everyone's life when his
character is fixed forever; with Elizabeth, it was those two terms
during which she rubbed shoulders with the rich.  Thereafter her
whole code of living was summed up in one belief, and that a simple
one.  It was that the Good ('lovely' was her name for it) is
synonymous with the expensive, the elegant, the aristocratic; and
the Bad ('beastly') is the cheap, the low, the shabby, the
laborious.  Perhaps it is in order to teach this creed that
expensive girls' schools exist.  The feeling subtilized itself as
Elizabeth grew older, diffused itself through all her thoughts.
Everything from a pair of stockings to a human soul was
classifiable as 'lovely' or 'beastly'.  And unfortunately--for Mr
Lackersteen's prosperity did not last--it was the 'beastly' that
had predominated in her life.

The inevitable crash came late in 1919.  Elizabeth was taken away
from school, to continue her education at a succession of cheap,
beastly schools, with gaps of a term or two when her father could
not pay the fees.  He died when she was twenty, of influenza.  Mrs
Lackersteen was left with an income of L150 a year, which was to
die with her.  The two women could not, under Mrs Lackersteen's
management, live on three pounds a week in England.  They moved to
Paris, where life was cheaper and where Mrs Lackersteen intended to
dedicate herself wholly to Art.

Paris!  Living in Paris!  Flory had been a little wide of the mark
when he pictured those interminable conversations with bearded
artists under the green plane trees.  Elizabeth's life in Paris had
not been quite like that.

Her mother had taken a studio in the Montparnasse quarter, and
relapsed at once into a state of squalid, muddling idleness.  She
was so foolish with money that her income would not come near
covering expenses, and for several months Elizabeth did not even
have enough to eat.  Then she found a job as visiting teacher of
English to the family of a French bank manager.  They called her
'notre mees Anglaise'.  The banker lived in the twelfth
arrondissement, a long way from Montparnasse, and Elizabeth had
taken a room in a pension near by.  It was a narrow, yellow-faced
house in a side street, looking out on to a poulterer's shop,
generally decorated with reeking carcasses of wild boars, which old
gentlemen like decrepit satyrs would visit every morning and sniff
long and lovingly.  Next door to the poulterer's was a fly-blown
cafe with the sign 'Cafe de l'Amitie.  Bock Formidable'.  How
Elizabeth had loathed that pension!  The patroness was an old
black-clad sneak who spent her life in tiptoeing up and down stairs
in hopes of catching the boarders washing stockings in their hand-
basins.  The boarders, sharp-tongued bilious widows, pursued the
only man in the establishment, a mild, bald creature who worked in
La Samaritaine, like sparrows worrying a bread-crust.  At meals all
of them watched each others' plates to see who was given the
biggest helping.  The bathroom was a dark den with leprous walls
and a rickety verdigrised geyser which would spit two inches of
tepid water into the bath and then mulishly stop working.  The bank
manager whose children Elizabeth taught was a man of fifty, with a
fat, worn face and a bald, dark yellow crown resembling an
ostrich's egg.  The second day after her arrival he came into the
room where the children were at their lessons, sat down beside
Elizabeth and immediately pinched her elbow.  The third day he
pinched her on the calf, the fourth day behind the knee, the fifth
day above the knee.  Thereafter, every evening, it was a silent
battle between the two of them, her hand under the table, struggling
and struggling to keep that ferret-like hand away from her.

It was a mean, beastly existence.  In fact, it reached levels of
'beastliness' which Elizabeth had not previously known to exist.
But the thing that most depressed her, most filled her with the
sense of sinking into some horrible lower world, was her mother's
studio.  Mrs Lackersteen was one of those people who go utterly to
pieces when they are deprived of servants.  She lived in a restless
nightmare between painting and housekeeping, and never worked at
either.  At irregular intervals she went to a 'school' where she
produced greyish still-lifes under the guidance of a master whose
technique was founded on dirty brushes; for the rest, she messed
about miserably at home with teapots and frying-pans.  The state of
her studio was more than depressing to Elizabeth; it was evil,
Satanic.  It was a cold, dusty pigsty, with piles of books and
papers littered all over the floor, generations of saucepans
slumbering in their grease on the rusty gas-stove, the bed never
made till afternoon, and everywhere--in every possible place where
they could be stepped on or knocked over--tins of paint-fouled
turpentine and pots half full of cold black tea.  You would lift a
cushion from a chair and find a plate holding the remains of a
poached egg underneath it.  As soon as Elizabeth entered the door
she would burst out:

'Oh, Mother, Mother dearest, how CAN you?  Look at the state of
this room!  It is so terrible to live like this!'

'The room, dearest?  What's the matter?  Is it untidy?'

'Untidy!  Mother, NEED you leave that plate of porridge in the
middle of your bed?  And those saucepans!  It does look so
dreadful.  Suppose anyone came in!'

The rapt, other-wordly look which Mrs Lackersteen assumed when
anything like work presented itself, would come into her eyes.

'None of MY friends would mind, dear.  We are such Bohemians, we
artists.  You don't understand how utterly wrapped up we all are in
our painting.  You haven't the artistic temperament, you see,
dear.'

'I must try and clean some of those saucepans.  I just can't bear
to think of you living like this.  What have you done with the
scrubbing-brush?'

'The scrubbing-brush?  Now, let me think, I know I saw it somewhere.
Ah yes!  I used it yesterday to clean my palette.  But it'll be
all right if you give it a good wash in turpentine.'

Mrs Lackersteen would sit down and continue smudging a sheet of
sketching paper with a Conte crayon while Elizabeth worked.

'How wonderful you are, dear.  So practical!  I can't think whom
you inherit it from.  Now with me, Art is simply EVERYTHING.  I
seem to feel it like a great sea surging up inside me.  It swamps
everything mean and petty out of existence.  Yesterday I ate my
lunch off Nash's Magazine to save wasting time washing plates.
Such a good idea!  When you want a clean plate you just tear off a
sheet,' etc., etc., etc.

Elizabeth had no friends in Paris.  Her mother's friends were women
of the same stamp as herself, or elderly ineffectual bachelors
living on small incomes and practising contemptible half-arts such
as wood-engraving or painting on porcelain.  For the rest,
Elizabeth saw only foreigners, and she disliked all foreigners en
bloc; or at least all foreign men, with their cheap-looking clothes
and their revolting table manners.  She had one great solace at
this time.  It was to go to the American library in the rue de
l'Elysee and look at the illustrated papers.  Sometimes on a Sunday
or her free afternoon she would sit there for hours at the big
shiny table, dreaming, over the Sketch, the Tatter, the Graphic,
the Sporting and Dramatic.

Ah, what joys were pictured there!  'Hounds meeting on the lawn of
Charlton Hall, the lovely Warwickshire seat of Lord Burrowdean.'
'The Hon. Mrs Tyke-Bowlby in the Park with her splendid Alsatian,
Kublai Khan, which took second prize at Cruft's this summer.'
'Sunbathing at Cannes.  Left to right:  Miss Barbara Pilbrick, Sir
Edward Tuke, Lady Pamela Westrope, Captain "Tuppy" Benacre.'

Lovely, lovely, golden world!  On two occasions the face of an old
schoolfellow looked at Elizabeth from the page.  It hurt her in her
breast to see it.  There they all were, her old schoolfellows, with
their horses and their cars and their husbands in the cavalry; and
here she, tied to that dreadful job, that dreadful pension, her
dreadful mother!  Was it possible that there was no escape?  Could
she be doomed forever to this sordid meanness, with no hope of ever
getting back to the decent world again?

It was not unnatural, with the example of her mother before her
eyes, that Elizabeth should have a healthy loathing of Art.  In
fact, any excess of intellect--'braininess' was her word for it--
tended to belong, in her eyes, to the 'beastly'.  Real people, she
felt, decent people--people who shot grouse, went to Ascot, yachted
at Cowes--were not brainy.  They didn't go in for this nonsense of
writing books and fooling with paintbrushes; and all these Highbrow
ideas--Socialism and all that.  'Highbrow' was a bitter word in her
vocabulary.  And when it happened, as it did once or twice, that
she met a veritable artist who was willing to work penniless all
his life, rather than sell himself to a bank or an insurance
company, she despised him far more than she despised the dabblers
of her mother's circle.  That a man should turn deliberately away
from all that was good and decent, sacrifice himself for a futility
that led nowhere, was shameful, degrading, evil.  She dreaded
spinsterhood, but she would have endured it a thousand lifetimes
through rather than marry such a man.

When Elizabeth had been nearly two years in Paris her mother died
abruptly of ptomaine poisoning.  The wonder was that she had not
died of it sooner.  Elizabeth was left with rather less than a
hundred pounds in the world.  Her uncle and aunt cabled at once
from Burma, asking her to come out and stay with them, and saying
that a letter would follow.

Mrs Lackersteen had reflected for some time over the letter, her
pen between her lips, looking down at the page with her delicate
triangular face like a meditative snake.

'I suppose we must have her out here, at any rate for a year.  WHAT
a bore!  However, they generally marry within a year if they've any
looks at all.  What am I to say to the girl, Tom?'

'Say?  Oh, just say she'll pick up a husband out here a damn sight
easier than at home.  Something of that sort, y'know.'

'My DEAR Tom!  What impossible things you say!'

Mrs Lackersteen wrote:


Of course, this is a very small station and we are in the jungle a
great deal of the time.  I'm afraid you will find it dreadfully
dull after the DELIGHTS of Paris.  But really in some ways these
small stations have their advantages for a young girl.  She finds
herself quite a QUEEN in the local society.  The unmarried men are
so lonely that they appreciate a girl's society in a quite
wonderful way, etc., etc.


Elizabeth spent thirty pounds on summer frocks and set sail
immediately.  The ship, heralded by rolling porpoises, ploughed
across the Mediterranean and down the Canal into a sea of staring,
enamel-like blue, then out into the green wastes of the Indian
Ocean, where flocks of flying fish skimmed in terror from the
approaching hull.  At night the waters were phosphorescent, and
the wash of the bow was like a moving arrowhead of green fire.
Elizabeth 'loved' the life on board ship.  She loved the dancing on
deck at nights, the cocktails which every man on board seemed
anxious to buy for her, the deck games, of which, however, she grew
tired at about the same time as the other members of the younger
set.  It was nothing to her that her mother's death was only two
months past.  She had never cared greatly for her mother, and
besides, the people here knew nothing of her affairs.  It was so
lovely after those two graceless years to breathe the air of wealth
again.  Not that most of the people here were rich; but on board
ship everyone behaves as though he were rich.  She was going to
love India, she knew.  She had formed quite a picture of India,
from the other passengers' conversation; she had even learned some
of the more necessary Hindustani phrases, such as 'idher ao',
'jaldi', 'sahiblog', etc.  In anticipation she tasted the agreeable
atmosphere of Clubs, with punkahs flapping and barefooted white-
turbaned boys reverently salaaming; and maidans where bronzed
Englishmen with little clipped moustaches galloped to and fro,
whacking polo balls.  It was almost as nice as being really rich,
the way people lived in India.

They sailed into Colombo through green glassy waters, where turtles
and black snakes floated basking.  A fleet of sampans came racing
out to meet the ship, propelled by coal-black men with lips stained
redder than blood by betel juice.  They yelled and struggled round
the gangway while the passengers descended.  As Elizabeth and her
friends came down, two sampan-wallahs, their prows nosing against
the gangway, besought them with yells.

'Don't you go with him, missie!  Not with him!  Bad wicked man he,
not fit taking missie!'

'Don't you listen him lies, missie!  Nasty low fellow!  Nasty low
tricks him playing.  Nasty NATIVE tricks!'

'Ha, ha!  He is not native himself!  Oh no!  Him European man,
white skin all same, missie!  Ha ha!'

'Stop your bat, you two, or I'll fetch one of you a kick,' said the
husband of Elizabeth's friend--he was a planter.  They stepped into
one of the sampans and were rowed towards the sun-bright quays.
And the successful sampan-wallah turned and discharged at his rival
a mouthful of spittle which he must have been saving up for a very
long time.

This was the Orient.  Scents of coco-nut oil and sandalwood,
cinnamon and turmeric, floated across the water on the hot,
swimming air.  Elizabeth's friends drove her out to Mount Lavinia,
where they bathed in a lukewarm sea that foamed like Coca-Cola.
She came back to the ship in the evening, and they reached Rangoon
a week later.

North of Mandalay the train, fuelled with wood, crawled at twelve
miles an hour across a vast, parched plain, bounded at its remote
edges by blue rings of hills.  White egrets stood poised,
motionless, like herons, and piles of drying chilis gleamed crimson
in the sun.  Sometimes a white pagoda rose from the plain like the
breast of a supine giantess.  The early tropic night settled down,
and the train jolted on, slowly, stopping at little stations where
barbaric yells sounded from the darkness.  Half-naked men with
their long hair knotted behind their heads moved to and fro in
torchlight, hideous as demons in Elizabeth's eyes.  The train
plunged into forest, and unseen branches brushed against the
windows.  It was about nine o'clock when they reached Kyauktada,
where Elizabeth's uncle and aunt were waiting with Mr Macgregor's
car, and with some servants carrying torches.  Her aunt came
forward and took Elizabeth's shoulders in her delicate, saurian
hands.

'I suppose you are our niece Elizabeth?  We are SO pleased to see
you,' she said, and kissed her.

Mr Lackersteen peered over his wife's shoulder in the torchlight.
He gave a half-whistle, exclaimed, 'Well, I'll be damned!' and then
seized Elizabeth and kissed her, more warmly than he need have
done, she thought.  She had never seen either of them before.

After dinner, under the punkah in the drawing-room, Elizabeth and
her aunt had a talk together.  Mr Lackersteen was strolling in the
garden, ostensibly to smell the frangipani, actually to have a
surreptitious drink that one of the servants smuggled to him from
the back of the house.

'My dear, how really lovely you are!  Let me look at you again.'
She took her by the shoulders.  'I DO think that Eton crop suits
you.  Did you have it done in Paris?'

'Yes.  Everyone was getting Eton-cropped.  It suits you if you've
got a fairly small head.'

'Lovely!  And those tortoise-shell spectacles--such a becoming
fashion!  I'm told that all the--er--demi-mondaines in South
America have taken to wearing them.  I'd no idea I had such a
RAVISHING beauty for a niece.  How old did you say you were, dear?'

'Twenty-two.'

'Twenty-two!  How delighted all the men will be when we take you to
the Club tomorrow!  They get so lonely, poor things, never seeing a
new face.  And you were two whole years in Paris?  I can't think
what the men there can have been about to let you leave unmarried.'

'I'm afraid I didn't meet many men, Aunt.  Only foreigners.  We had
to live so quietly.  And I was working,' she added, thinking this
rather a disgraceful admission.

'Of course, of course,' sighed Mrs Lackersteen.  'One hears the
same thing on every side.  Lovely girls having to work for their
living.  It is such a shame!  I think it's so terribly selfish,
don't you, the way these men remain unmarried while there are so
MANY poor girls looking for husbands?'  Elizabeth not answering
this, Mrs Lackersteen added with another sigh, 'I'm sure if I were
a young girl I'd marry anybody, literally ANYBODY!'

The two women's eyes met.  There was a great deal that Mrs
Lackersteen wanted to say, but she had no intention of doing more
than hint at it obliquely.  A great deal of her conversation was
carried on by hints; she generally contrived, however, to make her
meaning reasonably clear.  She said in a tenderly impersonal tone,
as though discussing a subject of general interest:

'Of course, I must say this.  There ARE cases when, if girls fail
to get married it's THEIR OWN FAULT.  It happens even out here
sometimes.  Only a short time ago I remember a case--a girl came
out and stayed a whole year with her brother, and she had offers
from all kinds of men--policemen, forest officers, men in timber
firms with QUITE good prospects.  And she refused them all; she
wanted to marry into the I.C.S., I heard.  Well, what do you
expect?  Of course her brother couldn't go on keeping her forever.
And now I hear she's at home, poor thing, working as a kind of lady
help, practically a SERVANT.  And getting only fifteen shillings a
week!  Isn't it dreadful to think of such things?'

'Dreadful!' Elizabeth echoed.

No more was said on this subject.  In the morning, after she came
back from Flory's house, Elizabeth was describing her adventure to
her aunt and uncle.  They were at breakfast, at the flower-laden
table, with the punkah flapping overhead and the tall stork-like
Mohammedan butler in his white suit and pagri standing behind Mrs
Lackersteen's chair, tray in hand.

'And oh, Aunt, such an interesting thing!  A Burmese girl came on
to the veranda.  I'd never seen one before, at least, not knowing
they were girls.  Such a queer little thing--she was almost like a
doll with her round yellow face and her black hair screwed up on
top.  She only looked about seventeen.  Mr Flory said she was his
laundress.'

The Indian butler's long body stiffened.  He squinted down at the
girl with his white eyeballs large in his black face.  He spoke
English well.  Mr Lackersteen paused with a forkful of fish half-
way from his plate and his crass mouth open.

'Laundress?' he said.  'Laundress!  I say, dammit, some mistake
there!  No such thing as a laundress in this country, y'know.
Laundering work's all done by men.  If you ask me--'

And then he stopped very suddenly, almost as though someone had
trodden on his toe under the table.



8


That evening Flory told Ko S'la to send for the barber--he was the
only barber in the town, an Indian, and he made a living by shaving
the Indian coolies at the rate of eight annas a month for a dry
shave every other day.  The Europeans patronized him for lack of
any other.  The barber was waiting on the veranda when Flory came
back from tennis, and Flory sterilized the scissors with boiling
water and Condy's fluid and had his hair cut.

'Lay out my best Palm Beach suit,' he told Ko S'la, 'and a silk
shirt and my sambhur-skin shoes.  Also that new tie that came from
Rangoon last week.'

'I have done so, thakin,' said Ko S'la, meaning that he would do
so.  When Flory came into the bedroom he found Ko S'la waiting
beside the clothes he had laid out, with a faintly sulky air.  It
was immediately apparent that Ko S'la knew why Flory was dressing
himself up (that is, in hopes of meeting Elizabeth) and that he
disapproved of it.

'What are you waiting for?' Flory said.

'To help you dress, thakin.'

'I shall dress myself this evening.  You can go.'

He was going to shave--the second time that day--and he did not
want Ko S'la to see him take shaving things into the bathroom.
It was several years since he had shaved twice in one day.  What
providential luck that he had sent for that new tie only last week,
he thought.  He dressed himself very carefully, and spent nearly a
quarter of an hour in brushing his hair, which was stiff and would
never lie down after it had been cut.

Almost the next moment, as it seemed, he was walking with Elizabeth
down the bazaar road.  He had found her alone in the Club 'library',
and with a sudden burst of courage asked her to come out with him;
and she had come with a readiness that surprised him; not even
stopping to say anything to her uncle and aunt.  He had lived so
long in Burma, he had forgotten English ways.  It was very dark
under the peepul trees of the bazaar road, the foliage hiding the
quarter moon, but the stars here and there in a gap blazed white and
low, like lamps hanging on invisible threads.  Successive waves of
scent came rolling, first the cloying sweetness of frangipani, then
a cold putrid stench of dung or decay from the huts opposite Dr
Veraswami's bungalow.  Drums were throbbing a little distance away.

As he heard the drums Flory remembered that a pwe was being acted a
little farther down the road, opposite U Po Kyin's house; in fact,
it was U Po Kyin who had made arrangements for the pwe, though
someone else had paid for it.  A daring thought occurred to Flory.
He would take Elizabeth to the pwe!  She would love it--she must;
no one with eyes in his head could resist a pwe-dance.  Probably
there would be a scandal when they came back to the Club together
after a long absence; but damn it! what did it matter?  She was
different from that herd of fools at the Club.  And it would be
such fun to go to the pwe together!  At this moment the music burst
out with a fearful pandemonium--a strident squeal of pipes, a
rattle like castanets and the hoarse thump of drums, above which a
man's voice was brassily squalling.

'Whatever is that noise?' said Elizabeth, stopping.  'It sounds
just like a jazz band!'

'Native music.  They're having a pwe--that's a kind of Burmese
play; a cross between a historical drama and a revue, if you can
imagine that.  It'll interest you, I think.  Just round the bend of
the road here.'

'Oh,' she said rather doubtfully.

They came round the bend into a glare of light.  The whole road for
thirty yards was blocked by the audience watching the pwe.  At the
back there was a raised stage, under humming petrol lamps, with the
orchestra squalling and banging in front of it; on the stage two
men dressed in clothes that reminded Elizabeth of Chinese pagodas
were posturing with curved swords in their hands.  All down the
roadway it was a sea of white muslin backs of women, pink scarves
flung round their shoulders and black hair-cylinders.  A few
sprawled on their mats, fast asleep.  An old Chinese with a tray of
peanuts was threading his way through the crowd, intoning
mournfully, 'Myaype!  Myaype!'

'We'll stop and watch a few minutes if you like,' Flory said.

The blaze of lights and the appalling din of the orchestra had
almost dazed Elizabeth, but what startled her most of all was the
sight of this crowd of people sitting in the road as though it had
been the pit of a theatre.

'Do they always have their plays in the middle of the road?' she
said.

'As a rule.  They put up a rough stage and take it down in the
morning.  The show lasts all night.'

'But are they ALLOWED to--blocking up the whole roadway?'

'Oh yes.  There are no traffic regulations here.  No traffic to
regulate, you see.'

It struck her as very queer.  By this time almost the entire
audience had turned round on their mats to stare at the 'Ingaleikma'.
There were half a dozen chairs in the middle of the crowd, where
some clerks and officials were sitting.  U Po Kyin was among them,
and he was making efforts to twist his elephantine body round and
greet the Europeans.  As the music stopped the pock-marked Ba Taik
came hastening through the crowd and shikoed low to Flory, with his
timorous air.

'Most holy one, my master U Po Kyin asks whether you and the young
white lady will not come and watch our pwe for a few minutes.  He
has chairs ready for you.'

'They're asking us to come and sit down,' Flory said to Elizabeth.
'Would you like to?  It's rather fun.  Those two fellows will clear
off in a moment and there'll be some dancing.  If it wouldn't bore
you for a few minutes?'

Elizabeth felt very doubtful.  Somehow it did not seem right or
even safe to go in among that smelly native crowd.  However, she
trusted Flory, who presumably knew what was proper, and allowed him
to lead her to the chairs.  The Burmans made way on their mats,
gazing after her and chattering; her shins brushed against warm,
muslin-clad bodies, there was a feral reek of sweat.  U Po Kyin
leaned over towards her, bowing as well as he could and saying
nasally:

'Kindly to sit down, madam!  I am most honoured to make your
acquaintance.  Good evening.  Good morning, Mr Flory, sir!  A most
unexpected pleasure.  Had we known that you were to honour us with
your company, we would have provided whiskies and other European
refreshments.  Ha ha!'

He laughed, and his betel-reddened teeth gleamed in the lamplight
like red tinfoil.  He was so vast and so hideous that Elizabeth
could not help shrinking from him.  A slender youth in a purple
longyi was bowing to her and holding out a tray with two glasses of
yellow sherbet, iced.  U Po Kyin clapped his hands sharply, 'Hey
haung galay!' he called to a boy beside him.  He gave some
instructions in Burmese, and the boy pushed his way to the edge of
the stage.

'He's telling them to bring on their best dancer in our honour,'
Flory said.  'Look, here she comes.'

A girl who had been squatting at the back of the stage, smoking,
stepped forward into the lamplight.  She was very young, slim-
shouldered, breastless, dressed in a pale blue satin longyi that
hid her feet.  The skirts of her ingyi curved outwards above her
hips in little panniers, according to the ancient Burmese fashion.
They were like the petals of a downward-pointing flower.  She threw
her cigar languidly to one of the men in the orchestra, and then,
holding out one slender arm, writhed it as though to shake the
muscles loose.

The orchestra burst into a sudden loud squalling.  There were pipes
like bagpipes, a strange instrument consisting of plaques of bamboo
which a man struck with a little hammer, and in the middle there
was a man surrounded by twelve tall drums of different sizes.  He
reached rapidly from one to another, thumping them with the heel of
his hand.  In a moment the girl began to dance.  But at first it
was not a dance, it was a rhythmic nodding, posturing and twisting
of the elbows, like the movements of one of those jointed wooden
figures on an old-fashioned roundabout.  The way her neck and
elbows rotated was precisely like a jointed doll, and yet
incredibly sinuous.  Her hands, twisting like snakeheads with the
fingers close together, could lie back until they were almost along
her forearms.  By degrees her movements quickened.  She began to
leap from side to side, flinging herself down in a kind of curtsy
and springing up again with extraordinary agility, in spite of the
long longyi that imprisoned her feet.  Then she danced in a
grotesque posture as though sitting down, knees bent, body leaned
forward, with her arms extended and writhing, her head also moving
to the beat of the drums.  The music quickened to a climax.  The
girl rose upright and whirled round as swiftly as a top, the
pannier of her ingyi flying out about her like the petals of a
snowdrop.  Then the music stopped as abruptly as it had begun, and
the girl sank again into a curtsy, amid raucous shouting from the
audience.

Elizabeth watched the dance with a mixture of amazement, boredom
and something approaching horror.  She had sipped her drink and
found that it tasted like hair oil.  On a mat by her feet three
Burmese girls lay fast asleep with their heads on the same pillow,
their small oval faces side by side like the faces of kittens.
Under cover of the music Flory was speaking in a low voice into
Elizabeth's ear commenting on the dance.

'I knew this would interest you; that's why I brought you here.
You've read books and been in civilized places, you're not like the
rest of us miserable savages here.  Don't you think this is worth
watching, in its queer way?  Just look at that girl's movements--
look at that strange, bent-forward pose like a marionette, and the
way her arms twist from the elbow like a cobra rising to strike.
It's grotesque, it's even ugly, with a sort of wilful ugliness.
And there's something sinister in it too.  There's a touch of the
diabolical in all Mongols.  And yet when you look closely, what
art, what centuries of culture you can see behind it!  Every
movement that girl makes has been studied and handed down through
innumerable generations.  Whenever you look closely at the art of
these Eastern peoples you can see that--a civilization stretching
back and back, practically the same, into times when we were
dressed in woad.  In some way that I can't define to you, the whole
life and spirit of Burma is summed up in the way that girl twists
her arms.  When you see her you can see the rice fields, the
villages under the teak trees, the pagodas, the priests in their
yellow robes, the buffaloes swimming the rivers in the early
morning, Thibaw's palace--'

His voice stopped abruptly as the music stopped.  There were
certain things, and a pwe-dance was one of them, that pricked him
to talk discursively and incautiously; but now he realized that he
had only been talking like a character in a novel, and not a very
good novel.  He looked away.  Elizabeth had listened to him with a
chill of discomfort.  What WAS the man talking about? was her first
thought.  Moreover, she had caught the hated word Art more than
once.  For the first time she remembered that Flory was a total
stranger and that it had been unwise to come out with him alone.
She looked round her, at the sea of dark faces and the lurid glare
of the lamps; the strangeness of the scene almost frightened her.
What was she doing in this place?  Surely it was not right to be
sitting among the black people like this, almost touching them, in
the scent of their garlic and their sweat?  Why was she not back at
the Club with the other white people?  Why had he brought her here,
among this horde of natives, to watch this hideous and savage
spectacle?

The music struck up, and the pwe girl began dancing again.  Her
face was powdered so thickly that it gleamed in the lamplight like
a chalk mask with live eyes behind it.  With that dead-white oval
face and those wooden gestures she was monstrous, like a demon.
The music changed its tempo, and the girl began to sing in a brassy
voice.  It was a song with a swift trochaic rhythm, gay yet fierce.
The crowd took it up, a hundred voices chanting the harsh syllables
in unison.  Still in that strange bent posture the girl turned
round and danced with her buttocks protruded towards the audience.
Her silk longyi gleamed like metal.  With hands and elbows still
rotating she wagged her posterior from side to side.  Then--
astonishing feat, quite visible through the longyi--she began to
wriggle her two buttocks independently in time with the music.

There was a shout of applause from the audience.  The three girls
asleep on the mat woke up at the same moment and began clapping
their hands wildly.  A clerk shouted nasally 'Bravo! Bravo!' in
English for the Europeans' benefit.  But U Po Kyin frowned and
waved his hand.  He knew all about European women.  Elizabeth,
however, had already stood up.

'I'm going.  It's time we were back,' she said abruptly.  She was
looking away, but Flory could see that her face was pink.

He stood up beside her, dismayed.  'But, I say!  Couldn't you stay
a few minutes longer?  I know it's late, but--they brought this
girl on two hours before she was due, in our honour.  Just a few
minutes?'

'I can't help it, I ought to have been back ages ago.  I don't know
WHAT my uncle and aunt will be thinking.'

She began at once to pick her way through the crowd, and he
followed her, with not even time to thank the pwe people for their
trouble.  The Burmans made way with a sulky air.  How like these
English people, to upset everything by sending for the best dancer
and then go away almost before she had started!  There was a
fearful row as soon as Flory and Elizabeth had gone, the pwe girl
refusing to go on with her dance and the audience demanding that
she should continue.  However, peace was restored when two clowns
hurried on to the stage and began letting off crackers and making
obscene jokes.

Flory followed the girl abjectly up the road.  She was walking
quickly, her head turned away, and for some moments she would not
speak.  What a thing to happen, when they had been getting on so
well together!  He kept trying to apologize.

'I'm so sorry!  I'd no idea you'd mind--'

'It's nothing.  What is there to be sorry about?  I only said it
was time to go back, that's all.'

'I ought to have thought.  One gets not to notice that kind of
thing in this country.  These people's sense of decency isn't the
same as ours--it's stricter in some ways--but--'

'It's not that!  It's not that!' she exclaimed quite angrily.

He saw that he was only making it worse.  They walked on in
silence, he behind.  He was miserable.  What a bloody fool he had
been!  And yet all the while he had no inkling of the real reason
why she was angry with him.  It was not the pwe girl's behaviour,
in itself, that had offended her; it had only brought things to a
head.  But the whole expedition--the very notion of WANTING to rub
shoulders with all those smelly natives--had impressed her badly.
She was perfectly certain that that was not how white men ought to
behave.  And that extraordinary rambling speech that he had begun,
with all those long words--almost, she thought bitterly, as though
he were quoting poetry!  It was how those beastly artists that you
met sometimes in Paris used to talk.  She had thought him a manly
man till this evening.  Then her mind went back to the morning's
adventure, and how he had faced the buffalo barehanded, and some of
her anger evaporated.  By the time they reached the Club gate she
felt inclined to forgive him.  Flory had by now plucked up courage
to speak again.  He stopped, and she stopped too, in a patch where
the boughs let through some starlight and he could see her face
dimly.

'I say.  I say, I do hope you're not really angry about this?'

'No, of course I'm not.  I told you I wasn't.'

'I oughtn't to have taken you there.  Please forgive me.  Do you
know, I don't think I'd tell the others where you've been.  Perhaps
it would be better to say you've just been out for a stroll, out in
the garden--something like that.  They might think it queer, a
white girl going to a pwe.  I don't think I'd tell them.'

'Oh, of course I won't!' she agreed with a warmness that surprised
him.  After that he knew that he was forgiven.  But what it was
that he was forgiven, he had not yet grasped.

They went into the Club separately, by tacit consent.  The expedition
had been a failure, decidedly.  There was a gala air about the Club
lounge tonight.  The entire European community were waiting to greet
Elizabeth, and the butler and the six chokras, in their best
starched white suits, were drawn up on either side of the door,
smiling and salaaming.  When the Europeans had finished their
greetings the butler came forward with a vast garland of flowers
that the servants had prepared for the 'missiesahib'.  Mr Macgregor
made a very humorous speech of welcome, introducing everybody.  He
introduced Maxwell as 'our local arboreal specialist', Westfield as
'the guardian of law and order and--ah--terror of the local
banditti', and so on and so forth.  There was much laughter.  The
sight of a pretty girl's face had put everyone in such a good humour
that they could even enjoy Mr Macgregor's speech--which, to tell the
truth, he had spent most of the evening in preparing.

At the first possible moment Ellis, with a sly air, took Flory and
Westfield by the arm and drew them away into the card-room.  He was
in a much better mood than usual.  He pinched Flory's arm with his
small, hard fingers, painfully but quite amiably.

'Well, my lad, everyone's been looking for you.  Where have you
been all this time?'

'Oh, only for a stroll.'

'For a stroll!  And who with?'

'With Miss Lackersteen.'

'I knew it!  So YOU'RE the bloody fool who's fallen into the trap,
are you?  YOU swallowed the bait before anyone else had time to
look at it.  I thought you were too old a bird for that, by God I
did!'

'What do you mean?'

'Mean!  Look at him pretending he doesn't know what I mean!  Why, I
mean that Ma Lackersteen's marked you down for her beloved nephew-
in-law, of course.  That is, if you aren't bloody careful.  Eh,
Westfield?'

'Quite right, ol' boy.  Eligible young bachelor.  Marriage halter
and all that.  They've got their eye on him.'

'I don't know where you're getting this idea from.  The girl's
hardly been here twenty-four hours.'

'Long enough for you to take her up the garden path, anyway.  You
watch your step.  Tom Lackersteen may be a drunken sot, but he's
not such a bloody fool that he wants a niece hanging round his neck
for the rest of his life.  And of course SHE knows which side her
bread's buttered.  So you take care and don't go putting your head
into the noose.'

'Damn it, you've no right to talk about people like that.  After
all, the girl's only a kid--'

'My dear old ass'--Ellis, almost affectionate now that he had a new
subject for scandal, took Flory by the coat lapel--'my dear, dear
old ass, don't you go filling yourself up with moonshine.  You
think that girl's easy fruit: she's not.  These girls out from home
are all the same.  "Anything in trousers but nothing this side the
altar"--that's their motto, every one of them.  Why do you think
the girl's come out here?'

'Why?  I don't know.  Because she wanted to, I suppose.'

'My good fool!  She come out to lay her claws into a husband,
of course.  As if it wasn't well known!  When a girl's failed
everywhere else she tries India, where every man's pining for the
sight of a white woman.  The Indian marriage-market, they call it.
Meat market it ought to be.  Shiploads of 'em coming out every year
like carcasses of frozen mutton, to be pawed over by nasty old
bachelors like you.  Cold storage.  Juicy joints straight from the
ice.'

'You do say some repulsive things.'

'Best pasture-fed English meat,' said Ellis with a pleased air.
'Fresh consignments.  Warranted prime condition.'

He went through a pantomime of examining a joint of meat, with
goatish sniffs.  This joke was likely to last Ellis a long time;
his jokes usually did; and there was nothing that gave him quite so
keen a pleasure as dragging a woman's name through mud.

Flory did not see much more of Elizabeth that evening.  Everyone
was in the lounge together, and there was the silly clattering
chatter about nothing that there is on these occasions.  Flory
could never keep up that kind of conversation for long.  But as for
Elizabeth, the civilized atmosphere of the Club, with the white
faces all round her and the friendly look of the illustrated papers
and the 'Bonzo' pictures, reassured her after that doubtful
interlude at the pwe.

When the Lackersteens left the Club at nine, it was not Flory but
Mr Macgregor who walked home with them, ambling beside Elizabeth
like some friendly saurian monster, among the faint crooked shadows
of the gold mohur stems.  The Prome anecdote, and many another,
found a new home.  Any newcomer to Kyauktada was apt to come in for
rather a large share of Mr Macgregor's conversation, for the others
looked on him as an unparalleled bore, and it was a tradition at
the Club to interrupt his stories.  But Elizabeth was by nature a
good listener.  Mr Macgregor thought he had seldom met so
intelligent a girl.

Flory stayed a little longer at the Club, drinking with the others.
There was much smutty talk about Elizabeth.  The quarrel about Dr
Veraswami's election had been shelved for the time being.  Also,
the notice that Ellis had put up on the previous evening had been
taken down.  Mr Macgregor had seen it during his morning visit to
the Club, and in his fair-minded way he had at once insisted on its
removal.  So the notice had been suppressed; not, however, before
it had achieved its object.



9


During the next fortnight a great deal happened.

The feud between U Po Kyin and Dr Veraswami was now in full swing.
The whole town was divided into two factions, with every native
soul from the magistrates down to the bazaar sweepers enrolled on
one side or the other, and all ready for perjury when the time
came.  But of the two parties, the doctor's was much the smaller
and less efficiently libellous.  The editor of the Burmese Patriot
had been put on trial for sedition and libel, bail being refused.
His arrest had provoked a small riot in Rangoon, which was
suppressed by the police with the death of only two rioters.  In
prison the editor went on hunger strike, but broke down after six
hours.

In Kyauktada, too, things had been happening.  A dacoit named Nga
Shwe O had escaped from the jail in mysterious circumstances.  And
there had been a whole crop of rumours about a projected native
rising in the district.  The rumours--they were very vague ones as
yet--centred round a village named Thongwa, not far from the camp
where Maxwell was girdling teak.  A weiksa, or magician, was said
to have appeared from nowhere and to be prophesying the doom of the
English power and distributing magic bullet-proof jackets.  Mr
Macgregor did not take the rumours very seriously, but he had asked
for an extra force of Military Police.  It was said that a company
of Indian infantry with a British officer in command would be sent
to Kyauktada shortly.  Westfield, of course, had hurried to Thongwa
at the first threat, or rather hope, of trouble.

'God, if they'd only break out and rebel properly for once!' he
said to Ellis before starting.  'But it'll be a bloody washout as
usual.  Always the same story with these rebellions--peter out
almost before they've begun.  Would you believe it, I've never
fired my gun at a fellow yet, not even a dacoit.  Eleven years of
it, not counting the War, and never killed a man.  Depressing.'

'Oh, well,' said Ellis, 'if they won't come up to the scratch you
can always get hold of the ringleaders and give them a good
bambooing on the Q.T.  That's better than coddling them up in our
damned nursing homes of prisons.'

'H'm, probably.  Can't do it though, nowadays.  All these kid-glove
laws--got to keep them, I suppose, if we're fools enough to make
'em.'

'Oh, rot the laws.  Bambooing's the only thing that makes any
impression on the Burman.  Have you seen them after they've been
flogged?  I have.  Brought out of the jail on bullock carts,
yelling, with the women plastering mashed bananas on their
backsides.  That's something they do understand.  If I had my way
I'd give it 'em on the soles of the feet the same as the Turks do.'

'Ah well.  Let's hope they'll have the guts to show a bit of fight
for once.  Then we'll call out the Military Police, rifles and all.
Plug a few dozen of 'em--that'll clear the air.'

However, the hoped-for opportunity did not come.  Westfield and the
dozen constables he had taken with him to Thongwa--jolly round-
faced Gurkha boys, pining to use their kukris on somebody--found
the district depressingly peaceful.  There seemed not the ghost of
a rebellion anywhere; only the annual attempt, as regular as the
monsoon, of the villagers to avoid paying the capitation tax.

The weather was growing hotter and hotter.  Elizabeth had had her
first attack of prickly heat.  Tennis at the Club had practically
ceased; people would play one languid set and then fall into chairs
and swallow pints of tepid lime-juice--tepid, because the ice came
only twice weekly from Mandalay and melted within twenty-four hours
of arriving.  The Flame of the Forest was in full bloom.  The
Burmese women, to protect their children from the sun, streaked
their faces with yellow cosmetic until they looked like little
African witch-doctors.  Flocks of green pigeons, and imperial
pigeons as large as ducks, came to eat the berries of the big
peepul trees along the bazaar road.

Meanwhile, Flory had turned Ma Hla May out of his house.

A nasty, dirty job!  There was a sufficient pretext--she had stolen
his gold cigarette-case and pawned it at the house of Li Yeik, the
Chinese grocer and illicit pawnbroker in the bazaar--but still, it
was only a pretext.  Flory knew perfectly well, and Ma Hla May
knew, and all the servants knew, that he was getting rid of her
because of Elizabeth.  Because of 'the Ingaleikma with dyed hair',
as Ma Hla May called her.

Ma Hla May made no violent scene at first.  She stood sullenly
listening while he wrote her a cheque for a hundred rupees--Li Yeik
or the Indian chetty in the bazaar would cash cheques--and told her
that she was dismissed.  He was more ashamed than she; he could not
look her in the face, and his voice went flat and guilty.  When the
bullock cart came for her belongings, he shut himself in the
bedroom skulking till the scene should be over.

Cartwheels grated on the drive, there was the sound of men
shouting; then suddenly there was a fearful uproar of screams.
Flory went outside.  They were all struggling round the gate in the
sunlight.  Ma Hla May was clinging to the gatepost and Ko S'la was
trying to bundle her out.  She turned a face full of fury and
despair towards Flory, screaming over and over, 'Thakin!  Thakin!
Thakin!  Thakin!  Thakin!'  It hurt him to the heart that she
should still call him thakin after he had dismissed her.

'What is it?' he said.

It appeared that there was a switch of false hair that Ma Hla May
and Ma Yi both claimed.  Flory gave the switch to Ma Yi and gave Ma
Hla May two rupees to compensate her.  Then the cart jolted away,
with Ma Hla May sitting beside her two wicker baskets, straight-
backed and sullen, and nursing a kitten on her knees.  It was only
two months since he had given her the kitten as a present.

Ko S'la, who had long wished for Ma Hla May's removal, was not
altogether pleased now that it had happened.  He was even less
pleased when he saw his master going to church--or as he called it,
to the 'English pagoda'--for Flory was still in Kyauktada on the
Sunday of the padre's arrival, and he went to church with the
others.  There was a congregation of twelve, including Mr Francis,
Mr Samuel and six native Christians, with Mrs Lackersteen playing
'Abide with Me' on the tiny harmonium with one game pedal.  It was
the first time in ten years that Flory had been to church, except
to funerals.  Ko S'la's notions of what went on in the 'English
pagoda' were vague in the extreme; but he did know that church-
going signified respectability--a quality which, like all
bachelors' servants, he hated in his bones.

'There is trouble coming,' he said despondently to the other
servants.  'I have been watching him (he meant Flory) these ten
days past.  He has cut down his cigarettes to fifteen a day, he has
stopped drinking gin before breakfast, he shaves himself every
evening--though he thinks I do not know it, the fool.  And he has
ordered half a dozen new silk shirts!  I had to stand over the
dirzi calling him bahinchut to get them finished in time.  Evil
omens!  I give him three months longer, and then good-bye to the
peace in this house!'

'What, is he going to get married?' said Ba Pe.

'I am certain of it.  When a white man begins going to the English
pagoda, it is, as you might say, the beginning of the end.'

'I have had many masters in my life,' old Sammy said.  'The worst
was Colonel Wimpole sahib, who used to make his orderly hold me
down over the table while he came running from behind and kicked me
with very thick boots for serving banana fritters too frequently.
At other times, when he was drunk, he would fire his revolver
through the roof of the servants' quarters, just above our heads.
But I would sooner serve ten years under Colonel Wimpole sahib than
a week under a memsahib with her kit-kit.  If our master marries I
shall leave the same day.'

'I shall not leave, for I have been his servant fifteen years.  But
I know what is in store for us when that woman comes.  She will
shout at us because of spots of dust on the furniture, and wake us
up to bring cups of tea in the afternoon when we are asleep, and
come poking into the cookhouse at all hours and complain over dirty
saucepans and cockroaches in the flour bin.  It is my belief that
these women lie awake at nights thinking of new ways to torment
their servants.'

'They keep a little red book,' said Sammy, 'in which they enter the
bazaar-money, two annas for this, four annas for that, so that a
man cannot earn a pice.  They make more kit-kit over the price of
an onion than a sahib over five rupees.'

'Ah, do I not know it!  She will be worse than Ma Hla May.  Women!'
he added comprehensively, with a kind of sigh.

The sigh was echoed by the others, even by Ma Pu and Ma Yi.
Neither took Ko S'la's remarks as a stricture upon her own sex,
Englishwomen being considered a race apart, possibly not even
human, and so dreadful that an Englishman's marriage is usually the
signal for the flight of every servant in his house, even those who
have been with him for years.



10


But as a matter of fact, Ko S'la's alarm was premature.  After
knowing Elizabeth for ten days, Flory was scarcely more intimate
with her than on the day when he had first met her.

As it happened, he had her almost to himself during these ten days,
most of the Europeans being in the jungle.  Flory himself had no
right to be loitering in headquarters, for at this time of year the
work of timber-extraction was in full swing, and in his absence
everything went to pieces under the incompetent Eurasian overseer.
But he had stayed--pretext, a touch of fever--while despairing
letters came almost every day from the overseer, telling of
disasters.  One of the elephants was ill, the engine of the light
railway that was used for carrying teak logs to the river had
broken down, fifteen of the coolies had deserted.  But Flory still
lingered, unable to tear himself away from Kyauktada while
Elizabeth was there, and continually seeking--never, as yet, to
much purpose--to recapture that easy and delightful friendship of
their first meeting.

They met every day, morning and evening, it was true.  Each evening
they played a single of tennis at the Club--Mrs Lackersteen was too
limp and Mr Lackersteen too liverish for tennis at this time of
year--and afterwards they would sit in the lounge, all four
together, playing bridge and talking.  But though Flory spent hours
in Elizabeth's company, and often they were alone together, he was
never for an instant at his ease with her.  They talked--so long as
they talked of trivialities--with the utmost freedom, yet they were
distant, like strangers.  He felt stiff in her presence, he could
not forget his birthmark; his twice-scraped chin smarted, his body
tortured him for whisky and tobacco--for he tried to cut down his
drinking and smoking when he was with her.  After ten days they
seemed no nearer the relationship he wanted.

For somehow, he had never been able to talk to her as he longed to
talk.  To talk, simply to talk!  It sounds so little, and how much
it is!  When you have existed to the brink of middle age in bitter
loneliness, among people to whom your true opinion on every subject
on earth is blasphemy, the need to talk is the greatest of all
needs.  Yet with Elizabeth serious talk seemed impossible.  It was
as though there had been a spell upon them that made all their
conversation lapse into banality; gramophone records, dogs, tennis
racquets--all that desolating Club-chatter.  She seemed not to WANT
to talk of anything but that.  He had only to touch upon a subject
of any conceivable interest to hear the evasion, the 'I shan't
play', coming into her voice.  Her taste in books appalled him when
he discovered it.  Yet she was young, he reminded himself, and had
she not drunk white wine and talked of Marcel Proust under the
Paris plane trees?  Later, no doubt, she would understand him and
give him the companionship he needed.  Perhaps it was only that he
had not won her confidence yet.

He was anything but tactful with her.  Like all men who have lived
much alone, he adjusted himself better to ideas than to people.
And so, though all their talk was superficial, he began to irritate
her sometimes; not by what he said but by what he implied.  There
was an uneasiness between them, ill-defined and yet often verging
upon quarrels.  When two people, one of whom has lived long in the
country while the other is a newcomer, are thrown together, it is
inevitable that the first should act as cicerone to the second.
Elizabeth, during these days, was making her first acquaintance
with Burma; it was Flory, naturally, who acted as her interpreter,
explaining this, commenting upon that.  And the things he said, or
the way he said them, provoked in her a vague yet deep disagreement.
For she perceived that Flory, when he spoke of the 'natives', spoke
nearly always IN FAVOUR of them.  He was forever praising Burmese
customs and the Burmese character; he even went so far as to
contrast them favourably with the English.  It disquieted her.
After all, natives were natives--interesting, no doubt, but finally
only a 'subject' people, an inferior people with black faces.  His
attitude was a little TOO tolerant.  Nor had he grasped, yet, in
what way he was antagonizing her.  He so wanted her to love Burma as
he loved it, not to look at it with the dull, incurious eyes of a
memsahib!  He had forgotten that most people can be at ease in a
foreign country only when they are disparaging the inhabitants.

He was too eager in his attempts to interest her in things
Oriental.  He tried to induce her, for instance, to learn Burmese,
but it came to nothing.  (Her aunt had explained to her that only
missionary-women spoke Burmese; nice women found kitchen Urdu quite
as much as they needed.)  There were countless small disagreements
like that.  She was grasping, dimly, that his views were not the
views an Englishman should hold.  Much more clearly she grasped
that he was asking her to be fond of the Burmese, even to admire
them; to admire people with black faces, almost savages, whose
appearance still made her shudder!

The subject cropped up in a hundred ways.  A knot of Burmans would
pass them on the road.  She, with her still fresh eyes, would gaze
after them, half curious and half repelled; and she would say to
Flory, as she would have said to anybody:

'How REVOLTINGLY ugly these people are, aren't they?'

'ARE they?  I always think they're rather charming-looking, the
Burmese.  They have such splendid bodies!  Look at that fellow's
shoulders--like a bronze statue.  Just think what sights you'd see
in England if people went about half naked as they do here!'

'But they have such hideous-shaped heads!  Their skulls kind of
slope up behind like a tom-cat's.  And then the way their foreheads
slant back--it makes them look so WICKED.  I remember reading
something in a magazine about the shape of people's heads; it said
that a person with a sloping forehead is a CRIMINAL TYPE.'

'Oh, come, that's a bit sweeping!  Round about half the people in
the world have that kind of forehead.'

'Oh, well, if you count COLOURED people, of course--!'

Or perhaps a string of women would pass, going to the well: heavy-
set peasant-girls, copper-brown, erect under their water-pots with
strong marelike buttocks protruded.  The Burmese women repelled
Elizabeth more than the men; she felt her kinship with them, and
the hatefulness of being kin to creatures with black faces.

'Aren't they too simply dreadful?  So COARSE-LOOKING; like some
kind of animal.  Do you think ANYONE could think those women
attractive?'

'Their own men do, I believe.'

'I suppose they would.  But that black skin--I don't know how
anyone could bear it!'

'But, you know, one gets used to the brown skin in time.  In fact
they say--I believe it's true--that after a few years in these
countries a brown skin seems more natural than a white one.  And
after all, it IS more natural.  Take the world as a whole, it's an
eccentricity to be white.'

'You DO have some funny ideas!'

And so on and so on.  She felt all the while an unsatisfactoriness,
an unsoundness in the things he said.  It was particularly so on
the evening when Flory allowed Mr Francis and Mr Samuel, the two
derelict Eurasians, to entrap him in conversation at the Club gate.

Elizabeth, as it happened, had reached the Club a few minutes
before Flory, and when she heard his voice at the gate she came
round the tennis-screen to meet him.  The two Eurasians had sidled
up to Flory and cornered him like a pair of dogs asking for a game.
Francis was doing most of the talking.  He was a meagre, excitable
man, and as brown as a cigar-leaf, being the son of a South Indian
woman; Samuel, whose mother had been a Karen, was pale yellow with
dull red hair.  Both were dressed in shabby drill suits, with vast
topis beneath which their slender bodies looked like the stalks of
toadstools.

Elizabeth came down the path in time to hear fragments of an
enormous and complicated autobiography.  Talking to white men--
talking, for choice, about himself--was the great joy of Francis's
life.  When, at intervals of months, he found a European to listen
to him, his life-history would pour out of him in unquenchable
torrents.  He was talking in a nasal, sing-song voice of incredible
rapidity:

'Of my father, sir, I remember little, but he was very choleric man
and many whackings with big bamboo stick all knobs on both for
self, little half-brother and two mothers.  Also how on occasion of
bishop's visit little half-brother and I dress in longyis and sent
among the Burmese children to preserve incognito.  My father never
rose to be bishop, sir.  Four converts only in twenty-eight years,
and also too great fondness for Chinese rice-spirit very fiery
noised abroad and spoil sales of my father's booklet entitled The
Scourge of Alcohol, published with the Rangoon Baptist Press, one
rupee eight annas.  My little half-brother die one hot weather,
always coughing, coughing,' etc., etc.

The two Eurasians perceived the presence of Elizabeth.  Both doffed
their topis with bows and brilliant displays of teeth.  It was
probably several years since either of them had had a chance of
talking to an Englishwoman.  Francis burst out more effusively than
ever.  He was chattering in evident dread that he would be
interrupted and the conversation cut short.

'Good evening to you, madam, good evening, good evening!  Most
honoured to make your acquaintance, madam!  Very sweltering is the
weather these days, is not?  But seasonable for April.  Not too
much you are suffering from prickly heat, I trust?  Pounded
tamarind applied to the afflicted spot is infallible.  Myself I
suffer torments each night.  Very prevalent disease among we
Europeans.'

He pronounced it Europian, like Mr Chollop in Martin Chuzzlewit.
Elizabeth did not answer.  She was looking at the Eurasians
somewhat coldly.  She had only a dim idea as to who or what they
were, and it struck her as impertinent that they should speak to
her.

'Thanks, I'll remember about the tamarind,' Flory said.

'Specific of renowned Chinese doctor, sir.  Also, sir-madam, may I
advise to you, wearing only Terai hat is not judicious in April,
sir.  For the natives all well, their skulls are adamant.  But for
us sunstroke ever menaces.  Very deadly is the sun upon European
skull.  But is it that I detain you, madam?'

This was said in a disappointed tone.  Elizabeth had, in fact,
decided to snub the Eurasians.  She did not know why Flory was
allowing them to hold him in conversation.  As she turned away to
stroll back to the tennis court, she made a practice stroke in the
air with her racquet, to remind Flory that the game was overdue.
He saw it and followed her, rather reluctantly, for he did not like
snubbing the wretched Francis, bore though he was.

'I must be off,' he said.  'Good evening, Francis.  Good evening,
Samuel.'

'Good evening, sir!  Good evening, madam!  Good evening, good
evening!'  They receded with more hat flourishes.

'Who ARE those two?' said Elizabeth as Flory came up with her.
'Such extraordinary creatures!  They were in church on Sunday.  One
of them looks almost white.  Surely he isn't an Englishman?'

'No, they're Eurasians--sons of white fathers and native mothers.
Yellow-bellies is our friendly nickname for them.'

'But what are they doing here?  Where do they live?  Do they do any
work?'

'They exist somehow or other in the bazaar.  I believe Francis acts
as clerk to an Indian money-lender, and Samuel to some of the
pleaders.  But they'd probably starve now and then if it weren't
for the charity of the natives.'

'The natives!  Do you mean to say--sort of CADGE from the natives?'

'I fancy so.  It would be a very easy thing to do, if one cared to.
The Burmese won't let anyone starve.'

Elizabeth had never heard of anything of this kind before.  The
notion of men who were at least partly white living in poverty
among 'natives' so shocked her that she stopped short on the path,
and the game of tennis was postponed for a few minutes.

'But how awful!  I mean, it's such a bad example!  It's almost as
bad as if one of US was like that.  Couldn't something be done for
those two?  Get up a subscription and send them away from here, or
something?'

'I'm afraid it wouldn't help much.  Wherever they went they'd be in
the same position.'

'But couldn't they get some proper work to do?'

'I doubt it.  You see, Eurasians of that type--men who've been
brought up in the bazaar and had no education--are done for from
the start.  The Europeans won't touch them with a stick, and
they're cut off from entering the lower-grade Government services.
There's nothing they can do except cadge, unless they chuck all
pretension to being Europeans.  And really you can't expect the
poor devils to do that.  Their drop of white blood is the sole
asset they've got.  Poor Francis, I never meet him but he begins
telling me about his prickly heat.  Natives, you see, are supposed
not to suffer from prickly heat--bosh, of course, but people
believe it.  It's the same with sunstroke.  They wear those huge
topis to remind you that they've got European skulls.  A kind of
coat of arms.  The bend sinister, you might say.'

This did not satisfy Elizabeth.  She perceived that Flory, as
usual, had a sneaking sympathy with the Eurasians.  And the
appearance of the two men had excited a peculiar dislike in her.
She had placed their type now.  They looked like dagoes.  Like
those Mexicans and Italians and other dago people who play the
mauvais role in so many a film.

'They looked awfully degenerate types, didn't they?  So thin and
weedy and cringing; and they haven't got at all HONEST faces.  I
suppose these Eurasians ARE very degenerate?  I've heard that half-
castes always inherit what's worst in both races.  Is that true?'

'I don't know that it's true.  Most Eurasians aren't very good
specimens, and it's hard to see how they could be, with their
upbringing.  But our attitude towards them is rather beastly.  We
always talk of them as though they'd sprung up from the ground like
mushrooms, with all their faults ready-made.  But when all's said
and done, we're responsible for their existence.'

'Responsible for their existence?'

'Well, they've all got fathers, you see.'

'Oh . . . Of course there's that. . . .  But after all, YOU aren't
responsible.  I mean, only a very low kind of man would--er--have
anything to do with native women, wouldn't he?'

'Oh, quite.  But the fathers of both those two were clergymen in
holy orders, I believe.'

He thought of Rosa McFee, the Eurasian girl he had seduced in
Mandalay in 1913.  The way he used to sneak down to the house in a
gharry with the shutters down; Rosa's corkscrew curls; her withered
old Burmese mother, giving him tea in the dark living-room with the
fern pots and the wicker divan.  And afterwards, when he had
chucked Rosa, those dreadful, imploring letters on scented note-
paper, which, in the end, he had ceased opening.

Elizabeth reverted to the subject of Francis and Samuel after
tennis.

'Those two Eurasians--does anyone here have anything to do with
them?  Invite them to their houses or anything?'

'Good gracious, no.  They're complete outcasts.  It's not
considered quite the thing to talk to them, in fact.  Most of us
say good morning to them--Ellis won't even do that.'

'But YOU talked to them.'

'Oh well, I break the rules occasionally.  I meant that a pukka
sahib probably wouldn't be seen talking to them.  But you see, I
try--just sometimes, when I have the pluck--NOT to be a pukka
sahib.'

It was an unwise remark.  She knew very well by this time the
meaning of the phrase 'pukka sahib' and all it stood for.  His
remark had made the difference in their viewpoint a little clearer.
The glance she gave him was almost hostile, and curiously hard; for
her face could look hard sometimes, in spite of its youth and its
flower-like skin.  Those modish tortoise-shell spectacles gave her
a very self-possessed look.  Spectacles are queerly expressive
things--almost more expressive, indeed, than eyes.

As yet he had neither understood her nor quite won her trust.  Yet
on the surface, at least, things had not gone ill between them.  He
had fretted her sometimes, but the good impression that he had made
that first morning was not yet effaced.  It was a curious fact that
she scarcely noticed his birthmark at this time.  And there were
some subjects on which she was glad to hear him talk.  Shooting,
for example--she seemed to have an enthusiasm for shooting that was
remarkable in a girl.  Horses, also; but he was less knowledgeable
about horses.  He had arranged to take her out for a day's
shooting, later, when he could make preparations.  Both of them
were looking forward to the expedition with some eagerness, though
not entirely for the same reason.



11


Flory and Elizabeth walked down the bazaar road.  It was morning,
but the air was so hot that to walk in it was like wading through a
torrid sea.  Strings of Burmans passed, coming from the bazaar, on
scraping sandals, and knots of girls who hurried by four and five
abreast, with short quick steps, chattering, their burnished hair
gleaming.  By the roadside, just before you got to the jail, the
fragments of a stone pagoda were littered, cracked and overthrown
by the strong roots of a peepul tree.  The angry carved faces of
demons looked up from the grass where they had fallen.  Near by
another peepul tree had twined itself round a palm, uprooting it
and bending it backwards in a wrestle that had lasted a decade.

They walked on and came to the jail, a vast square block, two
hundred yards each way, with shiny concrete walls twenty feet high.
A peacock, pet of the jail, was mincing pigeon-toed along the
parapet.  Six convicts came by, head down, dragging two heavy
handcarts piled with earth, under the guard of Indian warders.
They were long-sentence men, with heavy limbs, dressed in uniforms
of coarse white cloth with small dunces' caps perched on their
shaven crowns.  Their faces were greyish, cowed and curiously
flattened.  Their leg-irons jingled with a clear ring.  A woman
came past carrying a basket of fish on her head.  Two crows were
circling round it and making darts at it, and the woman was
flapping one hand negligently to keep them away.

There was a din of voices a little distance away.  'The bazaar's
just round the corner,' Flory said.  'I think this is a market
morning.  It's rather fun to watch.'

He had asked her to come down to the bazaar with him, telling her
it would amuse her to see it.  They rounded the bend.  The bazaar
was an enclosure like a very large cattle pen, with low stalls,
mostly palm-thatched, round its edge.  In the enclosure, a mob of
people seethed, shouting and jostling; the confusion of their
multi-coloured clothes was like a cascade of hundreds-and-thousands
poured out of a jar.  Beyond the bazaar one could see the huge,
miry river.  Tree branches and long streaks of scum raced down it
at seven miles an hour.  By the bank a fleet of sampans, with sharp
beak-like bows on which eyes were painted, rocked at their mooring-
poles.

Flory and Elizabeth stood watching for a moment.  Files of women
passed balancing vegetable baskets on their heads, and pop-eyed
children who stared at the Europeans.  An old Chinese in dungarees
faded to sky-blue hurried by, nursing some unrecognizable, bloody
fragment of a pig's intestines.

'Let's go and poke around the stalls a bit, shall we?' Flory said.

'Is it all right going in among the crowd?  Everything's so
horribly dirty.'

'Oh, it's all right, they'll make way for us.  It'll interest you.'

Elizabeth followed him doubtfully and even unwillingly.  Why was it
that he always brought her to these places?  Why was he forever
dragging her in among the 'natives', trying to get her to take an
interest in them and watch their filthy, disgusting habits?  It was
all wrong, somehow.  However, she followed, not feeling able to
explain her reluctance.  A wave of stifling air met them; there was
a reek of garlic, dried fish, sweat, dust, anise, cloves and
turmeric.  The crowd surged round them, swarms of stocky peasants
with cigar-brown faces, withered elders with their grey hair tied
in a bun behind, young mothers carrying naked babies astride the
hip.  Flo was trodden on and yelped.  Low, strong shoulders bumped
against Elizabeth, as the peasants, too busy bargaining even to
stare at a white woman, struggled round the stalls.

'Look!'  Flory was pointing with his stick to a stall, and saying
something, but it was drowned by the yells of two women who were
shaking their fists at each other over a basket of pineapples.
Elizabeth had recoiled from the stench and din, but he did not
notice it, and led her deeper into the crowd, pointing to this
stall and that.  The merchandise was foreign-looking, queer and
poor.  There were vast pomelos hanging on strings like green moons,
red bananas, baskets of heliotrope-coloured prawns the size of
lobsters, brittle dried fish tied in bundles, crimson chilis, ducks
split open and cured like hams, green coco-nuts, the larvae of the
rhinoceros beetle, sections of sugar-cane, dahs, lacquered sandals,
check silk longyis, aphrodisiacs in the form of large, soap-like
pills, glazed earthenware jars four feet high, Chinese sweetmeats
made of garlic and sugar, green and white cigars, purple prinjals,
persimmon-seed necklaces, chickens cheeping in wicker cages, brass
Buddhas, heart-shaped betel leaves, bottles of Kruschen salts,
switches of false hair, red clay cooking-pots, steel shoes for
bullocks, papier-mache marionettes, strips of alligator hide with
magical properties.  Elizabeth's head was beginning to swim.  At
the other end of the bazaar the sun gleamed through a priest's
umbrella, blood-red, as though through the ear of a giant.  In
front of a stall four Dravidian women were pounding turmeric with
heavy stakes in a large wooden mortar.  The hot-scented yellow
powder flew up and tickled Elizabeth's nostrils, making her sneeze.
She felt that she could not endure this place a moment longer.  She
touched Flory's arm.

'This crowd--the heat is so dreadful.  Do you think we could get
into the shade?'

He turned round.  To tell the truth, he had been too busy talking--
mostly inaudibly, because of the din--to notice how the heat and
stench were affecting her.

'Oh, I say, I am sorry.  Let's get out of it at once.  I tell you
what, we'll go along to old Li Yeik's shop--he's the Chinese
grocer--and he'll get us a drink of something.  It is rather
stifling here.'

'All these spices--they kind of take your breath away.  And what is
that dreadful smell like fish?'

'Oh, only a kind of sauce they make out of prawns.  They bury them
and then dig them up several weeks afterwards.'

'How absolutely horrible!'

'Quite wholesome, I believe.  Come away from that!' he added to
Flo, who was nosing at a basket of small gudgeon-like fish with
spines on their gills.

Li Yeik's shop faced the farther end of the bazaar.  What Elizabeth
had really wanted was to go straight back to the Club, but the
European look of Li Yeik's shop-front--it was piled with
Lancashire-made cotton shirts and almost incredibly cheap German
clocks--comforted her somewhat after the barbarity of the bazaar.
They were about to climb the steps when a slim youth of twenty,
damnably dressed in a longyi, blue cricket blazer and bright yellow
shoes, with his hair parted and greased 'Ingaleik fashion',
detached himself from the crowd and came after them.  He greeted
Flory with a small awkward movement as though restraining himself
from shikoing.

'What is it?' Flory said.

'Letter, sir.'  He produced a grubby envelope.

'Would you excuse me?' Flory said to Elizabeth, opening the letter.
It was from Ma Hla May--or rather, it had been written for her and
she had signed it with a cross--and it demanded fifty rupees, in a
vaguely menacing manner.

Flory pulled the youth aside.  'You speak English?  Tell Ma Hla May
I'll see about this later.  And tell her that if she tries
blackmailing me she won't get another pice.  Do you understand?'

'Yes, sir.'

'And now go away.  Don't follow me about, or there'll be trouble.'

'Yes, sir.'

'A clerk wanting a job,' Flory explained to Elizabeth as they went
up the steps.  'They come bothering one at all hours.'  And he
reflected that the tone of the letter was curious, for he had not
expected Ma Hla May to begin blackmailing him so soon; however, he
had not time at the moment to wonder what it might mean.

They went into the shop, which seemed dark after the outer air.  Li
Yeik, who was sitting smoking among his baskets of merchandise--
there was no counter--hobbled eagerly forward when he saw who had
come in.  Flory was a friend of his.  He was an old bent-kneed man
dressed in blue, wearing a pigtail, with a chinless yellow face,
all cheekbones, like a benevolent skull.  He greeted Flory with
nasal honking noises which he intended for Burmese, and at once
hobbled to the back of the shop to call for refreshments.  There
was a cool sweetish smell of opium.  Long strips of red paper with
black lettering were pasted on the walls, and at one side there was
a little altar with a portrait of two large, serene-looking people
in embroidered robes, and two sticks of incense smouldering in
front of it.  Two Chinese women, one old, and a girl were sitting
on a mat rolling cigarettes with maize straw and tobacco like
chopped horsehair.  They wore black silk trousers, and their feet,
with bulging, swollen insteps, were crammed into red-heeled wooden
slippers no bigger than a doll's.  A naked child was crawling
slowly about the floor like a large yellow frog.

'Do look at those women's feet!' Elizabeth whispered as soon as Li
Yeik's back was turned.  'Isn't it simply dreadful!  How do they
get them like that?  Surely it isn't natural?'

'No, they deform them artificially.  It's going out in China, I
believe, but the people here are behind the times.  Old Li Yeik's
pigtail is another anachronism.  Those small feet are beautiful
according to Chinese ideas.'

'Beautiful!  They're so horrible I can hardly look at them.  These
people must be absolute savages!'

'Oh no!  They're highly civilized; more civilized than we are, in
my opinion.  Beauty's all a matter of taste.  There are a people in
this country called the Palaungs who admire long necks in women.
The girls wear broad brass rings to stretch their necks, and they
put on more and more of them until in the end they have necks like
giraffes.  It's no queerer than bustles or crinolines.'

At this moment Li Yeik came back with two fat, round-faced Burmese
girls, evidently sisters, giggling and carrying between them two
chairs and a blue Chinese teapot holding half a gallon.  The two
girls were or had been Li Yeik's concubines.  The old man had
produced a tin of chocolates and was prising off the lid and
smiling in a fatherly way, exposing three long, tobacco-blackened
teeth.  Elizabeth sat down in a very uncomfortable frame of mind.
She was perfectly certain that it could not be right to accept
these people's hospitality.  One of the Burmese girls had at once
gone behind the chairs and begun fanning Flory and Elizabeth, while
the other knelt at their feet and poured out cups of tea.  Elizabeth
felt very foolish with the girl fanning the back of her neck and the
Chinaman grinning in front of her.  Flory always seemed to get her
into these uncomfortable situations.  She took a chocolate from the
tin Li Yeik offered her, but she could not bring herself to say
'thank you'.

'Is this ALL RIGHT?' she whispered to Flory.

'All right?'

'I mean, ought we to be sitting down in these people's house?
Isn't it sort of--sort of infra dig?'

'It's all right with a Chinaman.  They're a favoured race in this
country.  And they're very democratic in their ideas.  It's best to
treat them more or less as equals.'

'This tea looks absolutely beastly.  It's quite green.  You'd think
they'd have the sense to put milk in it, wouldn't you?'

'It's not bad.  It's a special kind of tea old Li Yeik gets from
China.  It has orange blossoms in it, I believe.'

'Ugh!  It tastes exactly like earth,' she said, having tasted it.

Li Yeik stood holding his pipe, which was two feet long with a
metal bowl the size of an acorn, and watching the Europeans to see
whether they enjoyed his tea.  The girl behind the chair said
something in Burmese, at which both of them burst out giggling
again.  The one kneeling on the floor looked up and gazed in a
naive admiring way at Elizabeth.  Then she turned to Flory and
asked him whether the English lady wore stays.  She pronounced it
s'tays.

'Ch!' said Li Yeik in a scandalized manner, stirring the girl with
his toe to silence her.

'I should hardly care to ask her,' Flory said.

'Oh, thakin, please do ask her!  We are so anxious to know!'

There was an argument, and the girl behind the chair forgot fanning
and joined in.  Both of them, it appeared, had been pining all
their lives to see a veritable pair of s'tays.  They had heard so
many tales about them; they were made of steel on the principle of
a strait waistcoat, and they compressed a woman so tightly that she
had no breasts, absolutely no breasts at all!  The girls pressed
their hands against their fat ribs in illustration.  Would not
Flory be so kind as to ask the English lady?  There was a room
behind the shop where she could come with them and undress.  They
had been so hoping to see a pair of s'tays.

Then the conversation lapsed suddenly.  Elizabeth was sitting
stiffly, holding her tiny cup of tea, which she could not bring
herself to taste again, and wearing a rather hard smile.  A chill
fell upon the Orientals; they realized that the English girl, who
could not join in their conversation, was not at her ease.  Her
elegance and her foreign beauty, which had charmed them a moment
earlier, began to awe them a little.  Even Flory was conscious of
the same feeling.  There came one of those dreadful moments that
one has with Orientals, when everyone avoids everyone else's eyes,
trying vainly to think of something to say.  Then the naked child,
which had been exploring some baskets at the back of the shop,
crawled across to where the European sat.  It examined their shoes
and stockings with great curiosity, and then, looking up, saw their
white faces and was seized with terror.  It let out a desolate
wail, and began making water on the floor.

The old Chinese woman looked up, clicked her tongue and went on
rolling cigarettes.  No one else took the smallest notice.  A pool
began to form on the floor.  Elizabeth was so horrified that she
set her cup down hastily, and spilled the tea.  She plucked at
Flory's arm.

'That child!  Do look what it's doing!  Really, can't someone--it's
too awful!'  For a moment everyone gazed in astonishment, and then
they all grasped what was the matter.  There was a flurry and a
general clicking of tongues.  No one had paid any attention to the
child--the incident was too normal to be noticed--and now they all
felt horribly ashamed.  Everyone began putting the blame on the
child.  There were exclamations of 'What a disgraceful child!  What
a disgusting child!'  The old Chinese woman carried the child,
still howling, to the door, and held it out over the step as though
wringing out a bath sponge.  And in the same moment, as it seemed,
Flory and Elizabeth were outside the shop, and he was following her
back to the road with Li Yeik and the others looking after them in
dismay.

'If THAT'S what you call civilized people--!' she was exclaiming.

'I'm sorry,' he said feebly.  'I never expected--'

'What absolutely DISGUSTING people!'

She was bitterly angry.  Her face had flushed a wonderful delicate
pink, like a poppy bud opened a day too soon.  It was the deepest
colour of which it was capable.  He followed her past the bazaar
and back to the main road, and they had gone fifty yards before he
ventured to speak again.

'I'm so sorry that this should have happened!  Li Yeik is such a
decent old chap.  He'd hate to think that he'd offended you.
Really it would have been better to stay a few minutes.  Just to
thank him for the tea.'

'Thank him!  After THAT!'

'But honestly, you oughtn't to mind that sort of thing.  Not in
this country.  These people's whole outlook is so different from
ours.  One has to adjust oneself.  Suppose, for instance, you were
back in the Middle Ages--'

'I think I'd rather not discuss it any longer.'

It was the first time they had definitely quarrelled.  He was too
miserable even to ask himself how it was that he offended her.
He did not realize that this constant striving to interest her in
Oriental things struck her only as perverse, ungentlemanly, a
deliberate seeking after the squalid and the 'beastly'.  He had not
grasped even now with what eyes she saw the 'natives'.  He only
knew that at each attempt to make her share his life, his thoughts,
his sense of beauty, she shied away from him like a frightened
horse.

They walked up the road, he to the left of her and a little behind.
He watched her averted cheek and the tiny gold hairs on her nape
beneath the brim of her Terai hat.  How he loved her, how he loved
her!  It was as though he had never truly loved her till this
moment, when he walked behind her in disgrace, not even daring to
show his disfigured face.  He made to speak several times, and
stopped himself.  His voice was not quite ready, and he did not
know what he could say that did not risk offending her somehow.  At
last he said, flatly, with a feeble pretence that nothing was the
matter:

'It's getting beastly hot, isn't it?'

With the temperature at 90 degrees in the shade it was not a
brilliant remark.  To his surprise she seized on it with a kind of
eagerness.  She turned to face him, and she was smiling again.

'Isn't it simply BAKING!'

With that they were at peace.  The silly, banal remark, bringing
with it the reassuring atmosphere of Club-chatter, had soothed her
like a charm.  Flo, who had lagged behind, came puffing up to them
dribbling saliva; in an instant they were talking, quite as usual,
about dogs.  They talked about dogs for the rest of the way home,
almost without a pause.  Dogs are an inexhaustible subject.  Dogs,
dogs! thought Flory as they climbed the hot hillside, with the
mounting sun scorching their shoulders through their thin clothes,
like the breath of fire--were they never to talk of anything except
dogs?  Or failing dogs, gramophone records and tennis racquets?
And yet, when they kept to trash like this, how easily, how
amicably they could talk!

They passed the glittering white wall of the cemetery and came to
the Lackersteens' gate.  Old mohur trees grew round it, and a clump
of hollyhocks eight feet high, with round red flowers like blowsy
girls' faces.  Flory took off his hat in the shade and fanned his
face.

'Well, we're back before the worst of the heat comes.  I'm afraid
our trip to the bazaar wasn't altogether a success.'

'Oh, not at all!  I enjoyed it, really I did.'

'No--I don't know, something unfortunate always seems to happen.--
Oh, by the way!  You haven't forgotten that we're going out
shooting the day after tomorrow?  I hope that day will be all right
for you?'

'Yes, and my uncle's going to lend me his gun.  Such awful fun!
You'll have to teach me all about shooting.  I AM so looking
forward to it.'

'So am I.  It's a rotten time of year for shooting, but we'll do
our best.  Goodbye for the present, then.'

'Good-bye, Mr Flory.'

She still called him Mr Flory though he called her Elizabeth.  They
parted and went their ways, each thinking of the shooting trip,
which, both of them felt, would in some way put things right
between them.



12


In the sticky, sleepy heat of the living-room, almost dark because
of the beaded curtain, U Po Kyin was marching slowly up and down,
boasting.  From time to time he would put a hand under his singlet
and scratch his sweating breasts, huge as a woman's with fat.  Ma
Kin was sitting on her mat, smoking slender white cigars.  Through
the open door of the bedroom one could see the corner of U Po
Kyin's huge square bed, with carved teak posts, like a catafalque,
on which he had committed many and many a rape.

Ma Kin was now hearing for the first time of the 'other affair'
which underlay U Po Kyin's attack on Dr Veraswami.  Much as he
despised her intelligence, U Po Kyin usually let Ma Kin into his
secrets sooner or later.  She was the only person in his immediate
circle who was not afraid of him, and there was therefore a
pleasure in impressing her.

'Well, Kin Kin,' he said, 'you see how it has all gone according to
plan!  Eighteen anonymous letters already, and every one of them a
masterpiece.  I would repeat some of them to you if I thought you
were capable of appreciating them.'

'But supposing the Europeans take no notice of your anonymous
letters?  What then?'

'Take no notice?  Aha, no fear of that!  I think I know something
about the European mentality.  Let me tell you, Kin Kin, that if
there is one thing I CAN do, it is to write an anonymous letter.'

This was true.  U Po Kyin's letters had already taken effect, and
especially on their chief target, Mr Macgregor.

Only two days earlier than this, Mr Macgregor had spent a very
troubled evening in trying to make up his mind whether Dr Veraswami
was or was not guilty of disloyalty to the Government.  Of course,
it was not a question of any overt act of disloyalty--that was
quite irrelevant.  The point was, was the doctor the KIND of man
who would hold seditious opinions?  In India you are not judged for
what you do, but for what you ARE.  The merest breath of suspicion
against his loyalty can ruin an Oriental official.  Mr Macgregor
had too just a nature to condemn even an Oriental out of hand.  He
had puzzled as late as midnight over a whole pile of confidential
papers, including the five anonymous letters he had received,
besides two others that had been forwarded to him by Westfield,
pinned together with a cactus thorn.

It was not only the letters.  Rumours about the doctor had been
pouring in from every side.  U Po Kyin fully grasped that to call
the doctor a traitor was not enough in itself; it was necessary to
attack his reputation from every possible angle.  The doctor was
charged not only with sedition, but also with extortion, rape,
torture, performing illegal operations, performing operations while
blind drunk, murder by poison, murder by sympathetic magic, eating
beef, selling death certificates to murderers, wearing his shoes in
the precincts of the pagoda and making homosexual attempts on the
Military Police drummer boy.  To hear what was said of him, anyone
would have imagined the doctor a compound of Machiavelli, Sweeny
Todd and the Marquis de Sade.  Mr Macgregor had not paid much
attention at first.  He was too accustomed to this kind of thing.
But with the last of the anonymous letters U Po Kyin had brought
off a stroke that was brilliant even for him.

It concerned the escape of Nga Shwe O, the dacoit, from Kyauktada
jail.  Nga Shwe O, who was in the middle of a well-earned seven
years, had been preparing his escape for several months past, and
as a start his friends outside had bribed one of the Indian
warders.  The warder received his hundred rupees in advance,
applied for leave to visit the death-bed of a relative and spent
several busy days in the Mandalay brothels.  Time passed, and the
day of the escape was postponed several times--the warder,
meanwhile, growing more and more homesick for the brothels.
Finally he decided to earn a further reward by betraying the plot
to U Po Kyin.  But U Po Kyin, as usual, saw his chance.  He told
the warder on dire penalties to hold his tongue, and then, on the
very night of the escape, when it was too late to do anything, sent
another anonymous letter to Mr Macgregor, warning him that an
escape was being attempted.  The letter added, needless to say,
that Dr Veraswami, the superintendent of the jail, had been bribed
for his connivance.

In the morning there was a hullabaloo and a rushing to and fro of
warders and, policemen at the jail, for Nga Shwe O had escaped.
(He was a long way down the river, in a sampan provided by U Po
Kyin.)  This time Mr Macgregor was taken aback.  Whoever had
written the letter must have been privy to the plot, and was
probably telling the truth about the doctor's connivance.  It was a
very serious matter.  A jail superintendent who will take bribes to
let a prisoner escape is capable of anything.  And therefore--
perhaps the logical sequence was not quite clear, but it was clear
enough to Mr Macgregor--therefore the charge of sedition, which was
the main charge against the doctor, became much more credible.

U Po Kyin had attacked the other Europeans at the same time.
Flory, who was the doctor's friend and his chief source of
prestige, had been scared easily enough into deserting him.  With
Westfield it was a little harder.  Westfield, as a policeman, knew
a great deal about U Po Kyin and might conceivably upset his plans.
Policemen and magistrates are natural enemies.  But U Po Kyin had
known how to turn even this fact to advantage.  He had accused the
doctor, anonymously of course, of being in league with the
notorious scoundrel and bribe-taker U Po Kyin.  That settled
Westfield.  As for Ellis, no anonymous letters were needed in his
case; nothing could possibly make him think worse of the doctor
than he did already.

U Po Kyin had even sent one of his anonymous letters to Mrs
Lackersteen, for he knew the power of European women.  Dr
Veraswami, the letter said, was inciting the natives to abduct and
rape the European women--no details were given, nor were they
needed.  U Po Kyin had touched Mrs Lackersteen's weak spot.  To her
mind the words 'sedition', 'Nationalism,', 'rebellion', 'Home
Rule', conveyed one thing and one only, and that was a picture of
herself being raped by a procession of jet-black coolies with
rolling white eyeballs.  It was a thought that kept her awake at
night sometimes.  Whatever good regard the Europeans might once
have had for the doctor was crumbling rapidly.

'So you see,' said U Po Kyin with a pleased air, 'you see how I
have undermined him.  He is like a tree sawn through at the base.
One tap and down he comes.  In three weeks or less I shall deliver
that tap.'

'How?'

'I am just coming to that.  I think it is time for you to hear
about it.  You have no sense in these matters, but you know how to
hold your tongue.  You have heard talk of this rebellion that is
brewing near Thongwa village?'

'Yes.  They are very foolish, those villagers.  What can they do
with their dahs and spears against the Indian soldiers?  They will
be shot down like wild animals.'

'Of course.  If there is any fighting it will be a massacre.  But
they are only a pack of superstitious peasants.  They have put
their faith in these absurd bullet-proof jackets that are being
distributed to them.  I despise such ignorance.'

'Poor men!  Why do you not stop them, Ko Po Kyin?  There is no need
to arrest anybody.  You have only to go to the village and tell
them that you know their plans, and they will never dare to go on.'

'Ah well, I could stop them if I chose, of course.  But then I do
not choose.  I have my reasons.  You see, Kin Kin--you will please
keep silent about this--this is, so to speak, my own rebellion.  I
arranged it myself.'

'What!'

Ma Kin dropped her cigar.  Her eyes had opened so wide that the
pale blue white showed all round the pupil.  She was horrified.
She burst out:

'Ko Po Kyin, what are you saying?  You do not mean it!  You,
raising a rebellion--it cannot be true!'

'Certainly it is true.  And a very good job we are making of it.
That magician whom I brought from Rangoon is a clever fellow.  He
has toured all over India as a circus conjurer.  The bullet-proof
jackets were bought at Whiteaway & Laidlaw's stores, one rupee
eight annas each.  They are costing me a pretty penny, I can tell
you.'

'But, Ko Po Kyin!  A rebellion!  The terrible fighting and shooting,
and all the poor men who will be killed!  Surely you have not
gone mad?  Are you not afraid of being shot yourself?'

U Po Kyin halted in his stride.  He was astonished.  'Good gracious,
woman, what idea have you got hold of now?  You do not suppose that
_I_ am rebelling against the Government?  I--a Government servant
of thirty years' standing!  Good heavens, no!  I said that I had
STARTED the rebellion, not that I was taking part in it.  It is
these fools of villagers who are going to risk their skins, not I.
No one dreams that I have anything to do with it, or ever will,
except Ba Sein and one or two others.'

'But you said it was you who were persuading them to rebel?'

'Of course.  I have accused Veraswami of raising a rebellion
against the Government.  Well, I must have a rebellion to show,
must I not?'

'Ah, I see.  And when the rebellion breaks out, you are going to
say that Dr Veraswami is to blame for it.  Is that it?'

'How slow you are!  I should have thought even a fool would have
seen that I am raising the rebellion merely in order to crush it.
I am--what is that expression Mr Macgregor uses?  Agent provocateur--
Latin, you would not understand.  I am agent provocateur.  First I
persuade these fools at Thongwa to rebel, and then I arrest them as
rebels.  At the very moment when it is due to start, I shall pounce
on the ringleaders and clap every one of them in jail.  After that,
I dare say there may possibly be some fighting.  A few men may be
killed and a few more sent to the Andamans.  But, meanwhile, I shall
be first in the field.  U Po Kyin, the man who quelled a most
dangerous rising in the nick of time!  I shall be the hero of the
district.'

U Po Kyin, justly proud of his plan, began to pace up and down the
room again with his hands behind his back, smiling.  Ma Kin
considered the plan in silence for some time.  Finally she said:

'I still do not see why you are doing this, Ko Po Kyin.  Where is
it all leading?  And what has it got to do with Dr Veraswami?'

'I shall never teach you wisdom, Kin Kin!  Did I not tell you at
the beginning that Veraswami stands in my way?  This rebellion is
the very thing to get rid of him.  Of course we shall never prove
that he is responsible for it; but what does that matter?  All the
Europeans will take it for granted that he is mixed up in it
somehow.  That is how their minds work.  He will be ruined for
life.  And his fall is my rise.  The blacker I can paint him, the
more glorious my own conduct will appear.  Now do you understand?'

'Yes, I do understand.  And I think it is a base, evil plan.  I
wonder you are not ashamed to tell it me.'

'Now, Kin Kin!  Surely you are not going to start that nonsense
over again?'

'Ko Po Kyin, why is it that you are only happy when you are being
wicked?  Why is it that everything you do must bring evil to
others?  Think of that poor doctor who will be dismissed from his
post, and those villagers who will be shot or flogged with bamboos
or imprisoned for life.  Is it necessary to do such things?  What
can you want with more money when you are rich already?'

'Money!  Who is talking about money?  Some day, woman, you will
realize that there are other things in the world besides money.
Fame, for example.  Greatness.  Do you realize that the Governor of
Burma will very probably pin an Order on my breast for my loyal
action in this affair?  Would not even you be proud of such an
honour as that?'

Ma Kin shook her head, unimpressed.  'When will you remember, Ko Po
Kyin, that you are not going to live a thousand years?  Consider
what happens to those who have lived wickedly.  There is such a
thing, for instance, as being turned into a rat or a frog.  There
is even hell.  I remember what a priest said to me once about hell,
something that he had translated from the Pali scriptures, and it
was very terrible.  He said, "Once in a thousand centuries two red-
hot spears will meet in your heart, and you will say to yourself,
'Another thousand centuries of my torment are ended, and there is
as much to come as there has been before.'"  Is it not very
dreadful to think of such things, Ko Po Kyin?'

U Po Kyin laughed and gave a careless wave of his hand that meant
'pagodas'.

'Well, I hope you may still laugh when it comes to the end.  But
for myself, I should not care to look back upon such a life.'

She relighted her cigar with her thin shoulder turned disapprovingly
on U Po Kyin while he took several more turns up and down the room.
When he spoke, it was more seriously than before, and even with a
touch of diffidence.

'You know, Kin Kin, there is another matter behind all this.
Something that I have not told to you or to anyone else.  Even Ba
Sein does not know.  But I believe I will tell it you now.'

'I do not want to hear it, if it is more wickedness.'

'No, no.  You were asking just now what is my real object in this
affair.  You think, I suppose, that I am ruining Veraswami merely
because I dislike him and his ideas about bribes as a nuisance.
It is not only that.  There is something else that is far more
important, and it concerns you as well as me.'

'What is it?'

'Have you never felt in you, Kin Kin, a desire for higher things?
Has it never struck you that after all our successes--all my
successes, I should say--we are almost in the same position as when
we started?  I am worth, I dare say, two lakhs of rupees, and yet
look at the style in which we live!  Look at this room!  Positively
it is no better than that of a peasant.  I am tired of eating with
my fingers and associating only with Burmans--poor, inferior
people--and living, as you might say, like a miserable Township
Officer.  Money is not enough; I should like to feel that I have
risen in the world as well.  Do you not wish sometimes for a way of
life that is a little more--how shall I say--elevated?'

'I do not know how we could want more than what we have already.
When I was a girl in my village I never thought that I should live
in such a house as this.  Look at those English chairs--I have
never sat in one of them in my life.  But I am very proud to look
at them and think that I own them.'

'Ch!  Why did you ever leave that village of yours, Kin Kin?  You
are only fit to stand gossiping by the well with a stone water-pot
on your head.  But I am more ambitious, God be praised.  And now I
will tell you the real reason why I am intriguing against Veraswami.
It is in my mind to do something that is really magnificent.
Something noble, glorious!  Something that is the very highest
honour an Oriental can attain to.  You know what I mean, of course?'

'No.  What do you mean?'

'Come, now!  The greatest achievement of my life!  Surely you can
guess?'

'Ah, I know!  You are going to buy a motor-car.  But oh, Ko Po
Kyin, please do not expect me to ride in it!'

U Po Kyin threw up his hands in disgust.  'A motor-car!  You have
the mind of a bazaar peanut-seller!  I could buy twenty motor-cars
if I wanted them.  And what use would a motor-car be in this place?
No, it is something far grander than that.'

'What, then?'

'It is this.  I happen to know that in a month's time the Europeans
are going to elect one native member to their Club.  They do not
want to do it, but they will have orders from the Commissioner, and
they will obey.  Naturally, they would elect Veraswami, who is the
highest native official in the district.  But I have disgraced
Veraswami.  And so--'

'What?'

U Po Kyin did not answer for a moment.  He looked at Ma Kin, and
his vast yellow face, with its broad jaw and numberless teeth, was
so softened that it was almost child-like.  There might even have
been tears in his tawny eyes.  He said in a small, almost awed
voice, as though the greatness of what he was saying overcame him:

'Do you not see, woman?  Do you not see that if Veraswami is
disgraced I shall be elected to the Club myself?'

The effect of it was crushing.  There was not another word of
argument on Ma Kin's part.  The magnificence of U Po Kyin's project
had struck her dumb.

And not without reason, for all the achievements of U Po Kyin's
life were as nothing beside this.  It is a real triumph--it would
be doubly so in Kyauktada--for an official of the lower ranks to
worm his way into the European Club.  The European Club, that
remote, mysterious temple, that holy of holies far harder of entry
than Nirvana!  Po Kyin, the naked gutter-boy of Mandalay, the
thieving clerk and obscure official, would enter that sacred place,
call Europeans 'old chap', drink whisky and soda and knock white
balls to and fro on the green table!  Ma Kin, the village woman,
who had first seen the light through the chinks of a bamboo hut
thatched with palm-leaves, would sit on a high chair with her feet
imprisoned in silk stockings and high-heeled shoes (yes, she would
actually wear shoes in that place!) talking to English ladies in
Hindustani about baby-linen!  It was a prospect that would have
dazzled anybody.

For a long time Ma Kin remained silent, her lips parted, thinking
of the European Club and the splendours that it might contain.
For the first time in her life she surveyed U Po Kyin's intrigues
without disapproval.  Perhaps it was a feat greater even than the
storming of the Club to have planted a grain of ambition in Ma
Kin's gentle heart.



13


As Flory came through the gate of the hospital compound four
ragged sweepers passed him, carrying some dead coolie, wrapped in
sackcloth, to a foot-deep grave in the jungle.  Flory crossed the
brick-like earth of the yard between the hospital sheds.  All down
the wide verandas, on sheetless charpoys, rows of grey-faced men
lay silent and moveless.  Some filthy-looking curs, which were said
to devour amputated limbs, dozed or snapped at their fleas among
the piles of the buildings.  The whole place wore a sluttish and
decaying air.  Dr Veraswami struggled hard to keep it clean, but
there was no coping with the dust and the bad water-supply, and the
inertia of sweepers and half-trained Assistant Surgeons.

Flory was told that the doctor was in the out-patients' department.
It was a plaster-walled room furnished only with a table and two
chairs, and a dusty portrait of Queen Victoria, much awry.  A
procession of Burmans, peasants with gnarled muscles beneath their
faded rags, were filing into the room and queueing up at the table.
The doctor was in shirt-sleeves and sweating profusely.  He sprang
to his feet with an exclamation of pleasure, and in his usual fussy
haste thrust Flory into the vacant chair and produced a tin of
cigarettes from the drawer of the table.

'What a delightful visit, Mr Flory!  Please to make yourself
comfortable--that iss, if one can possibly be comfortable in such a
place ass this, ha, ha!  Afterwards, at my house, we will talk with
beer and amenities.  Kindly excuse me while I attend to the
populace.'

Flory sat down, and the hot sweat immediately burst out and
drenched his shirt.  The heat of the room was stifling.  The
peasants steamed garlic from all their pores.  As each man came to
the table the doctor would bounce from his chair, prod the patient
in the back, lay a black ear to his chest, fire off several
questions in villainous Burmese, then bounce back to the table and
scribble a prescription.  The patients took the prescriptions
across the yard to the Compounder, who gave them bottles filled
with water and various vegetable dyes.  The Compounder supported
himself largely by the sale of drugs, for the Government paid him
only twenty-five rupees a month.  However, the doctor knew nothing
of this.

On most mornings the doctor had not time to attend to the out-
patients himself, and left them to one of the Assistant Surgeons.
The Assistant Surgeon's methods of diagnosis were brief.  He would
simply ask each patient, 'Where is your pain?  Head, back or
belly?' and at the reply hand out a prescription from one of three
piles that he had prepared beforehand.  The patients much preferred
this method to the doctor's.  The doctor had a way of asking them
whether they had suffered from venereal diseases--an ungentlemanly,
pointless question--and sometimes he horrified them still more by
suggesting operations.  'Belly-cutting' was their phrase for it.
The majority of them would have died a dozen times over rather than
submit to 'belly-cutting'.

As the last patient disappeared the doctor sank into his chair,
fanning his face with the prescription-pad.

'Ach, this heat!  Some mornings I think that never will I get the
smell of garlic out of my nose!  It iss amazing to me how their
very blood becomes impregnated with it.  Are you not suffocated,
Mr Flory?  You English have the sense of smell almost too highly
developed.  What torments you must all suffer in our filthy East!'

'Abandon your noses, all ye who enter here, what?  They might write
that up over the Suez Canal.  You seem busy this morning?'

'Ass ever.  Ah but, my friend, how discouraging iss the work of a
doctor in this country!  These villagers--dirty, ignorant savages!
Even to get them to come to hospital iss all we can do, and they
will die of gangrene or carry a tumour ass large ass a melon for
ten years rather than face the knife.  And such medicines ass their
own so-called doctors give to them!  Herbs gathered under the new
moon, tigers' whiskers, rhinoceros horn, urine, menstrual blood!
How men can drink such compounds iss disgusting.'

'Rather picturesque, all the same.  You ought to compile a Burmese
pharmacopoeia, doctor.  It would be almost as good as Culpeper.'

'Barbarous cattle, barbarous cattle,' said the doctor, beginning to
struggle into his white coat.  'Shall we go back to my house?
There iss beer and I trust a few fragments of ice left.  I have an
operation at ten, strangulated hernia, very urgent.  Till then I am
free.'

'Yes.  As a matter of fact there's something I rather wanted to
talk to you about.'

They recrossed the yard and climbed the steps of the doctor's
veranda.  The doctor, having felt in the ice-chest and found that
the ice was all melted to tepid water, opened a bottle of beer and
called fussily to the servants to set some more bottles swinging in
a cradle of wet straw.  Flory was standing looking over the veranda
rail, with his hat still on.  The fact was that he had come here to
utter an apology.  He had been avoiding the doctor for nearly a
fortnight--since the day, in fact, when he had set his name to the
insulting notice at the Club.  But the apology had got to be
uttered.  U Po Kyin was a very good judge of men, but he had erred
in supposing that two anonymous letters were enough to scare Flory
permanently away from his friend.

'Look here, doctor, you know what I wanted to say?'

'I?  No.'

'Yes, you do.  It's about that beastly trick I played on you the
other week.  When Ellis put that notice on the Club board and I
signed my name to it.  You must have heard about it.  I want to try
and explain--'

'No, no, my friend, no, no!' The doctor was so distressed that he
sprang across the veranda and seized Flory by the arm.  'You shall
NOT explain!  Please never mention it!  I understand perfectly--but
most perfectly.'

'No, you don't understand.  You couldn't.  You don't realize just
what KIND of pressure is put on one to make one do things like
that.  There was nothing to make me sign the notice.  Nothing could
have happened if I'd refused.  There's no law telling us to be
beastly to Orientals--quite the contrary.  But--it's just that one
daren't be loyal to an Oriental when it means going against the
others.  It doesn't DO.  If I'd stuck out against signing the
notice I'd have been in disgrace at the Club for a week or two.
So I funked it, as usual.'

'Please, Mr Flory, please!  Possitively you will make me
uncomfortable if you continue.  Ass though I could not make all
allowances for your position!'

'Our motto, you know is, "In India, do as the English do".'

'Of course, of course.  And a most noble motto.  "Hanging
together", ass you call it.  It iss the secret of your superiority
to we Orientals.'

'Well, it's never much use saying one's sorry.  But what I did come
here to say was that it shan't happen again.  In fact--'

'Now, now, Mr Flory, you will oblige me by saying no more upon this
subject.  It iss all over and forgotten.  Please to drink up your
beer before it becomes ass hot ass tea.  Also, I have a thing to
tell you.  You have not asked for my news yet.'

'Ah, your news.  What is your news, by the way?  How's everything
been going all this time?  How's Ma Britannia?  Still moribund?'

'Aha, very low, very low!  But not so low ass I.  I am in deep
waters, my friend.'

'What?  U Po Kyin again?  Is he still libelling you?'

'If he iss libelling me!  This time it iss--well, it iss something
diabolical.  My friend, you have heard of this rebellion that is
supposed to be on the point of breaking out in the district?'

'I've heard a lot of talk.  Westfield's been out bent on slaughter,
but I hear he can't find any rebels.  Only the usual village
Hampdens who won't pay their taxes.'

'Ah yes.  Wretched fools!  Do you know how much iss the tax that
most of them have refused to pay?  Five rupees!  They will get
tired of it and pay up presently.  We have this trouble every year.
But ass for the rebellion--the SO-CALLED rebellion, Mr Flory--I
wish you to know that there iss more in it than meets the eye.'

'Oh?  What?'

To Flory's surprise the doctor made such a violent gesture of anger
that he spilled most of his beer.  He put his glass down on the
veranda rail and burst out:

'It iss U Po Kyin again!  That unutterable scoundrel!  That
crocodile deprived of natural feeling!  That--that--'

'Go on.  "That obscene trunk of humors, that swol'n parcel of
dropsies, that bolting-hutch of beastliness"--go on.  What's he
been up to now?'

'A villainy unparalleled'--and here the doctor outlined the plot
for a sham rebellion, very much as U Po Kyin had explained it to Ma
Kin.  The only detail not known to him was U Po Kyin's intention of
getting himself elected to the European Club.  The doctor's face
could not accurately be said to flush, but it grew several shades
blacker in his anger.  Flory was so astonished that he remained
standing up.

'The cunning old devil!  Who'd have thought he had it in him?  But
how did you manage to find all this out?'

'Ah, I have a few friends left.  But now do you see, my friend,
what ruin he iss preparing for me?  Already he hass calumniated me
right and left.  When this absurd rebellion breaks out, he will do
everything in his power to connect my name with it.  And I tell you
that the slightest suspicion of my loyalty could be ruin for me,
ruin!  If it were ever breathed that I were even a sympathizer with
this rebellion, there iss an end of me.'

'But, damn it, this is ridiculous!  Surely you can defend yourself
somehow?'

'How can I defend myself when I can prove nothing?  I know that all
this iss true, but what use iss that?  If I demand a public
inquiry, for every witness I produce U Po Kyin would produce fifty.
You do not realize the influence of that man in the district.  No
one dare speak against him.'

'But why need you prove anything?  Why not go to old Macgregor and
tell him about it?  He's a very fair-minded old chap in his way.
He'd hear you out.'

'Useless, useless.  You have not the mind of an intriguer, Mr
Flory.  Qui s'excuse, s'accuse, iss it not?  It does not pay to cry
that there iss a conspiracy against one.'

'Well, what are you going to do, then?'

'There iss nothing I can do.  Simply I must wait and hope that my
prestige will carry me through.  In affairs like this, where a
native official's reputation iss at stake, there iss no question
of proof, of evidence.  All depends upon one's standing with the
Europeans.  If my standing iss good, they will not believe it of
me; if bad, they will believe it.  Prestige iss all.'

They were silent for a moment.  Flory understood well enough that
'prestige iss all'.  He was used to these nebulous conflicts, in
which suspicion counts for more than proof, and reputation for more
than a thousand witnesses.  A thought came into his head, an
uncomfortable, chilling thought which would never have occurred to
him three weeks earlier.  It was one of those moments when one sees
quite clearly what is one's duty, and, with all the will in the
world to shirk it, feels certain that one must carry it out.  He
said:

'Suppose, for instance, you were elected to the Club?  Would that
do your prestige any good?'

'If I were elected to the Club!  Ah, indeed, yes!  The Club!  It
iss a fortress impregnable.  Once there, and no one would listen to
these tales about me any more than if it were about you, or Mr
Macgregor, or any other European gentleman.  But what hope have I
that they will elect me after their minds have been poisoned
against me?'

'Well now, look here, doctor, I tell you what.  I'll propose your
name at the next general meeting.  I know the question's got to
come up then, and if someone comes forward with the name of a
candidate, I dare say no one except Ellis will blackball him.
And in the meantime--'

'Ah, my friend, my dear friend!'  The doctor's emotion caused him
almost to choke.  He seized Flory by the hand.  'Ah, my friend,
that iss noble!  Truly it iss noble!  But it iss too much.  I fear
that you will be in trouble with your European friends again.  Mr
Ellis, for example--would he tolerate it that you propose my name?'

'Oh, bother Ellis.  But you must understand that I can't promise to
get you elected.  It depends on what Macgregor says and what mood
the others are in.  It may all come to nothing.'

The doctor was still holding Flory's hand between his own, which
were plump and damp.  The tears had actually started into his eyes,
and these, magnified by his spectacles, beamed upon Flory like the
liquid eyes of a dog.

'Ah, my friend!  If I should but be elected!  What an end to all my
troubles!  But, my friend, ass I said before, do not be too rash in
this matter.  Beware of U Po Kyin!  By now he will have numbered
you among hiss enemies.  And even for you hiss enmity can be a
danger.'

'Oh, good Lord, he can't touch me.  He's done nothing so far--only
a few silly anonymous letters.'

'I would not be too sure.  He hass subtle ways to strike.  And for
sure he will raise heaven and earth to keep me from being elected
to the Club.  If you have a weak spot, guard it, my friend.  He
will find it out.  He strikes always at the weakest spot.'

'Like the crocodile,' Flory suggested.

'Like the crocodile,' agreed the doctor gravely.  'Ah but, my
friend, how gratifying to me if I should become a member of your
European Club!  What an honour, to be the associate of European
gentlemen!  But there iss one other matter, Mr Flory, that I did
not care to mention before.  It iss--I hope this iss clearly
understood--that I have no intention of USING the Club in any way.
Membership is all I desire.  Even if I were elected, I should not,
of course, ever presume to COME to the Club.'

'Not come to the Club?'

'No, no!  Heaven forbid that I should force my society upon the
European gentlemen!  Simply I should pay my subscriptions.  That,
for me, iss a privilege high enough.  You understand that, I
trust?'

'Perfectly, doctor, perfectly.'

Flory could not help laughing as he walked up the hill.  He was
definitely committed now to proposing the doctor's election.  And
there would be such a row when the others heard of it--oh, such a
devil of a row!  But the astonishing thing was that it only made
him laugh.  The prospect that would have appalled him a month back
now almost exhilarated him.

Why?  And why had he given his promise at all?  It was a small
thing, a small risk to take--nothing heroic about it--and yet it
was unlike him.  Why, after all these years--the circumspect, pukka
sahib-like years--break all the rules so suddenly?

He knew why.  It was because Elizabeth, by coming into his life,
had so changed it and renewed it that all the dirty, miserable
years might never have passed.  Her presence had changed the whole
orbit of his mind.  She had brought back to him the air of England--
dear England, where thought is free and one is not condemned
forever to dance the danse du pukka sahib for the edification of
the lower races.  Where is the life that late I led? he thought.
Just by existing she had made it possible for him, she had even
made it natural to him, to act decently.

Where is the life that late I led? he thought again as he came
through the garden gate.  He was happy, happy.  For he had
perceived that the pious ones are right when they say that there is
salvation and life can begin anew.  He came up the path, and it
seemed to him that his house, his flowers, his servants, all the
life that so short a time ago had been drenched in ennui and
homesickness, were somehow made new, significant, beautiful
inexhaustibly.  What fun it could all be, if only you had someone
to share it with you!  How you could love this country, if only you
were not alone!  Nero was out on the path, braving the sun for some
grains of paddy that the mali had dropped, taking food to his
goats.  Flo made a dash at him, panting, and Nero sprang into the
air with a flurry and lighted on Flory's shoulder.  Flory walked
into the house with the little red cock in his arms, stroking his
silky ruff and the smooth, diamond-shaped feathers of his back.

He had not set foot on the veranda before he knew that Ma Hla May
was in the house.  It did not need Ko S'la to come hurrying from
within with a face of evil tidings.  Flory had smelled her scent of
sandalwood, garlic, coco-nut oil and the jasmine in her hair.  He
dropped Nero over the veranda rail.

'THE WOMAN has come back,' said Ko S'la.

Flory had turned very pale.  When he turned pale the birthmark made
him hideously ugly.  A pang like a blade of ice had gone through
his entrails.  Ma Hla May had appeared in the doorway of the
bedroom.  She stood with her face downcast, looking at him from
beneath lowered brows.

'Thakin,' she said in a low voice, half sullen, half urgent.

'Go away!' said Flory angrily to Ko S'la, venting his fear and
anger upon him.

'Thakin,' she said, 'come into the bedroom here.  I have a thing to
say to you.'

He followed her into the bedroom.  In a week--it was only a week--
her appearance had degenerated extraordinarily.  Her hair looked
greasy.  All her lockets were gone, and she was wearing a
Manchester longyi of flowered cotton, costing two rupees eight
annas.  She had coated her face so thick with powder that it was
like a clown's mask, and at the roots of her hair, where the powder
ended, there was a ribbon of natural-coloured brown skin.  She
looked a drab.  Flory would not face her, but stood looking
sullenly through the open doorway to the veranda.

'What do you mean by coming back like this?  Why did you not go
home to your village?'

'I am staying in Kyauktada, at my cousin's house.  How can I go
back to my village after what has happened?'

'And what do you mean by sending men to demand money from me?  How
can you want more money already, when I gave you a hundred rupees
only a week ago?'

'How can I go back?' she repeated, ignoring what he had said.  Her
voice rose so sharply that he turned round.  She was standing very
upright, sullen, with her black brows drawn together and her lips
pouted.

'Why cannot you go back?'

'After that!  After what you have done to me!'

Suddenly she burst into a furious tirade.  Her voice had risen to
the hysterical graceless scream of the bazaar women when they
quarrel.

'How can I go back, to be jeered at and pointed at by those low,
stupid peasants whom I despise?  I who have been a bo-kadaw, a
white man's wife, to go home to my father's house, and shake the
paddy basket with old hags and women who are too ugly to find
husbands!  Ah, what shame, what shame!  Two years I was your wife,
you loved me and cared for me, and then without warning, without
reason, you drove me from your door like a dog.  And I must go back
to my village, with no money, with all my jewels and silk longyis
gone, and the people will point and say, "There is Ma Hla May who
thought herself cleverer than the rest of us.  And behold! her
white man has treated her as they always do."  I am ruined, ruined!
What man will marry me after I have lived two years in your house?
You have taken my youth from me.  Ah, what shame, what shame!'

He could not look at her; he stood helpless, pale, hang-dog.  Every
word she said was justified, and how tell her that he could do no
other than he had done?  How tell her that it would have been an
outrage, a sin, to continue as her lover?  He almost cringed from
her, and the birthmark stood on his yellow face like a splash of
ink.  He said flatly, turning instinctively to money--for money had
never failed with Ma Hla May:

'I will give you money.  You shall have the fifty rupees you asked
me for--more later.  I have no more till next month.'

This was true.  The hundred rupees he had given her, and what he
had spent on clothes, had taken most of his ready money.  To his
dismay she burst into a loud wail.  Her white mask puckered up and
the tears sprang quickly out and coursed down her cheeks.  Before
he could stop her she had fallen on her knees in front of him, and
she was bowing, touching the floor with her forehead in the 'full'
shiko of utter abasement.

'Get up, get up!' he exclaimed.  The shameful, abject shiko, neck
bent, body doubled up as though inviting a blow, always horrified
him.  'I can't bear that.  Get up this instant.'

She wailed again, and made an attempt to clasp his ankles.  He
stepped backwards hurriedly.

'Get up, now, and stop that dreadful noise.  I don't know what you
are crying about.'

She did not get up, but only rose to her knees and wailed at him
anew.  'Why do you offer me money?  Do you think it is only for
money that I have come back?  Do you think that when you have
driven me from your door like a dog it is only because of money
that I care?'

'Get up,' he repeated.  He had moved several paces away, lest she
should seize him.  'What do you want if it is not money?'

'Why do you hate me?' she wailed.  'What harm have I done you?  I
stole your cigarette-case, but you were not angry at that.  You are
going to marry this white woman, I know it, everyone knows it.  But
what does it matter, why must you turn me away?  Why do you hate
me?'

'I don't hate you.  I can't explain.  Get up, please get up.'

She was weeping quite shamelessly now.  After all, she was hardly
more than a child.  She looked at him through her tears, anxiously,
studying him for a sign of mercy.  Then, a dreadful thing, she
stretched herself at full length, flat on her face.

'Get up, get up!' he cried out in English.  'I can't bear that--
it's too abominable!'

She did not get up, but crept, wormlike, right across the floor to
his feet.  Her body made a broad ribbon on the dusty floor.  She
lay prostrate in front of him, face hidden, arms extended, as
though before a god's altar.

'Master, master,' she whimpered, 'will you not forgive me?  This
once, only this once!  Take Ma Hla May back.  I will be your slave,
lower than your slave.  Anything sooner than turn me away.'

She had wound her arms round his ankles, actually was kissing his
toes.  He stood looking down at her with his hands in his pockets,
helpless.  Flo came ambling into the room, walked to where Ma Hla
May lay and sniffed at her longyi.  She wagged her tail vaguely,
recognizing the smell.  Flory could not endure it.  He bent down
and took Ma Hla May by the shoulders, lifting her to her knees.

'Stand up, now,' he said.  'It hurts me to see you like this.  I
will do what I can for you.  What is the use of crying?'

Instantly she cried out in renewed hope:  'Then you will take me
back?  Oh, master, take Ma Hla May back!  No one need ever know.  I
will stay here when that white woman comes, she will think I am one
of the servants' wives.  Will you not take me back?'

'I cannot.  It's impossible,' he said, turning away again.

She heard finality in his tone, and uttered a harsh, ugly cry.  She
bent forward again in a shiko, beating her forehead against the
floor.  It was dreadful.  And what was more dreadful than all, what
hurt in his breast, was the utter gracelessness, the lowness of the
emotion beneath those entreaties.  For in all this there was not a
spark of love for him.  If she wept and grovelled it was only for
the position she had once had as his mistress, the idle life, the
rich clothes and dominion over servants.  There was something
pitiful beyond words in that.  Had she loved him he could have
driven her from his door with far less compunction.  No sorrows are
so bitter as those that are without a trace of nobility.  He bent
down and picked her up in his arms.

'Listen, Ma Hla May,' he said; 'I do not hate you, you have done me
no evil.  It is I who have wronged you.  But there is no help for
it now.  You must go home, and later I will send you money.  If you
like you shall start a shop in the bazaar.  You are young.  This
will not matter to you when you have money and can find yourself a
husband.'

'I am ruined!' she wailed again.  'I shall kill myself.  I shall
jump off the jetty into the river.  How can I live after this
disgrace?'

He was holding her in his arms, almost caressing her.  She was
clinging close to him, her face hidden against his shirt, her body
shaking with sobs.  The scent of sandalwood floated into his
nostrils.  Perhaps even now she thought that with her arms around
him and her body against his she could renew her power over him.
He disentangled himself gently, and then, seeing that she did not
fall on her knees again, stood apart from her.

'That is enough.  You must go now.  And look, I will give you the
fifty rupees I promised you.'

He dragged his tin uniform case from under the bed and took out
five ten-rupee notes.  She stowed them silently in the bosom of her
ingyi.  Her tears had ceased flowing quite suddenly.  Without
speaking she went into the bathroom for a moment, and came out with
her face washed to its natural brown, and her hair and dress
rearranged.  She looked sullen, but not hysterical any longer.

'For the last time, thakin: you will not take me back?  That is
your last word?'

'Yes.  I cannot help it.'

'Then I am going, thakin.'

'Very well.  God go with you.'

Leaning against the wooden pillar of the veranda, he watched her
walk down the path in the strong sunlight.  She walked very
upright, with bitter offence in the carriage of her back and head.
It was true what she had said, he had robbed her of her youth.  His
knees were trembling uncontrollably.  Ko S'la came behind him,
silent-footed.  He gave a little deprecating cough to attract
Flory's attention.

'What's the matter now?'

'The holy one's breakfast is getting cold.'

'I don't want any breakfast.  Get me something to drink--gin.'

Where is the life that late I led?



14


Like long curved needles threading through embroidery, the two
canoes that carried Flory and Elizabeth threaded their way up the
creek that led inland from the eastern bank of the Irrawaddy.  It
was the day of the shooting trip--a short afternoon trip, for they
could not stay a night in the jungle together.  They were to shoot
for a couple of hours in the comparative cool of the evening, and
be back at Kyauktada in time for dinner.

The canoes, each hollowed out of a single tree-trunk, glided
swiftly, hardly rippling the dark brown water.  Water hyacinth with
profuse spongy foliage and blue flowers had choked the stream so
that the channel was only a winding ribbon four feet wide.  The
light filtered, greenish, through interlacing boughs.  Sometimes
one could hear parrots scream overhead, but no wild creatures
showed themselves, except once a snake that swam hurriedly away and
disappeared among the water hyacinth.

'How long before we get to the village?' Elizabeth called back to
Flory.  He was in a larger canoe behind, together with Flo and Ko
S'la, paddled by a wrinkly old woman dressed in rags.

'How far, grandmama?' Flory asked the canoe-woman.

The old woman took her cigar out of her mouth and rested her paddle
on her knees to think.  'The distance a man can shout,' she said
after reflection.

'About half a mile,' Flory translated.

They had come two miles.  Elizabeth's back was aching.  The canoes
were liable to upset at a careless moment, and you had to sit bolt
upright on the narrow backless seat, keeping your feet as well as
possible out of the bilge, with dead prawns in it, that sagged to
and fro at the bottom.  The Burman who paddled Elizabeth was sixty
years old, half naked, leaf-brown, with a body as perfect as that
of a young man.  His face was battered, gentle and humorous.  His
black cloud of hair, finer than that of most Burmans, was knotted
loosely over one ear, with a wisp or two tumbling across his cheek.
Elizabeth was nursing her uncle's gun across her knees.  Flory had
offered to take it, but she had refused; in reality, the feel of it
delighted her so much that she could not bring herself to give it
up.  She had never had a gun in her hand until today.  She was
wearing a rough skirt with brogue shoes and a silk shirt like a
man's, and she knew that with her Terai hat they looked well on
her.  She was very happy, in spite of her aching back and the hot
sweat that tickled her face, and the large, speckled mosquitoes
that hummed round her ankles.

The stream narrowed and the beds of water hyacinth gave place to
steep banks of glistening mud, like chocolate.  Rickety thatched
huts leaned far out over the stream, their piles driven into its
bed.  A naked boy was standing between two of the huts, flying a
green beetle on a piece of thread like a kite.  He yelled at the
sight of the Europeans, whereat more children appeared from
nowhere.  The old Burman guided the canoe to a jetty made of a
single palm-trunk laid in the mud--it was covered with barnacles
and so gave foothold--and sprang out and helped Elizabeth ashore.
The others followed with the bags and cartridges, and Flo, as she
always did on these occasions, fell into the mud and sank as deep
as the shoulder.  A skinny old gentleman wearing a magenta paso,
with a mole on his cheek from which four yard-long grey hairs
sprouted, came forward shikoing and cuffing the heads of the
children who had gathered round the jetty.

'The village headman,' Flory said.

The old man led the way to his house, walking ahead with an
extraordinary crouching gait, like a letter L upside down--the
result of rheumatism combined with the constant shikoing needed in
a minor Government official.  A mob of children marched rapidly
after the Europeans, and more and more dogs, all yapping and
causing Flo to shrink against Flory's heels.  In the doorway of
every hut clusters of moonlike, rustic faces gaped at the
'Ingaleikma'.  The village was darkish under the shade of broad
leaves.  In the rains the creek would flood, turning the lower
parts of the village into a squalid wooden Venice where the
villagers stepped from their front doors into their canoes.

The headman's house was a little bigger than the others, and it had
a corrugated iron roof, which, in spite of the intolerable din it
made during the rains, was the pride of the headman's life.  He had
foregone the building of a pagoda, and appreciably lessened his
chances of Nirvana, to pay for it.  He hastened up the steps and
gently kicked in the ribs a youth who was lying asleep on the
veranda.  Then he turned and shikoed again to the Europeans, asking
them to come inside.

'Shall we go in?' Flory said.  'I expect we shall have to wait half
an hour.'

'Couldn't you tell him to bring some chairs out on the veranda?'
Elizabeth said.  After her experience in Li Yeik's house she had
privately decided that she would never go inside a native house
again, if she could help it.

There was a fuss inside the house, and the headman, the youth and
some women dragged forth two chairs decorated in an extraordinary
manner with red hibiscus flowers, and also some begonias growing in
kerosene tins.  It was evident that a sort of double throne had
been prepared within for the Europeans.  When Elizabeth had sat
down the headman reappeared with a teapot, a bunch of very long,
bright green bananas, and six coal-black cheroots.  But when he had
poured her out a cup of tea Elizabeth shook her head, for the tea
looked, if possible, worse even than Li Yeik's.

The headman looked abashed and rubbed his nose.  He turned to Flory
and asked him whether the young thakin-ma would like some milk in
her tea.  He had heard that Europeans drank milk in their tea.  The
villages should, if it were desired, catch a cow and milk it.
However, Elizabeth still refused the tea; but she was thirsty, and
she asked Flory to send for one of the bottles of soda-water that
Ko S'la had brought in his bag.  Seeing this, the headman retired,
feeling guiltily that his preparations had been insufficient, and
left the veranda to the Europeans.

Elizabeth was still nursing her gun on her knees, while Flory
leaned against the veranda rail pretending to smoke one of the
headman's cheroots.  Elizabeth was pining for the shooting to
begin.  She plied Flory with innumerable questions.

'How soon can we start out?  Do you think we've got enough
cartridges?  How many beaters shall we take?  Oh, I do so hope we
have some luck!  You do think we'll get something, don't you?'

'Nothing wonderful, probably.  We're bound to get a few pigeons,
and perhaps jungle fowl.  They're out of season, but it doesn't
matter shooting the cocks.  They say there's a leopard round here,
that killed a bullock almost in the village last week.'

'Oh, a leopard!  How lovely if we could shoot it!'

'It's very unlikely, I'm afraid.  The only rule with this shooting
in Burma is to hope for nothing.  It's invariably disappointing.
The jungles teem with game, but as often as not you don't even get
a chance to fire your gun.'

'Why is that?'

'The jungle is so thick.  An animal may be five yards away and
quite invisible, and half the time they manage to dodge back past
the beaters.  Even when you see them it's only for a flash of a
second.  And again, there's water everywhere, so that no animal is
tied down to one particular spot.  A tiger, for instance, will roam
hundreds of miles if it suits him.  And with all the game there is,
they need never come back to a kill if there's anything suspicious
about it.  Night after night, when I was a boy, I've sat up over
horrible stinking dead cows, waiting for tigers that never came.'

Elizabeth wriggled her shoulder-blades against the chair.  It was a
movement that she made sometimes when she was deeply pleased.  She
loved Flory, really loved him, when he talked like this.  The most
trivial scrap of information about shooting thrilled her.  If only
he would always talk about shooting, instead of about books and Art
and that mucky poetry!  In a sudden burst of admiration she decided
that Flory was really quite a handsome man, in his way.  He looked
so splendidly manly, with his pagri-cloth shirt open at the throat,
and his shorts and puttees and shooting boots!  And his face,
lined, sunburned, like a soldier's face.  He was standing with his
birthmarked cheek away from her.  She pressed him to go on talking.

'DO tell me some more about tiger-shooting.  It's so awfully
interesting!'

He described the shooting, years ago, of a mangy old man-eater who
had killed one of his coolies.  The wait in the mosquito-ridden
machan; the tiger's eyes approaching through the dark jungle, like
great green lanterns; the panting, slobbering noise as he devoured
the coolie's body, tied to a stake below.  Flory told it all
perfunctorily enough--did not the proverbial Anglo Indian bore
always talk about tiger-shooting?--but Elizabeth wriggled her
shoulders delightedly once more.  He did not realize how such talk
as this reassured her and made up for all the times when he had
bored her and disquieted her.  Six shock-headed youths came down
the path, carrying dahs over their shoulders, and headed by a
stringy but active old man with grey hair.  They halted in front of
the headman's house, and one of them uttered a hoarse whoop,
whereat the headman appeared and explained that these were the
beaters.  They were ready to start now, if the young thakin-ma did
not find it too hot.

They set out.  The side of the village away from the creek was
protected by a hedge of cactus six feet high and twelve thick.
One went up a narrow lane of cactus, then along a rutted, dusty
bullock-cart track, with bamboos as tall as flagstaffs growing
densely on either side.  The beaters marched rapidly ahead in
single file, each with his broad dah laid along his forearm.  The
old hunter was marching just in front of Elizabeth.  His longyi was
hitched up like a loin-cloth, and his meagre thighs were tattooed
with dark blue patterns, so intricate that he might have been
wearing drawers of blue lace.  A bamboo the thickness of a man's
wrist had fallen and hung across the path.  The leading beater
severed it with an upward flick of his dah; the prisoned water
gushed out of it with a diamond-flash.  After half a mile they
reached the open fields, and everyone was sweating, for they had
walked fast and the sun was savage.

'That's where we're going to shoot, over there,' Flory said.

He pointed across the stubble, a wide dust-coloured plain, cut up
into patches of an acre or two by mud boundaries.  It was horribly
flat, and lifeless save for the snowy egrets.  At the far edge a
jungle of great trees rose abruptly, like a dark green cliff.  The
beaters had gone across to a small tree like a hawthorn twenty
yards away.  One of them was on his knees, shikoing to the tree and
gabbling, while the old hunter poured a bottle of some cloudy
liquid on to the ground.  The others stood looking on with serious,
bored faces, like men in church.

'What ARE those men doing?' Elizabeth said.

'Only sacrificing to the local gods.  Nats, they call them--a kind
of dryad.  They're praying to him to bring us good luck.'

The hunter came back and in a cracked voice explained that they
were to beat a small patch of scrub over to the right before
proceeding to the main jungle.  Apparently the Nat had counselled
this.  The hunter directed Flory and Elizabeth where to stand,
pointing with his dah.  The six beaters, plunged into the scrub;
they would make a detour and beat back towards the paddy-fields.
There were some bushes of the wild rose thirty yards from the
jungle's edge, and Flory and Elizabeth took cover behind one of
these, while Ko S'la squatted down behind another bush a little
distance away, holding Flo's collar and stroking her to keep her
quiet.  Flory always sent Ko S'la to a distance when he was
shooting, for he had an irritating trick of clicking his tongue if
a shot was missed.  Presently there was a far-off echoing sound--a
sound of tapping and strange hollow cries; the beat had started.
Elizabeth at once began trembling so uncontrollably that she could
not keep her gun-barrel still.  A wonderful bird, a little bigger
than a thrush, with grey wings and body of blazing scarlet, broke
from the trees and came towards them with a dipping flight.  The
tapping and the cries came nearer.  One of the bushes at the
jungle's edge waved violently--some large animal was emerging.
Elizabeth raised her gun and tried to steady it.  But it was only a
naked yellow beater, dah in hand.  He saw that he had emerged and
shouted to the others to join him.

Elizabeth lowered her gun.  'What's happened?'

'Nothing.  The beat's over.'

'So there was nothing there!' she cried in bitter disappointment.

'Never mind, one never gets anything the first beat.  We'll have
better luck next time.'

They crossed the lumpy stubble, climbing over the mud boundaries
that divided the fields, and took up their position opposite the
high green wall of the jungle.  Elizabeth had already learned how
to load her gun.  This time the beat had hardly started when Ko
S'la whistled sharply.

'Look out!' Flory cried.  'Quick, here they come!'

A flight of green pigeons were dashing towards them at incredible
speed, forty yards up.  They were like a handful of catapulted
stones whirling through the sky.  Elizabeth was helpless with
excitement.  For a moment she could not move, then she flung her
barrel into the air, somewhere in the direction of the birds, and
tugged violently at the trigger.  Nothing happened--she was pulling
at the trigger-guard.  Just as the birds passed overhead she found
the triggers and pulled both of them simultaneously.  There was a
deafening roar and she was thrown backwards a pace with her collar-
bone almost broken.  She had fired thirty yards behind the birds.
At the same moment she saw Flory turn and level his gun.  Two of
the pigeons, suddenly checked in their flight, swirled over and
dropped to the ground like arrows.  Ko S'la yelled, and he and Flo
raced after them.

'Look out!' said Flory, 'here's an imperial pigeon.  Let's have
him!'

A large heavy bird, with flight much slower than the others, was
flapping overhead.  Elizabeth did not care to fire after her
previous failure.  She watched Flory thrust a cartridge into the
breech and raise his gun, and the white plume of smoke leapt up
from the muzzle.  The bird planed heavily down, his wing broken.
Flo and Ko S'la came running excitedly up, Flo with the big
imperial pigeon in her mouth, and Ko S'la grinning and producing
two green pigeons from his Kachin bag.

Flory took one of the little green corpses to show to Elizabeth.
'Look at it.  Aren't they lovely things?  The most beautiful bird
in Asia.'

Elizabeth touched its smooth feathers with her finger-tip.  It
filled her with bitter envy, because she had not shot it.  And yet
it was curious, but she felt almost an adoration for Flory now that
she had seen how he could shoot.

'Just look at its breast-feathers; like a jewel.  It's murder to
shoot them.  The Burmese say that when you kill one of these birds
they vomit, meaning to say, "Look, here is all I possess, and I've
taken nothing of yours.  Why do you kill me?"  I've never seen one
do it, I must admit.'

'Are they good to eat?'

'Very.  Even so, I always feel it's a shame to kill them.'

'I wish I could do it like you do!' she said enviously.

'It's only a knack, you'll soon pick it up.  You know how to hold
your gun, and that's more than most people do when they start.'

However, at the next two beats, Elizabeth could hit nothing.  She
had learned not to fire both barrels at once, but she was too
paralysed with excitement ever to take aim.  Flory shot several
more pigeons, and a small bronze-wing dove with back as green as
verdigris.  The jungle fowl were too cunning to show themselves,
though one could hear them cluck-clucking all round, and once or
twice the sharp trumpet-call of a cock.  They were getting deeper
into the jungle now.  The light was greyish, with dazzling patches
of sunlight.  Whichever way one looked one's view was shut in by
the multitudinous ranks of trees, and the tangled bushes and
creepers that struggled round their bases like the sea round the
piles of a pier.  It was so dense, like a bramble bush extending
mile after mile, that one's eyes were oppressed by it.  Some of the
creepers were huge, like serpents.  Flory and Elizabeth struggled
along narrow game-tracks, up slippery banks, thorns tearing at
their clothes.  Both their shirts were drenched with sweat.  It was
stifling hot, with a scent of crushed leaves.  Sometimes for
minutes together invisible cidadas would keep up a shrill, metallic
pinging like the twanging of a steel guitar, and then, by stopping,
make a silence that startled one.

As they were walking to the fifth beat they came to a great peepul
tree in which, high up, one could hear imperial pigeons cooing.  It
was a sound like the far-off lowing of cows.  One bird fluttered
out and perched alone on the topmost bough, a small greyish shape.

'Try a sitting shot,' Flory said to Elizabeth.  'Get your sight on
him and pull off without waiting.  Don't shut your left eye.'

Elizabeth raised her gun, which had begun trembling as usual.  The
beaters halted in a group to watch, and some of them could not
refrain from clicking their tongues; they thought it queer and
rather shocking to see a woman handle a gun.  With a violent effort
of will Elizabeth kept her gun still for a second, and pulled the
trigger.  She did not hear the shot; one never does when it has
gone home.  The bird seemed to jump upwards from the bough, then
down it came, tumbling over and over, and stuck in a fork ten yards
up.  One of the beaters laid down his dah and glanced appraisingly
at the tree; then he walked to a great creeper, thick as a man's
thigh and twisted like a stick of barley sugar, that hung far out
from a bough.  He ran up the creeper as easily as though it had
been a ladder, walked upright along the broad bough, and brought
the pigeon to the ground.  He put it limp and warm into Elizabeth's
hand.

She could hardly give it up, the feel of it so ravished her.  She
could have kissed it, hugged it to her breast.  All the men, Flory
and Ko S'la and the beaters, smiled at one another to see her
fondling the dead bird.  Reluctantly, she gave it to Ko S'la to put
in the bag.  She was conscious of an extraordinary desire to fling
her arms round Flory's neck and kiss him; and in some way it was
the killing of the pigeon that made her feel this.

After the fifth beat the hunter explained to Flory that they must
cross a clearing that was used for growing pineapples, and would
beat another patch of jungle beyond.  They came out into sunlight,
dazzling after the jungle gloom.  The clearing was an oblong of an
acre or two hacked out of the jungle like a patch mown in long
grass, with the pineapples, prickly cactus-like plants, growing in
rows, almost smothered by weeds.  A low hedge of thorns divided the
field in the middle.  They had nearly crossed the field when there
was a sharp cock-a-doodle-doo from beyond the hedge.

'Oh, listen!' said Elizabeth, stopping.  'Was that a jungle cock?'

'Yes.  They come out to feed about this time.'

'Couldn't we go and shoot him?'

'We'll have a try if you like.  They're cunning beggars.  Look,
we'll stalk up the hedge until we get opposite where he is.  We'll
have to go without making a sound.'

He sent Ko S'la and the beaters on, and the two of them skirted the
field and crept along the hedge.  They had to bend double to keep
themselves out of sight.  Elizabeth was in front.  The hot sweat
trickled down her face, tickling her upper lip, and her heart was
knocking violently.  She felt Flory touch her heel from behind.
Both of them stood upright and looked over the hedge together.

Ten yards away a little cock the size of a bantam, was pecking
vigorously at the ground.  He was beautiful, with his long silky
neck-feathers, bunched comb and arching, laurel-green tail.  There
were six hens with him, smaller brown birds, with diamond-shaped
feathers like snake-scales on their backs.  All this Elizabeth and
Flory saw in the space of a second, then with a squawk and a whirr
the birds were up and flying like bullets for the jungle.  Instantly,
automatically as it seemed, Elizabeth raised her gun and fired.  It
was one of those shots where there is no aiming, no consciousness of
the gun in one's hand, when one's mind seems to fly behind the
charge and drive it to the mark.  She knew the bird was doomed even
before she pulled the trigger.  He tumbled, showered feathers thirty
yards away.  'Good shot, good shot!' cried Flory.  In their
excitement both of them dropped their guns, broke through the thorn
hedge and raced side by side to where the bird lay.

'Good shot!' Flory repeated, as excited as she.  'By Jove, I've
never seen anyone kill a flying bird their first day, never!  You
got your gun off like lightning.  It's marvellous!'

They were kneeling face to face with the dead bird between them.
With a shock they discovered that their hands, his right and her
left, were clasped tightly together.  They had run to the place
hand-in-hand without noticing it.

A sudden stillness came on them both, a sense of something
momentous that must happen.  Flory reached across and took her
other hand.  It came yieldingly, willingly.  For a moment they
knelt with their hands clasped together.  The sun blazed upon them
and the warmth breathed out of their bodies; they seemed to be
floating upon clouds of heat and joy.  He took her by the upper
arms to draw her towards him.

Then suddenly he turned his head away and stood up, pulling
Elizabeth to her feet.  He let go of her arms.  He had remembered
his birthmark.  He dared not do it.  Not here, not in daylight!
The snub it invited was too terrible.  To cover the awkwardness of
the moment he bent down and picked up the jungle cock.

'It was splendid,' he said.  'You don't need any teaching.  You can
shoot already.  We'd better get on to the next beat.'

They had just crossed the hedge and picked up their guns when there
was a series of shouts from the edge of the jungle.  Two of the
beaters were running towards them with enormous leaps, waving their
arms wildly in the air.

'What is it?' Elizabeth said.

'I don't know.  They've seen some animal or other.  Something good,
by the look of them.'

'Oh, hurrah!  Come on!'

They broke into a run and hurried across the field, breaking
through the pineapples and the stiff prickly weeds.  Ko S'la and
five of the beaters were standing in a knot all talking at once,
and the other two were beckoning excitedly to Flory and Elizabeth.
As they came up they saw in the middle of the group an old woman
who was holding up her ragged longyi with one hand and gesticulating
with a big cigar in the other.  Elizabeth could hear some word
that sounded like 'Char' repeated over and over again.

'What is it they're saying?' she said.

The beaters came crowding round Flory, all talking eagerly and
pointing into the jungle.  After a few questions he waved his hand
to silence them and turned to Elizabeth:

'I say, here's a bit of luck!  This old girl was coming through the
jungle, and she says that at the sound of the shot you fired just
now, she saw a leopard run across the path.  These fellows know
where he's likely to hide.  If we're quick they may be able to
surround him before he sneaks away, and drive him out.  Shall we
try it?'

'Oh, do let's!  Oh, what awful fun!  How lovely, how lovely if we
could get that leopard!'

'You understand it's dangerous?  We'll keep close together and
it'll probably be all right, but it's never absolutely safe on
foot.  Are you ready for that?'

'Oh, of course, of course!  I'm not frightened.  Oh, do let's be
quick and start!'

'One of you come with us, and show us the way,' he said to the
beaters.  'Ko S'la, put Flo on the leash and go with the others.
She'll never keep quiet with us.  We'll have to hurry,' he added to
Elizabeth.

Ko S'la and the beaters hurried off along the edge of the jungle.
They would strike in and begin beating farther up.  The other
beater, the same youth who had climbed the tree after the pigeon,
dived into the jungle, Flory and Elizabeth following.  With short
rapid steps, almost running, he led them through a labyrinth of
game-tracks.  The bushes trailed so low that sometimes one had
almost to crawl, and creepers hung across the path like trip-wires.
The ground was dusty and silent underfoot.  At some landmark in the
jungle the beater halted, pointed to the ground as a sign that this
spot would do, and put his finger on his lips to enjoin silence.
Flory took four SG cartridges from his pockets and took Elizabeth's
gun to load it silently.

There was a faint rustling behind them, and they all started.  A
nearly naked youth with a pellet-bow, come goodness knows whence,
had parted the bushes.  He looked at the beater, shook his head and
pointed up the path.  There was a dialogue of signs between the two
youths, then the beater seemed to agree.  Without speaking all four
stole forty yards along the path, round a bend, and halted again.
At the same moment a frightful pandemonium of yells, punctuated by
barks from Flo, broke out a few hundred yards away.

Elizabeth felt the beater's hand on her shoulder, pushing her
downwards.  They all four squatted down under cover of a prickly
bush, the Europeans in front, the Burmans behind.  In the distance
there was such a tumult of yells and the rattle of dahs against
tree-trunks that one could hardly believe six men could make so
much noise.  The beaters were taking good care that the leopard
should not turn back upon them.  Elizabeth watched some large, pale
yellow ants marching like soldiers over the thorns of the bush.
One fell on to her hand and crawled up her forearm.  She dared not
move to brush it away.  She was praying silently, 'Please God, let
the leopard come!  Oh please, God, let the leopard come!'

There was a sudden loud pattering on the leaves.  Elizabeth raised
her gun, but Flory shook his head sharply and pushed the barrel
down again.  A jungle fowl scuttled across the path with long noisy
strides.

The yells of the beaters seemed hardly to come any closer, and
this end of the jungle the silence was like a pall.  The ant on
Elizabeth's arm bit her painfully and dropped to the ground.  A
dreadful despair had begun to form in her heart; the leopard was
not coming, he had slipped away somewhere, they had lost him.  She
almost wished they had never heard of the leopard, the disappointment
was so agonizing.  Then she felt the beater pinch her elbow.  He was
craning his face forward, his smooth, dull yellow cheek only a few
inches from her own; she could smell the coco-nut oil in his hair.
His coarse lips were puckered as in a whistle; he had heard
something.  Then Flory and Elizabeth heard it too, the faintest
whisper, as though some creature of air were gliding through the
jungle, just brushing the ground with its foot.  At the same moment
the leopard's head and shoulders emerged from the undergrowth,
fifteen yards down the path.

He stopped with his forepaws on the path.  They could see his low,
flat-eared head, his bare eye-tooth and his thick, terrible
forearm.  In the shadow he did not look yellow but grey.  He was
listening intently.  Elizabeth saw Flory spring to his feet, raise
his gun and pull the trigger instantly.  The shot roared, and
almost simultaneously there was a heavy crash as the brute dropped
flat in the weeds.  'Look out!' Flory cried, 'he's not done for!'
He fired again, and there was a fresh thump as the shot went home.
The leopard gasped.  Flory threw open his gun and felt in his
pocket for a cartridge, then flung all his cartridges on to the
path and fell on his knees, searching rapidly among them.

'Damn and blast it!' he cried.  'There isn't a single SG among
them.  Where in hell did I put them?'

The leopard had disappeared as he fell.  He was thrashing about in
the undergrowth like a great, wounded snake, and crying out with a
snarling, sobbing noise, savage and pitiful.  The noise seemed to
be coming nearer.  Every cartridge Flory turned up had 6 or 8
marked on the end.  The rest of the large-shot cartridges had, in
fact, been left with Ko S'la.  The crashing and snarling were now
hardly five yards away, but they could see nothing, the jungle was
so thick.

The two Burmans were crying out 'Shoot!  Shoot!  Shoot!'  The sound
of 'Shoot!  Shoot!' got farther away--they were skipping for the
nearest climbable trees.  There was a crash in the undergrowth so
close that it shook the bush by which Elizabeth was standing.

'By God, he's almost on us!' Flory said.  'We must turn him
somehow.  Let fly at the sound.'

Elizabeth raised her gun.  Her knees were knocking like castanets,
but her hand was as steady as stone.  She fired rapidly, once,
twice.  The crashing noise receded.  The leopard was crawling away,
crippled but swift, and still invisible.

'Well done!  You've scared him,' Flory said.

'But he's getting away!  He's getting away!' Elizabeth cried,
dancing about in agitation.  She made to follow him.  Flory jumped
to his feet and pulled her back.

'No fear!  You stay here.  Wait!'

He slipped two of the small-shot cartridges into his gun and ran
after the sound of the leopard.  For a moment Elizabeth could not
see either beast or man, then they reappeared in a bare patch
thirty yards away.  The leopard was writhing along on his belly,
sobbing as he went.  Flory levelled his gun and fired at four
yards' distance.  The leopard jumped like a cushion when one hits
it, then rolled over, curled up and lay still.  Flory poked the
body with his gun-barrel.  It did not stir.

'It's all right, he's done for,' he called.  'Come and have a look
at him.'

The two Burmans jumped down from their tree, and they and Elizabeth
went across to where Flory was standing.  The leopard--it was a
male--was lying curled up with his head between his forepaws.  He
looked much smaller than he had looked alive; he looked rather
pathetic, like a dead kitten.  Elizabeth's knees were still
quivering.  She and Flory stood looking down at the leopard, close
together, but not clasping hands this time.

It was only a moment before Ko S'la and the others came up,
shouting with glee.  Flo gave one sniff at the dead leopard, then
down went her tail and she bolted fifty yards, whimpering.  She
could not be induced to come near him again.  Everyone squatted
down round the leopard and gazed at him.  They stroked his
beautiful white belly, soft as a hare's, and squeezed his broad
pugs to bring out the claws, and pulled back his black lips to
examine the fangs.  Presently two of the beaters cut down a tall
bamboo and slung the leopard upon it by his paws, with his long
tail trailing down, and then they marched back to the village in
triumph.  There was no talk of further shooting, though the light
still held.  They were all, including the Europeans, too anxious to
get home and boast of what they had done.

Flory and Elizabeth walked side by side across the stubble field.
The others were thirty yards ahead with the guns and the leopard,
and Flo was slinking after them a long way in the rear.  The sun
was going down beyond the Irrawaddy.  The light shone level across
the field, gilding the stubble stalks, and striking into their
faces with a yellow, gentle beam.  Elizabeth's shoulder was almost
touching Flory's as they walked.  The sweat that had drenched their
shirts had dried again.  They did not talk much.  They were happy
with that inordinate happiness that comes of exhaustion and
achievement, and with which nothing else in life--no joy of either
the body or the mind--is even able to be compared.

'The leopard skin is yours,' Flory said as they approached the
village.

'Oh, but you shot him!'

'Never mind, you stick to the skin.  By Jove, I wonder how many of
the women in this country would have kept their heads like you did!
I can just see them screaming and fainting.  I'll get the skin
cured for you in Kyauktada jail.  There's a convict there who can
cure skins as soft as velvet.  He's doing a seven-year sentence, so
he's had time to learn the job.'

'Oh well, thanks awfully.'

No more was said for the present.  Later, when they had washed off
the sweat and dirt, and were fed and rested, they would meet again
at the Club.  They made no rendezvous, but it was understood
between them that they would meet.  Also, it was understood that
Flory would ask Elizabeth to marry him, though nothing was said
about this either.

At the village Flory paid the beaters eight annas each, superintended
the skinning of the leopard, and gave the headman a bottle of beer
and two of the imperial pigeons.  The skin and skull were packed
into one of the canoes.  All the whiskers had been stolen, in spite
of Ko S'la's efforts to guard them.  Some young men of the village
carried off the carcass in order to eat the heart and various other
organs, the eating of which they believed would make them strong and
swift like the leopard.



15


When Flory arrived at the Club he found the Lackersteens in an
unusually morose mood.  Mrs Lackersteen was sitting, as usual, in
the best place under the punkah, and was reading the Civil List,
the Debrett of Burma.  She was in a bad temper with her husband,
who had defied her by ordering a 'large peg' as soon as he reached
the Club, and was further defying her by reading the Pink'un.
Elizabeth was alone in the stuffy little library, turning over the
pages of an old copy of Blackwood's.

Since parting with Flory, Elizabeth had had a very disagreeable
adventure.  She had come out of her bath and was half-way through
dressing for dinner when her uncle had suddenly appeared in her
room--pretext, to hear some more about the day's shooting--and
begun pinching her leg in a way that simply could not be
misunderstood.  Elizabeth was horrified.  This was her first
introduction to the fact that some men are capable of making love
to their nieces.  We live and learn.  Mr Lackersteen had tried to
carry the thing off as a joke, but he was too clumsy and too nearly
drunk to succeed.  It was fortunate that his wife was out of
hearing, or there might have been a first-rate scandal.

After this, dinner was an uncomfortable meal.  Mr Lackersteen was
sulking.  What rot it was, the way these women put on airs and
prevented you from having a good time!  The girl was pretty enough
to remind him of the Illustrations in La Vie Parisienne, and damn
it! wasn't he paying for her keep?  It was a shame.  But for
Elizabeth the position was very serious.  She was penniless and had
no home except her uncle's house.  She had come eight thousand
miles to stay here.  It would be terrible if after only a fortnight
her uncle's house were to be made uninhabitable for her.

Consequently, one thing was much surer in her mind than it had
been: that if Flory asked her to marry him (and he would, there was
little doubt of it), she would say yes.  At another time it was
just possible that she would have decided differently.  This
afternoon, under the spell of that glorious, exciting, altogether
'lovely' adventure, she had come near to loving Flory; as near as,
in his particular case, she was able to come.  Yet even after that,
perhaps, her doubts would have returned.  For there had always been
something dubious about Flory; his age, his birthmark, his queer,
perverse way of talking--that 'highbrow' talk that was at once
unintelligible and disquieting.  There had been days when she had
even disliked him.  But now her uncle's behaviour had turned the
scale.  Whatever happened she had got to escape from her uncle's
house, and that soon.  Yes, undoubtedly she would marry Flory when
he asked her!

He could see her answer in her face as he came into the library.
Her air was gentler, more yielding than he had known it.  She was
wearing the same lilac-coloured frock that she had worn that first
morning when he met her, and the sight of the familiar frock gave
him courage.  It seemed to bring her nearer to him, taking away the
strangeness and the elegance that had sometimes unnerved him.

He picked up the magazine she had been reading and made some
remark; for a moment they chattered in the banal way they so seldom
managed to avoid.  It is strange how the drivelling habits of
conversation will persist into almost all moments.  Yet even as
they chattered they found themselves drifting to the door and then
outside, and presently to the big frangipani tree by the tennis
court.  It was the night of the full moon.  Flaring like a white-
hot coin, so brilliant that it hurt one's eyes, the moon swam
rapidly upwards in a sky of smoky blue, across which drifted a few
wisps of yellowish cloud.  The stars were all invisible.  The
croton bushes, by day hideous things like jaundiced laurels, were
changed by the moon into jagged black and white designs like
fantastic wood-cuts.  By the compound fence two Dravidian coolies
were walking down the road, transfigured, their white rags
gleaming.  Through the tepid air the scent streamed from the
frangipani trees like some intolerable compound out of a penny-in-
the-slot machine.

'Look at the moon, just look at it!' Flory said.  'It's like a
white sun.  It's brighter than an English winter day.'

Elizabeth looked up into the branches of the frangipani tree, which
the moon seemed to have changed into rods of silver.  The light lay
thick, as though palpable, on everything, crusting the earth and
the rough bark of trees like some dazzling salt, and every leaf
seemed to bear a freight of solid light, like snow.  Even
Elizabeth, indifferent to such things, was astonished.

'It's wonderful!  You never see moonlight like that at Home.  It's
so--so--'  No adjective except 'bright' presenting itself, she was
silent.  She had a habit of leaving her sentences unfinished, like
Rosa Dartle, though for a different reason.

'Yes, the old moon does her best in this country.  How that tree
does stink, doesn't it?  Beastly, tropical thing!  I hate a tree
that blooms all the year round, don't you?'

He was talking half abstractedly, to cover the time till the
coolies should be out of sight.  As they disappeared he put his arm
round Elizabeth's shoulder, and then, when she did not start or
speak, turned her round and drew her against him.  Her head came
against his breast, and her short hair grazed his lips.  He put his
hand under her chin and lifted her face up to meet his.  She was
not wearing her spectacles.

'You don't mind?'

'No.'

'I mean, you don't mind my--this thing of mine?' he shook his head
slightly to indicate the birthmark.  He could not kiss her without
first asking this question.

'No, no.  Of course not.'

A moment after their mouths met he felt her bare arms settle
lightly round his neck.  They stood pressed together, against the
smooth trunk of the frangipani tree, body to body, mouth to mouth,
for a minute or more.  The sickly scent of the tree came mingling
with the scent of Elizabeth's hair.  And the scent gave him a
feeling of stultification, of remoteness from Elizabeth, even
though she was in his arms.  All that that alien tree symbolized
for him, his exile, the secret, wasted years--it was like an
unbridgeable gulf between them.  How should he ever make her
understand what it was that he wanted of her?  He disengaged
himself and pressed her shoulders gently against the tree, looking
down at her face, which he could see very clearly though the moon
was behind her.

'It's useless trying to tell you what you mean to me,' he said.
'"What you mean to me!"  These blunted phrases!  You don't know,
you can't know, how much I love you.  But I've got to try and tell
you.  There's so much I must tell you.  Had we better go back to
the Club?  They may come looking for us.  We can talk on the
veranda.'

'Is my hair very untidy?' she said.

'It's beautiful.'

'But has it got untidy?  Smooth it for me, would you, please?'

She bent her head towards him, and he smoothed the short, cool
locks with his hand.  The way she bent her head to him gave him a
curious feeling of intimacy, far more intimate than the kiss, as
though he had already been her husband.  Ah, he must have her, that
was certain!  Only by marrying her could his life be salvaged.  In
a moment he would ask her.  They walked slowly through the cotton
bushes and back to the Club, his arm still round her shoulder.

'We can talk on the veranda,' he repeated.  'Somehow, we've never
really talked, you and I.  My God, how I've longed all these years
for somebody to talk to!  How I could talk to you, interminably,
interminably!  That sounds boring.  I'm afraid it will be boring.
I must ask you to put up with it for a little while.'

She made a sound of remonstrance at the word 'boring'.

'No, it is boring, I know that.  We Anglo-Indians are always looked
on as bores.  And we ARE bores.  But we can't help it.  You see,
there's--how shall I say?--a demon inside us driving us to talk.
We walk about under a load of memories which we long to share and
somehow never can.  It's the price we pay for coming to this
country.'

They were fairly safe from interruption on the side veranda, for
there was no door opening directly upon it.  Elizabeth had sat down
with her arms on the little wicker table, but Flory remained
strolling back and forth, with his hands in his coatpockets,
stepping into the moonlight that streamed beneath the eastern eaves
of the veranda, and back into the shadows.

'I said just now that I loved you.  Love!  The word's been used
till it's meaningless.  But let me try to explain.  This afternoon
when you were there shooting with me, I thought, my God! here at
last is somebody who can share my life with me, but really share
it, really LIVE it with me--do you see--'

He was going to ask her to marry him--indeed, he had intended to
ask her without more delay.  But the words were not spoken yet;
instead, he found himself talking egoistically on and on.  He could
not help it.  It was so important that she should understand
something of what his life in this country had been; that she
should grasp the nature of the loneliness that he wanted her to
nullify.  And it was so devilishly difficult to explain.  It is
devilish to suffer from a pain that is all but nameless.  Blessed
are they who are stricken only with classifiable diseases!  Blessed
are the poor, the sick, the crossed in love, for at least other
people know what is the matter with them and will listen to their
belly-achings with sympathy.  But who that has not suffered it
understands the pain of exile?  Elizabeth watched him as he moved
to and fro, in and out of the pool of moonlight that turned his
silk coat to silver.  Her heart was still knocking from the kiss,
and yet her thoughts wandered as he talked.  Was he going to ask
her to marry him?  He was being so slow about it!  She was dimly
aware that he was saying something about loneliness.  Ah, of
course!  He was telling her about the loneliness she would have to
put up with in the jungle, when they were married.  He needn't have
troubled.  Perhaps you did get rather lonely in the jungle
sometimes?  Miles from anywhere, no cinemas, no dances, no one but
each other to talk to, nothing to do in the evenings except read--
rather a bore, that.  Still, you could have a gramophone.  What a
difference it would make when those new portable radio sets got out
to Burma!  She was about to say this when he added:

'Have I made myself at all clear to you?  Have you got some picture
of the life we live here?  The foreignness, the solitude, the
melancholy!  Foreign trees, foreign flowers, foreign landscapes,
foreign faces.  It's all as alien as a different planet.  But do
you see--and it's this that I so want you to understand--do you
see, it mightn't be so bad living on a different planet, it might
even be the most interesting thing imaginable, if you had even one
person to share it with.  One person who could see it with eyes
something like your own.  This country's been a kind of solitary
hell to me--it's so to most of us--and yet I tell you it could
be a paradise if one weren't alone.  Does all this seem quite
meaningless?'

He had stopped beside the table, and he picked up her hand.  In the
half-darkness he could see her face only as a pale oval, like a
flower, but by the feeling of her hand he knew instantly that she
had not understood a word of what he was saying.  How should she,
indeed?  It was so futile, this meandering talk!  He would say to
her at once, Will you marry me?  Was there not a lifetime to talk
in?  He took her other hand and drew her gently to her feet.

'Forgive me all this rot I've been talking.'

'It's all right,' she murmured indistinctly, expecting that he was
about to kiss her.

'No, it's rot talking like that.  Some things will go into words,
some won't.  Besides, it was an impertinence to go belly-aching on
and on about myself.  But I was trying to lead up to something.
Look, this is what I wanted to say.  Will--'

'Eliz-a-beth!'

It was Mrs Lackersteen's high-pitched, plaintive voice, calling
from within the Club.

'Elizabeth?  Where are you, Elizabeth?'

Evidently she was near the front door--would be on the veranda in a
moment.  Flory pulled Elizabeth against him.  They kissed hurriedly.
He released her, only holding her hands.

'Quickly, there's just time.  Answer me this.  Will you--'

But that sentence never got any further.  At the same moment
something extraordinary happened under his feet--the floor was
surging and rolling like a sea--he was staggering, then dizzily
falling, hitting his upper arm a thump as the floor rushed towards
him.  As he lay there he found himself jerked violently backwards
and forwards as though some enormous beast below were rocking the
whole building on its back.

The drunken floor righted itself very suddenly, and Flory sat up,
dazed but not much hurt.  He dimly noticed Elizabeth sprawling
beside him, and screams coming from within the Club.  Beyond the
gate two Burmans were racing through the moonlight with their long
hair streaming behind them.  They were yelling at the top of their
voices:

'Nga Yin is shaking himself!  Nga Yin is shaking himself!'

Flory watched them unintelligently.  Who was Nga Yin?  Nga is the
prefix given to criminals.  Nga Yin must be a dacoit.  Why was he
shaking himself?  Then he remembered.  Nga Yin was a giant supposed
by the Burmese to be buried, like Typhaeus, beneath the crust of
the earth.  Of course!  It was an earthquake.

'An earthquake!' he exclaimed, and he remembered Elizabeth and
moved to pick her up.  But she was already sitting up, unhurt, and
rubbing the back of her head.

'Was that an earthquake?' she said in a rather awed voice.

Mrs Lackersteen's tall form came creeping round the corner of the
veranda, clinging to the wall like some elongated lizard.  She was
exclaiming hysterically:

'Oh dear, an earthquake!  Oh, what a dreadful shock!  I can't bear
it--my heart won't stand it!  Oh dear, oh dear!  An earthquake!'

Mr Lackersteen tottered after her, with a strange ataxic step
caused partly by earth-tremors and partly by gin.

'An earthquake, dammit!' he said.

Flory and Elizabeth slowly picked themselves up.  They all went
inside, with that queer feeling in the soles of the feet that one
has when one steps from a rocking boat on to the shore.  The old
butler was hurrying from the servants' quarters, thrusting his
pagri on his head as he came, and a troop of twittering chokras
after him.

'Earthquake, sir, earthquake!' he bubbled eagerly.

'I should damn well think it was an earthquake,' said Mr Lackersteen
as he lowered himself cautiously into a chair.  'Here, get some
drinks, butler.  By God, I could do with a nip of something after
that.'

They all had a nip of something.  The butler, shy yet beaming,
stood on one leg beside the table, with the tray in his hand.
'Earthquake, sir, BIG earthquake!' he repeated enthusiastically.
He was bursting with eagerness to talk; so, for that matter, was
everyone else.  An extraordinary joie de vivre had come over them
all as soon as the shaky feeling departed from their legs.  An
earthquake is such fun when it is over.  It is so exhilarating to
reflect that you are not, as you well might be, lying dead under a
heap of ruins.  With one accord they all burst out talking:  'My
dear, I've never HAD such a shock--I fell absolutely FLAT on my
back--I thought it was a dam' pariah dog scratching itself under
the floor--I thought it must be an explosion somewhere--' and so on
and so forth; the usual earthquake-chatter.  Even the butler was
included in the conversation.

'I expect you can remember ever so many earthquakes can't you
butler?' said Mrs Lackersteen, quite graciously, for her.

'Oh yes, madam, many earthquakes!  1887, 1899, 1906, 1912--many,
many I can remember, madam!'

'The 1912 one was a biggish one,' Flory said.

'Oh, sir, but 1906 was bigger!  Very bad shock, sir!  And big
heathen idol in the temple fall down on top of the thathanabaing,
that is Buddhist bishop, madam, which the Burmese say mean bad omen
for failure of paddy crop and foot-and-mouth disease.  Also in 1887
my first earthquake I remember, when I was a little chokra, and
Major Maclagan sahib was lying under the table and promising he
sign the teetotal pledge tomorrow morning.  He not know it was an
earthquake.  Also two cows was killed by falling roofs,' etc., etc.

The Europeans stayed in the Club till midnight, and the butler
popped into the room as many as half a dozen times, to relate a new
anecdote.  So far from snubbing him, the Europeans even encouraged
him to talk.  There is nothing like an earthquake for drawing
people together.  One more tremor, or perhaps two, and they would
have asked the butler to sit down at table with them.

Meanwhile, Flory's proposal went no further.  One cannot propose
marriage immediately after an earthquake.  In any case, he did not
see Elizabeth alone for the rest of that evening.  But it did not
matter, he knew that she was his now.  In the morning there would
be time enough.  On this thought, at peace in his mind, and dog-
tired after the long day, he went to bed.



16


The vultures in the big pyinkado trees by the cemetery flapped from
their dung-whitened branches, steadied themselves on the wing, and
climbed by vast spirals into the upper air.  It was early, but
Flory was out already.  He was going down to the Club, to wait
until Elizabeth came and then ask her formally to marry him.  Some
instinct, which he did not understand, prompted him to do it before
the other Europeans returned from the jungle.

As he came out of the compound gate he saw that there was a new
arrival at Kyauktada.  A youth with a long spear like a needle in
his hand was cantering across the maidan on a white pony.  Some
Sikhs, looking like sepoys, ran after him, leading two other
ponies, a bay and a chestnut, by the bridle.  When he came level
with him Flory halted on the road and shouted good morning.  He had
not recognized the youth, but it is usual in small stations to make
strangers welcome.  The other saw that he was hailed, wheeled his
pony negligently round and brought it to the side of the road.  He
was a youth of about twenty-live, lank but very straight, and
manifestly a cavalry officer.  He had one of those rabbit-like
faces common among English soldiers, with pale blue eyes and a
little triangle of fore-teeth visible between the lips; yet hard,
fearless and even brutal in a careless fashion--a rabbit, perhaps,
but a tough and martial rabbit.  He sat his horse as though he were
part of it, and he looked offensively young and fit.  His fresh
face was tanned to the exact shade that went with his light-
coloured eyes, and he was as elegant as a picture with his white
buckskin topi and his polo-boots that gleamed like an old
meerschaum pipe.  Flory felt uncomfortable in his presence from
the start.

'How d'you do?' said Flory.  'Have you just arrived?'

'Last night, got in by the late train.'  He had a surly, boyish
voice.  'I've been sent up here with a company of men to stand by
in case your local bad-mashes start any trouble.  My name's
Verrall--Military Police,' he added, not, however, inquiring
Flory's name in return.

'Oh yes.  We heard they were sending somebody.  Where are you
putting up?'

'Dak bungalow, for the time being.  There was some black beggar
staying there when I got in last night--Excise Officer or
something.  I booted him out.  This is a filthy hole, isn't it?' he
said with a backward movement of his head, indicating the whole of
Kyauktada.

'I suppose it's like the rest of these small stations.  Are you
staying long?'

'Only a month or so, thank God.  Till the rains break.  What a
rotten maidan you've got here, haven't you?  Pity they can't keep
this stuff cut,' he added, swishing the dried-up grass with the
point of his spear.  'Makes it so hopeless for polo or anything.'

'I'm afraid you won't get any polo here,' Flory said.  'Tennis is
the best we can manage.  There are only eight of us all told, and
most of us spend three-quarters of our time in the jungle.'

'Christ!  What a hole!'

After this there was a silence.  The tall, bearded Sikhs stood in a
group round their horses' heads, eyeing Flory without much favour.
It was perfectly clear that Verral was bored with the conversation
and wanted to escape.  Flory had never in his life felt so
completely de trop, or so old and shabby.  He noticed that
Verrall's pony was a beautiful Arab, a mare, with proud neck and
arching, plume-like tail; a lovely milk-white thing, worth several
thousands of rupees.  Verrall had already twitched the bridle to
turn away, evidently feeling that he had talked enough for one
morning.

'That's a wonderful pony of yours,' Flory said.

'She's not bad, better than these Burma scrubs.  I've come out to
do a bit of tent-pegging.  It's hopeless trying to knock a polo
ball about in this muck.  Hey, Hira Singh!' he called, and turned
his pony away.

The sepoy holding the bay pony handed his bridle to a companion,
ran to a spot forty yards away, and fixed a narrow boxwood peg in
the ground.  Verral took no further notice of Flory.  He raised his
spear and poised himself as though taking aim at the peg, while the
Indians backed their horses out of the way and stood watching
critically.  With a just perceptible movement Verrall dug his knees
into the pony's sides.  She bounded forward like a bullet from a
catapult.  As easily as a centaur the lank, straight youth leaned
over in the saddle, lowered his spear and plunged it clean through
the peg.  One of the Indians muttered gruffly 'Shabash!'  Verrall
raised his spear behind him in the orthodox fashion, and then,
pulling his horse to a canter, wheeled round and handed the
transfixed peg to the sepoy.

Verrall rode twice more at the peg, and hit it each time.  It was
done with matchless grace and with extraordinary solemnity.  The
whole group of men, Englishman and Indians, were concentrated upon
the business of hitting the peg as though it had been a religious
ritual.  Flory still stood watching, disregarded--Verrall's face
was one of those that are specially constructed for ignoring
unwelcome strangers--but from the very fact that he had been
snubbed unable to tear himself away.  Somehow, Verrall had filled
him with a horrible sense of inferiority.  He was trying to think
of some pretext for renewing the conversation, when he looked up
the hillside and saw Elizabeth, in pale blue, coming out of her
uncle's gate.  She must have seen the third transfixing of the peg.
His heart stirred painfully.  A thought occurred to him, one of
those rash thoughts that usually lead to trouble.  He called to
Verrall, who was a few yards away from him, and pointed with his
stick.

'Do these other two know how to do it?'

Verrall looked over his shoulder with a surly air.  He had expected
Flory to go away after being ignored.

'What?'

'Can these other two do it?' Flory repeated.

'The chestnut's not bad.  Bolts if you let him, though.'

'Let me have a shot at the peg, would you?'

'All right,' said Verrall ungraciously.  'Don't go and cut his
mouth to bits.'

A sepoy brought the pony, and Flory pretended to examine the curb-
chain.  In reality he was temporizing until Elizabeth should be
thirty or forty yards away.  He made up his mind that he would
stick the peg exactly at the moment when she passed (it is easy
enough on the small Burma ponies, provided that they will gallop
straight), and then ride up to her with it on his point.  That was
obviously the right move.  He did not want her to think that that
pink-faced young whelp was the only person who could ride.  He was
wearing shorts, which are uncomfortable to ride in, but he knew
that, like nearly everyone, he looked his best on horseback.

Elizabeth was approaching.  Flory stepped into the saddle, took the
spear from the Indian and waved it in greeting to Elizabeth.  She
made no response, however.  Probably she was shy in front of
Verrall.  She was looking away, towards the cemetery, and her
cheeks were pink.

'Chalo,' said Flory to the Indian, and then dug his knees into the
horse's sides.

The very next instant, before the horse had taken to bounds, Flory
found himself hurtling through the air, hitting the ground with a
crack that wrenched his shoulder almost out of joint, and rolling
over and over.  Mercifully the spear fell clear of him.  He lay
supine, with a blurred vision of blue sky and floating vultures.
Then his eyes focused on the khaki pagri and dark face of a Sikh,
bearded to the eyes, bending over him.

'What's happened?' he said in English, and he raised himself
painfully on his elbow.  The Sikh made some gruff answer and
pointed.  Flory saw the chestnut pony careering away over the
maidan, with the saddle under its belly.  The girth had not been
tightened, and had slipped round; hence his fall.

When Flory sat up he found that he was in extreme pain.  The right
shoulder of his shirt was torn open and already soaking with blood,
and he could feel more blood oozing from his cheek.  The hard earth
had grazed him.  His hat, too, was gone.  With a deadly pang he
remembered Elizabeth, and he saw her coming towards him, barely ten
yards away, looking straight at him as he sprawled there so
ignominiously.  My God, my God! he thought, O my God, what a fool I
must look!  The thought of it even drove away the pain of the fall.
He clapped a hand over his birth-mark, though the other cheek was
the damaged one.

'Elizabeth!  Hullo, Elizabeth!  Good morning!'

He had called out eagerly, appealingly, as one does when one is
conscious of looking a fool.  She did not answer, and what was
almost incredible, she walked on without pausing even for an
instant, as though she had neither seen nor heard him.

'Elizabeth!' he called again, taken aback; 'did you see my fall?
The saddle slipped.  The fool of a sepoy hadn't--'

There was no question that she had heard him now.  She turned her
face full upon him for a moment, and looked at him and through him
as though he had not existed.  Then she gazed away into the
distance beyond the cemetery.  It was terrible.  He called after
her in dismay--

'Elizabeth!  I say, Elizabeth!'

She passed on without a word, without a sign, without a look.  She
was walking sharply down the road, with a click of heels, her back
turned upon him.

The sepoys had come round him now, and Verrall, too, had ridden
across to where Flory lay.  Some of the sepoys had saluted
Elizabeth; Verrall had ignored her, perhaps not seeing her.  Flory
rose stiffly to his feet.  He was badly bruised, but no bones were
broken.  The Indians brought him his hat and stick, but they did
not apologize for their carelessness.  They looked faintly
contemptuous, as though thinking that he had only got what he
deserved.  It was conceivable that they had loosened the girth on
purpose.

'The saddle slipped,' said Flory in the weak, stupid way that one
does at such moments.

'Why the devil couldn't you look at it before you got up?' said
Verrall briefly.  'You ought to know these beggars aren't to be
trusted.'

Having said which he twitched his bridle and rode away, feeling the
incident closed.  The sepoys followed him without saluting Flory.
When Flory reached his gate he looked back and saw that the
chestnut pony had already been caught and re-saddled, and Verrall
was tent-pegging upon it.

The fall had so shaken him that even now he could hardly collect
his thoughts.  What could have made her behave like that?  She had
seen him lying bloody and in pain, and she had walked past him as
though he had been a dead dog.  How could it have happened?  HAD it
happened?  It was incredible.  Could she be angry with him?  Could
he have offended her in any way?  All the servants were waiting at
the compound fence.  They had come out to watch the tent-pegging,
and every one of them had seen his bitter humiliation.  Ko S'la ran
part of the way down the hill to meet him, with concerned face.

'The god has hurt himself?  Shall I carry the god back to the
house?'

'No,' said the god.  'Go and get me some whisky and a clean shirt.'

When they got back to the house Ko S'la made Flory sit down on the
bed and peeled off his torn shirt which the blood had stuck to his
body.  Ko S'la clicked his tongue.

'Ah ma lay?  These cuts are full of dirt.  You ought not to play
these children's games on strange ponies, thakin.  Not at your age.
It is too dangerous.'

'The saddle slipped,' Flory said.

'Such games,' pursued Ko S'la, 'are all very well for the young
police officer.  But you are no longer young, thakin.  A fall hurts
at your age.  You should take more care of yourself.'

'Do you take me for an old man?' said Flory angrily.  His shoulder
was smarting abominably.

'You are thirty-five, thakin,' said Ko S'la politely but firmly.

It was all very humiliating.  Ma Pu and Ma Yi, temporarily at
peace, had brought a pot of some dreadful mess which they declared
was good for cuts.  Flory told Ko S'la privately to throw it out of
the window and substitute boracic ointment.  Then, while he sat in
a tepid bath and Ko S'la sponged the dirt out of his grazes, he
puzzled helplessly, and, as his head grew clearer, with a deeper
and deeper dismay, over what had happened.  He had offended her
bitterly, that was clear.  But, when he had not even seen her since
last night, how COULD he have offended her?  And there was no even
plausible answer.

He explained to Ko S'la several times over that his fall was due to
the saddle slipping.  But Ko S'la, though sympathetic, clearly did
not believe him.  To the end of his days, Flory perceived, the fall
would be attributed to his own bad horsemanship.  On the other
hand, a fortnight ago, he had won undeserved renown by putting to
flight the harmless buffalo.  Fate is even-handed, after a fashion.



17


Flory did not see Elizabeth again until he went down to the Club
after dinner.  He had not, as he might have done, sought her out
and demanded an explanation.  His face unnerved him when he looked
at it in the glass.  With the birthmark on one side and the graze
on the other it was so woebegone, so hideous, that he dared not
show himself by daylight.  As he entered the Club lounge he put his
hand over his birthmark--pretext, a mosquito bite on the forehead.
It would have been more than his nerve was equal to, not to cover
his birthmark at such a moment.  However, Elizabeth was not there.

Instead, he tumbled into an unexpected quarrel.  Ellis and
Westfield had just got back from the jungle, and they were sitting
drinking, in a sour mood.  News had come from Rangoon that the
editor of the Burmese Patriot had been given only four months'
imprisonment for his libel against Mr Macregor, and Ellis was
working himself up into a rage over this light sentence.  As soon
as Flory came in Ellis began baiting him with remarks about 'that
little nigger Very-slimy'.  At the moment the very thought of
quarrelling made Flory yawn, but he answered incautiously, and
there was an argument.  It grew heated, and after Ellis had called
Flory a nigger's Nancy Boy and Flory had replied in kind, Westfield
too lost his temper.  He was a good-natured man, but Flory's
Bolshie ideas sometimes annoyed him.  He could never understand
why, when there was so clearly a right and a wrong opinion about
everything, Flory always seemed to delight in choosing the wrong
one.  He told Flory 'not to start talking like a damned Hyde Park
agitator', and then read him a snappish little sermon, taking as
his text the five chief beatitudes of the pukka sahib, namely:


Keeping up our prestige,
The firm hand (without the velvet glove),
We white men must hang together,
Give them an inch and they'll take an ell, and
Esprit de Corps.


All the while his anxiety to see Elizabeth was so gnawing at
Flory's heart that he could hardly hear what was said to him.
Besides, he had heard it all so often, so very often--a hundred
times, a thousand times it might be, since his first week in
Rangoon, when his burra sahib (an old Scotch gin-soaker and great
breeder of racing ponies, afterwards warned off the turf for some
dirty business of running the same horse under two different names)
saw him take off his topi to pass a native funeral and said to him
reprovingly:  'Remember laddie, always remember, we are sahiblog
and they are dirrt!'  It sickened him, now, to have to listen to
such trash.  So he cut Westfield short by saying blasphemously:

'Oh, shut up!  I'm sick of the subject.  Veraswami's a damned good
fellow--a damned sight better than some white men I can think of.
Anyway, I'm going to propose his name for the Club when the general
meeting comes.  Perhaps he'll liven this bloody place up a bit.'

Whereat the row would have become serious if it had not ended as
most rows ended at the Club--with the appearance of the butler, who
had heard the raised voices.

'Did master call, sir?'

'No.  Go to hell,' said Ellis morosely.

The butler retired, but that was the end of the dispute for the
time being.  At this moment there were footsteps and voices
outside; the Lackersteens were arriving at the Club.

When they entered the lounge, Flory could not even nerve himself to
look directly at Elizabeth; but he noticed that all three of them
were much more smartly dressed than usual.  Mr Lackersteen was even
wearing a dinner-jacket--white, because of the season--and was
completely sober.  The boiled shirt and pique waistcoat seemed to
hold him upright and stiffen his moral fibre like a breastplate.
Mrs Lackersteen looked handsome and serpentine in a red dress.  In
some indefinable way all three gave the impression that they were
waiting to receive some distinguished guest.

When drinks had been called for, and Mrs Lackersteen had usurped
the place under the punkah, Flory took a chair on the outside of
the group.  He dared not accost Elizabeth yet.  Mrs Lackersteen had
begun talking in an extraordinary, silly manner about the dear
Prince of Wales, and putting on an accent like a temporarily
promoted chorus-girl playing the part of a duchess in a musical
comedy.  The others wondered privately what the devil was the
matter with her.  Flory had stationed himself almost behind
Elizabeth.  She was wearing a yellow frock, cut very short as the
fashion then was, with champagne-coloured stockings and slippers to
match, and she carried a big ostrich-feather fan.  She looked so
modish, so adult, that he feared her more than he had ever done.
It was unbelievable that he had ever kissed her.  She was talking
easily to all the others at once, and now and again he dared to put
a word into the general conversation; but she never answered him
directly, and whether or not she meant to ignore him, he could not
tell.

'Well,' said Mrs Lackersteen presently, 'and who's for a rubbah?'

She said quite distinctly a 'rubbah'.  Her accent was growing more
aristocratic with every word she uttered.  It was unaccountable.
It appeared that Ellis, Westfield and Mr Lackersteen were for a
'rubbah'.  Flory refused as soon as he saw that Elizabeth was not
playing.  Now or never was his chance to get her alone.  When they
all moved for the card-room, he saw with a mixture of fear and
relief that Elizabeth came last.  He stopped in the doorway,
barring her path.  He had turned dreadly pale.  She shrank from him
a little.

'Excuse me,' they both said simultaneously.

'One moment,' he said, and do what he would his voice trembled.
'May I speak to you?  You don't mind--there's something I must
say.'

'Will you please let me pass, Mr Flory?'

'Please!  Please!  We're alone now.  You won't refuse just to let
me speak?'

'What is it, then?'

'It's only this.  Whatever I've done to offend you--please tell me
what it is.  Tell me and let me put it right.  I'd sooner cut my
hand off than offend you.  Just tell me, don't let me go on not
even knowing what it is.'

'I really don't know what you're talking about.  "Tell you how
you've offended me?"  Why should you have OFFENDED me?'

'But I must have!  After the way you behaved!'

'"After the way I behaved?"  I don't know what you mean.  I don't
know why you're talking in this extraordinary way at all.'

'But you won't even speak to me!  This morning you cut me
absolutely dead.'

'Surely I can do as I like without being questioned?'

'But please, please!  Don't you see, you must see, what it's like
for me to be snubbed all of a sudden.  After all, only last night
you--'

She turned pink.  'I think it's absolutely--absolutely caddish of
you to mention such things!'

'I know, I know.  I know all that.  But what else can I do?  You
walked past me this morning as though I'd been a stone.  I know
that I've offended you in some way.  Can you blame me if I want to
know what it is that I've done?'

He was, as usual, making it worse with every word he said.  He
perceived that whatever he had done, to be made to speak of it
seemed to her worse than the thing itself.  She was not going to
explain.  She was going to leave him in the dark--snub him and then
pretend that nothing had happened; the natural feminine move.
Nevertheless he urged her again:

'Please tell me.  I can't let everything end between us like this.'

'"End between us"?  There was nothing to end,' she said coldly.

The vulgarity of this remark wounded him, and he said quickly:

'That wasn't like you, Elizabeth!  It's not generous to cut a man
dead after you've been kind to him, and then refuse even to tell
him the reason.  You might be straightforward with me.  Please tell
me what it is that I've done.'

She gave him an oblique, bitter look, bitter not because of what he
had done, but because he had made her speak of it.  But perhaps she
was anxious to end the scene, and she said:

'Well then, if you absolutely force me to speak of it--'

'Yes?'

'I'm told that at the very same time as you were pretending to--
well, when you were . . . with me--oh, it's too beastly!  I can't
speak of it.'

'Go on.'

'I'm told that you're keeping a Burmese woman.  And now, will you
please let me pass?'

With that she sailed--there was no other possible word for it--she
sailed past him with a swish of her short skirts, and vanished into
the card-room.  And he remained looking after her, too appalled to
speak, and looking unutterably ridiculous.

It was dreadful.  He could not face her after that.  He turned to
hurry out of the Club, and then dared not even pass the door of the
card-room, lest she should see him.  He went into the lounge,
wondering how to escape, and finally climbed over the veranda rail
and dropped on to the small square of lawn that ran down to the
Irrawaddy.  The sweat was running from his forehead.  He could have
shouted with anger and distress.  The accursed luck of it!  To be
caught out over a thing like that.  'Keeping a Burmese woman'--and
it was not even true!  But much use it would ever be to deny it.
Ah, what damned, evil chance could have brought it to her ears?

But as a matter of fact, it was no chance.  It had a perfectly
sound cause, which was also the cause of Mrs Lackersteen's curious
behaviour at the Club this evening.  On the previous night, just
before the earthquake, Mrs Lackersteen had been reading the Civil
List.  The Civil List (which tells you the exact income of every
official in Burma) was a source of inexhaustible interest to her.
She was in the middle of adding up the pay and allowances of a
Conservator of Forests whom she had once met in Mandalay, when it
occurred to her to look up the name of Lieutenant Verrall, who, she
had heard from Mr Macregor, was arriving at Kyauktada tomorrow with
a hundred Military Policemen.  When she found the name, she saw in
front of it two words that startled her almost out of her wits.

The words were 'The Honourable'!

The HONOURABLE!  Lieutenants the Honourable are rare anywhere, rare
as diamonds in the Indian Army, rare as dodos in Burma.  And when
you are the aunt of the only marriageable young woman within fifty
miles, and you hear that a lieutenant the Honourable is arriving no
later than tomorrow--well!  With dismay Mrs Lackersteen remembered
that Elizabeth was out in the garden with Flory--that drunken
wretch Flory, whose pay was barely seven hundred rupees a month,
and who, it was only too probable, was already proposing to her!
She hastened immediately to call Elizabeth inside, but at this
moment the earthquake intervened.  However, on the way home there
was an opportunity to speak.  Mrs Lackersteen laid her hand
affectionately on Elizabeth's arm and said in the tenderest voice
she had ever succeeded in producing:

'Of course you know, Elizabeth dear, that Flory is keeping a
Burmese woman?'

For a moment this deadly charge actually failed to explode.
Elizabeth was so new to the ways of the country that the remark
made no impression on her.  It sounded hardly more significant than
'keeping a parrot'.

'Keeping a Burmese woman?  What for?'

'What FOR?  My dear! what DOES a man keep a woman for?'

And, of course, that was that.

For a long time Flory remained standing by the river bank.  The
moon was up, mirrored in the water like a broad shield of electron.
The coolness of the outer air had changed Flory's mood.  He had not
even the heart to be angry any longer.  For he had perceived, with
the deadly self-knowledge and self-loathing that come to one at
such a time, that what had happened served him perfectly right.
For a moment it seemed to him that an endless procession of Burmese
women, a regiment of ghosts, were marching past him in the
moonlight.  Heavens, what numbers of them!  A thousand--no, but a
full hundred at the least.  'Eyes right!' he thought despondently.
Their heads turned towards him, but they had no faces, only
featureless discs.  He remembered a blue longyi here, a pair of
ruby ear-rings there, but hardly a face or a name.  The gods are
just and of our pleasant vices (pleasant, indeed!) make instruments
to plague us.  He had dirtied himself beyond redemption, and this
was his just punishment.

He made his way slowly through the croton bushes and round the
clubhouse.  He was too saddened to feel the full pain of the
disaster yet.  It would begin hurting, as all deep wounds do, long
afterwards.  As he passed through the gate something stirred the
leaves behind him.  He started.  There was a whisper of harsh
Burmese syllables.

'Pike-san pay-like!  Pike-san pay-like!'

He turned sharply.  The 'pike-san pay-like' ('Give me the money')
was repeated.  He saw a woman standing under the shadow of the gold
mohur tree.  It was Ma Hla May.  She stepped out into the moonlight
warily, with a hostile air, keeping her distance as though afraid
that he would strike her.  Her face was coated with powder, sickly
white in the moon, and it looked as ugly as a skull, and defiant.

She had given him a shock.  'What the devil are you doing here?' he
said angrily in English.

'Pike-san pay-like!'

'What money?  What do you mean?  Why are you following me about
like this?'

'Pike-san pay-like!' she repeated almost in a scream.  'The money
you promised me, thakin.  You said you would give me more money.  I
want it now, this instant!'

'How can I give it you now?  You shall have it next month.  I have
given you a hundred and fifty rupees already.'

To his alarm she began shrieking 'Pike-san pay-like!' and a number
of similar phrases almost at the top of her voice.  She seemed on
the verge of hysterics.  The volume of noise that she produced was
startling.

'Be quiet!  They'll hear you in the Club!' he exclaimed, and was
instantly sorry for putting the idea into her head.

'Aha!  NOW I know what will frighten you!  Give me the money this
instant, or I will scream for help and bring them all out here.
Quick, now, or I begin screaming!'

'You bitch!' he said, and took a step towards her.  She sprang
nimbly out of reach, whipped off her slipper, and stood defying
him.

'Be quick!  Fifty rupees now and the rest tomorrow.  Out with it!
Or I give a scream they can hear as far as the bazaar!'

Flory swore.  This was not the time for such a scene.  Finally he
took out his pocket-book, found twenty-five rupees in it, and threw
them on to the ground.  Ma Hla May pounced on the notes and counted
them.

'I said fifty rupees, thakin!'

'How can I give it you if I haven't got it?  Do you think I carry
hundreds of rupees about with me?'

'I said fifty rupees!'

'Oh, get out of my way!' he said in English, and pushed past her.

But the wretched woman would not leave him alone.  She began to
follow him up the road like a disobedient dog, screaming out 'Pike-
san pay-like!  Pike-san pay-like!' as though mere noise could bring
the money into existence.  He hurried, partly to draw her away from
the Club, partly in hopes of shaking her off, but she seemed ready
to follow him as far as the house if necessary.  After a while he
could not stand it any longer, and he turned to drive her back.

'Go away this instant!  If you follow me any farther you shall
never have another anna.'

'Pike-san pay-like!'

'You fool,' he said, 'what good is this doing?  How can I give you
the money when I have not another pice on me?'

'That is a likely story!'

He felt helplessly in his pockets.  He was so wearied that he would
have given her anything to be rid of her.  His fingers encountered
his cigarette-case, which was of gold.  He took it out.

'Here, if I give you this will you go away?  You can pawn it for
thirty rupees.'

Ma Hla May seemed to consider, then said sulkily, 'Give it me.'

He threw the cigarette-case on to the grass beside the road.  She
grabbed it and immediately sprang back clutching it to her ingyi,
as though afraid that he would take it away again.  He turned and
made for the house, thanking God to be out of the sound of her
voice.  The cigarette-case was the same one that she had stolen ten
days ago.

At the gate he looked back.  Ma Hla May was still standing at the
bottom of the hill, a greyish figurine in the moonlight.  She must
have watched him up the hill like a dog watching a suspicious
stranger out of sight.  It was queer.  The thought crossed his mind,
as it had a few days earlier when she sent him the blackmailing
letter, that her behaviour had been curious and unlike herself.  She
was showing a tenacity of which he would never have thought her
capable--almost, indeed, as though someone else were egging her on.



18


After the row overnight Ellis was looking forward to a week of
baiting Flory.  He had nicknamed him Nancy--short for nigger's
Nancy Boy, but the women did not know that--and was already
inventing wild scandals about him.  Ellis always invented scandals
about anyone with whom he had quarrelled--scandals which grew, by
repeated embroideries, into a species of saga.  Flory's incautious
remark that Dr Veraswami was a 'damned good fellow' had swelled
before long into a whole Daily Worker-ful of blasphemy and
sedition.

'On my honour, Mrs Lackersteen,' said Ellis--Mrs Lackersteen had
taken a sudden dislike to Flory after discovering the great secret
about Verrall, and she was quite ready to listen to Ellis's tales--
'on my honour, if you'd been there last night and heard the things
that man Flory was saying--well, it'd have made you shiver in your
shoes!'

'Really!  You know, I always thought he had such CURIOUS ideas.
What has he been talking about now?  Not SOCIALISM,  I hope?'

'Worse.'

There were long recitals.  However, to Ellis's disappointment,
Flory had not stayed in Kyauktada to be baited.  He had gone back
to camp the day after his dismissal by Elizabeth.  Elizabeth heard
most of the scandalous tales about him.  She understood his
character perfectly now.  She understood why it was that he had so
often bored her and irritated her.  He was a highbrow--her
deadliest word--a highbrow, to be classed with Lenin, A. J. Cook
and the dirty little poets in the Montparnasse cafes.  She could
have forgiven him even his Burmese mistress more easily than that.
Flory wrote to her three days later; a weak, stilted letter, which
he sent by hand--his camp was a day's march from Kyauktada.
Elizabeth did not answer.

It was lucky for Flory that at present he was too busy to have time
to think.  The whole camp was at sixes and sevens since his long
absence.  Nearly thirty coolies were missing, the sick elephant was
worse than ever, and a vast pile of teak logs which should have
been sent off ten days earlier were still waiting because the
engine would not work.  Flory, a fool about machinery, struggled
with the bowels of the engine until he was black with grease and Ko
S'la told him sharply that white men ought not to do 'coolie-work'.
The engine was finally persuaded to run, or at least to totter.
The sick elephant was discovered to be suffering from tapeworms.
As for the coolies, they had deserted because their supply of opium
had been cut off--they would not stay in the jungle without opium,
which they took as a prophylactic against fever.  U Po Kyin,
willing to do Flory a bad turn, had caused the Excise Officers to
make a raid and seize the opium.  Flory wrote to Dr Veraswami,
asking for his help.  The doctor sent back a quantity of opium,
illegally procured, medicine for the elephant and a careful letter
of instructions.  A tapeworm measuring twenty-one feet was
extracted.  Flory was busy twelve hours a day.  In the evening if
there was no more to do he would plunge into the jungle and walk
and walk until the sweat stung his eyes and his knees were bleeding
from the briers.  The nights were his bad time.  The bitterness of
what had happened was sinking into him, as it usually does, by slow
degrees.

Meanwhile, several days had passed and Elizabeth had not yet seen
Verrall at less than a hundred yards' distance.  It had been a
great disappointment when he had not appeared at the Club on the
evening of his arrival.  Mr Lackersteen was really quite angry when
he discovered that he had been hounded into his dinner-jacket for
nothing.  Next morning Mrs Lackersteen made her husband send an
officious note to the dakbungalow, inviting Verrall to the Club;
there was no answer, however.  More days passed, and Verrall made
no move to join in the local society.  He had even neglected his
official calls, not even bothering to present himself at Mr
Macgregor's office.  The dakbungalow was at the other end of the
town, near the station, and he had made himself quite comfortable
there.  There is a rule that one must vacate a dakbungalow after a
stated number of days, but Verrall peaceably ignored it.  The
Europeans only saw him at morning and evening on the maidan.  On
the second day after his arrival fifty of his men turned out with
sickles and cleared a large patch of the maidan, after which
Verrall was to be seen galloping to and fro, practising polo
strokes.  He took not the smallest notice of any Europeans who
passed down the road.  Westfield and Ellis were furious, and even
Mr Macgregor said that Verrall's behaviour was 'ungracious'.  They
would all have fallen at the feet of a lieutenant the Honourable if
he had shown the smallest courtesy; as it was, everyone except the
two women detested him from the start.  It is always so with titled
people, they are either adored or hated.  If they accept one it is
charming simplicity, if they ignore one it is loathsome
snobbishness; there are no half-measures.

Verrall was the youngest son of a peer, and not at all rich, but by
the method of seldom paying a bill until a writ was issued against
him, he managed to keep himself in the only things he seriously
cared about: clothes and horses.  He had come out to India in a
British cavalry regiment, and exchanged into the Indian Army
because it was cheaper and left him greater freedom for polo.
After two years his debts were so enormous that he entered the
Burma Military Police, in which it was notoriously possible to save
money; however, he detested Burma--it is no country for a horseman--
and he had already applied to go back to his regiment.  He was the
kind of soldier who can get exchanges when he wants them.  Meanwhile,
he was only to be in Kyauktada for a month, and he had no intention
of mixing himself up with all the petty sahiblog of the district.
He knew the society of those small Burma stations--a nasty,
poodle-faking, horseless riffraff.  He despised them.

They were not the only people whom Verrall despised, however.  His
various contempts would take a long time to catalogue in detail.
He despised the entire non-military population of India, a few
famous polo players excepted.  He despised the entire Army as well,
except the cavalry.  He despised all Indian regiments, infantry and
cavalry alike.  It was true that he himself belonged to a native
regiment, but that was only for his own convenience.  He took no
interest in Indians, and his Urdu consisted mainly of swear-words,
with all the verbs in the third person singular.  His Military
Policemen he looked on as no better than coolies.  'Christ, what
God-forsaken swine!' he was often heard to mutter as he moved down
the ranks inspecting, with the old subahdar carrying his sword
behind him.  Verrall had even been in trouble once for his
outspoken opinions on native troops.  It was at a review, and
Verrall was among the group of officers standing behind the
general.  An Indian infantry regiment approached for the march-
past.

'The ---- Rifles,' somebody said.

'AND look at it,' said Verrall in his surly boy's voice.

The white-haired colonel of the ---- Rifles was standing near.  He
flushed to the neck, and reported Verrall to the general.  Verrall
was reprimanded, but the general, a British Army officer himself,
did not rub it in very hard.  Somehow, nothing very serious ever
did happen to Verrall, however offensive he made himself.  Up and
down India, wherever he was stationed, he left behind him a trail
of insulted people, neglected duties and unpaid bills.  Yet the
disgraces that ought to have fallen on him never did.  He bore a
charmed life, and it was not only the handle to his name that saved
him.  There was something in his eye before which duns, burra
memsahibs and even colonels quailed.

It was a disconcerting eye, pale blue and a little protuberant, but
exceedingly clear.  It looked you over, weighed you in the balance
and found you wanting, in a single cold scrutiny of perhaps five
seconds.  If you were the right kind of man--that is, if you were a
cavalry officer and a polo player--Verrall took you for granted and
even treated you with a surly respect; if you were any other type
of man whatever, he despised you so utterly that he could not have
hidden it even if he would.  It did not even make any difference
whether you were rich or poor, for in the social sense he was not
more than normally a snob.  Of course, like all sons of rich
families, he thought poverty disgusting and that poor people are
poor because they prefer disgusting habits.  But he despised soft
living.  Spending, or rather owing, fabulous sums on clothes, he
yet lived almost as ascetically as a monk.  He exercised himself
ceaselessly and brutally, rationed his drink and his cigarettes,
slept on a camp bed (in silk pyjamas) and bathed in cold water in
the bitterest winter.  Horsemanship and physical fitness were the
only gods he knew.  The stamp of hoofs on the maidan, the strong,
poised feeling of his body, wedded centaurlike to the saddle, the
polo-stick springy in his hand--these were his religion, the breath
of his life.  The Europeans in Burma--boozing, womanizing, yellow-
faced loafers--made him physically sick when he thought of their
habits.  As for social duties of all descriptions, he called them
poodle-faking and ignored them.  Women he abhorred.  In his view
they were a kind of siren whose one aim was to lure men away from
polo and enmesh them in tea-fights and tennis-parties.  He was not,
however, quite proof against women.  He was young, and women of
nearly all kinds threw themselves at his head; now and again he
succumbed.  But his lapses soon disgusted him, and he was too
callous when the pinch came to have any difficulty about escaping.
He had had perhaps a dozen such escapes during his two years in
India.

A whole week went by.  Elizabeth had not even succeeded in making
Verrall's acquaintance.  It was so tantalizing!  Every day, morning
and evening, she and her aunt walked down to the Club and back
again, past the maidan; and there was Verrall, hitting the polo-
balls the sepoys threw for him, ignoring the two women utterly.
So near and yet so far!  What made it even worse was that neither
woman would have considered it decent to speak of the matter
directly.  One evening the polo-ball, struck too hard, came
swishing through the grass and rolled across the road in front of
them.  Elizabeth and her aunt stopped involuntarily.  But it was
only a sepoy who ran to fetch the ball.  Verrall had seen the women
and kept his distance.

Next morning Mrs Lackersteen paused as they came out of the gate.
She had given up riding in her rickshaw lately.  At the bottom of
the maidan the Military Policemen were drawn up, a dust-coloured
rank with bayonets glittering.  Verrall was facing them, but not in
uniform--he seldom put on his uniform for morning parade, not
thinking it necessary with mere Military Policemen.  The two women
were looking at everything except Verrall, and at the same time, in
some manner, were contriving to look at him.

'The wretched thing is,' said Mrs Lackersteen--this was a propos de
bottes, but the subject needed no introduction--'the wretched thing
is that I'm afraid your uncle simply MUST go back to camp before
long.'

'Must he really?'

'I'm afraid so.  It is so HATEFUL in camp at this time of year!
Oh, those mosquitoes!'

'Couldn't he stay a bit longer?  A week, perhaps?'

'I don't see how he can.  He's been nearly a month in headquarters
now.  The firm would be furious if they heard of it.  And of course
both of us will have to go with him. SUCH a bore!  The mosquitoes--
simply terrible!'

Terrible indeed!  To have to go away before Elizabeth had so much
as said how-do-you-do to Verrall!  But they would certainly have to
go if Mr Lackersteen went.  It would never do to leave him to
himself.  Satan finds some mischief still, even in the jungle.  A
ripple like fire ran down the line of sepoys; they were unfixing
bayonets before marching away.  The dusty rank turned left,
saluted, and marched off in columns of fours.  The orderlies were
coming from the police lines with the ponies and polo-sticks.  Mrs
Lackersteen took a heroic decision.

'I think,' she said, 'we'll take a short-cut across the maidan.
It's SO much quicker than going right round by the road.'

It WAS quicker by about fifty yards, but no one ever went that way
on foot, because of the grass-seeds that got into one's stockings.
Mrs Lackersteen plunged boldly into the grass, and then, dropping
even the pretence of making for the Club, took a bee-line for
Verrall, Elizabeth following.  Either woman would have died on the
rack rather than admit that she was doing anything but take a
short-cut.  Verrall saw them coming, swore, and reined in his pony.
He could not very well cut them dead now that they were coming
openly to accost him.  The damned cheek of these women!  He rode
slowly towards them with a sulky expression on his face, chivvying
the polo-ball with small strokes.

'Good morning, Mr Verrall!' Mrs Lackersteen called out in a voice
of saccharine, twenty yards away.

'Morning!' he returned surlily, having seen her face and set her
down as one of the usual scraggy old boiling-fowls of an Indian
station.

The next moment Elizabeth came level with her aunt.  She had taken
off her spectacles and was swinging her Terai hat on her hand.
What did she care for sunstroke?  She was perfectly aware of the
prettiness of her cropped hair.  A puff of wind--oh, those blessed
breaths of wind, coming from nowhere in the stifling hot-weather
days!--had caught her cotton frock and blown it against her,
showing the outline of her body, slender and strong like a tree.
Her sudden appearance beside the older, sun-scorched woman was a
revelation to Verrall.  He started so that the Arab mare felt it
and would have reared on her hind legs, and he had to tighten the
rein.  He had not known until this moment, not having bothered to
inquire, that there were any YOUNG women in Kyauktada.

'My niece,' Mrs Lackersteen said.

He did not answer, but he had thrown away the polo-stick, and he
took off his topi.  For a moment he and Elizabeth remained gazing
at one another.  Their fresh faces were unmarred in the pitiless
light.  The grass-seeds were tickling Elizabeth's shins so that it
was agony, and without her spectacles she could only see Verrall
and his horse as a whitish blur.  But she was happy, happy!  Her
heart bounded and the blood flowed into her face, dyeing it like a
thin wash of aquarelle.  The thought, 'A peach, by Christ!' moved
almost fiercely through Verrall's mind.  The sullen Indians,
holding the ponies' heads, gazed curiously at the scene, as though
the beauty of the two young people had made its impression even on
them.

Mrs Lackersteen broke the silence, which had lasted half a minute.

'You know, Mr Verrall,' she said somewhat archly, 'we think it
RATHER unkind of you to have neglected us poor people all this
time.  When we're so PINING for a new face at the Club.'

He was still looking at Elizabeth when he answered, but the change
in his voice was remarkable.

'I've been meaning to come for some days.  Been so fearfully busy--
getting my men into their quarters and all that.  I'm sorry,' he
added--he was not in the habit of apologizing, but really, he had
decided, this girl was rather an exceptional bit of stuff--'I'm
sorry about not answering your note.'

'Oh, not at all!  We QUITE understood.  But we do hope we shall see
you at the Club this evening!  Because, you know,' she concluded
even more archly, 'if you disappoint us any longer, we shall begin
to think you rather a NAUGHTY young man!'

'I'm sorry,' he repeated.  'I'll be there this evening.'

There was not much more to be said, and the two women walked on to
the Club.  But they stayed barely five minutes.  The grass-seeds
were causing their shins such torment that they were obliged to
hurry home and change their stockings at once.

Verrall kept his promise and was at the Club that evening.  He
arrived a little earlier than the others, and he had made his
presence thoroughly felt before being in the place five minutes.
As Ellis entered the Club the old butler darted out of the card-
room and waylaid him.  He was in great distress, the tears rolling
down his cheeks.

'Sir!  Sir!'

'What the devil's the matter now!' said Ellis.

'Sir!  Sir!  New master been beating me, sir!'

'What?'

'BEATING me sir!'  His voice rose on the 'beating' with a long
tearful wail--'be-e-e-eating!'

'Beating you?  Do you good.  Who's been beating you?'

'New master, sir.  Military Police sahib.  Beating me with his
foot, sir--HERE!'  He rubbed himself behind.

'Hell!' said Ellis.

He went into the lounge.  Verrall was reading the Field, and
invisible except for Palm Beach trouser-ends and two lustrous
sooty-brown shoes.  He did not trouble to stir at hearing someone
else come into the room.  Ellis halted.

'Here, you--what's your name--Verrall!'

'What?'

'Have you been kicking our butler?'

Verrall's sulky blue eye appeared round the corner of the Field,
like the eye of a crustacean peering round a rock.

'What?' he repeated shortly.

'I said, have you been kicking our bloody butler?'

'Yes.'

'Then what the hell do you mean by it?'

'Beggar gave me his lip.  I sent him for a whisky and soda, and he
brought it warm.  I told him to put ice in it, and he wouldn't--
talked some bloody rot about saving the last pieces of ice.  So I
kicked his bottom.  Serve him right.'

Ellis turned quite grey.  He was furious.  The butler was a piece
of Club property and not to be kicked by strangers.  But what most
angered Ellis was the thought that Verrall quite possibly suspected
him of being SORRY for the butler--in fact, of disapproving of
kicking AS SUCH.

'Serve him right?  I dare say it bloody well did serve him right.
But what in hell's that got to do with it?  Who are YOU to come
kicking our servants?'

'Bosh, my good chap.  Needed kicking.  You've let your servants get
out of hand here.'

'You damned, insolent young tick, what's it got to do with YOU if
he needed kicking?  You're not even a member of this Club.  It's
our job to kick the servants, not yours.'

Verrall lowered the Field and brought his other eye into play.  His
surly voice did not change its tone.  He never lost his temper with
a European; it was never necessary.

'My good chap, if anyone gives me lip I kick his bottom.  Do you
want me to kick yours?'

All the fire went out of Ellis suddenly.  He was not afraid, he had
never been afraid in his life; only, Verrall's eye was too much for
him.  That eye could make you feel as though you were under
Niagara!  The oaths wilted on Ellis's lips; his voice almost
deserted him.  He said querulously and even plaintively:

'But damn it, he was quite right not to give you the last bit of
ice.  Do you think we only buy ice for you?  We can only get the
stuff twice a week in this place.'

'Rotten bad management on your part, then,' said Verrall, and
retired behind the Field, content to let the matter drop.

Ellis was helpless.  The calm way in which Verrall went back to his
paper, quite genuinely forgetting Ellis's existence, was maddening.
Should he not give the young swab a good, rousing kick?

But somehow, the kick was never given.  Verrall had earned many
kicks in his life, but he had never received one and probably never
would.  Ellis seeped helplessly back to the card-room, to work off
his feelings on the butler, leaving Verrall in possession of the
lounge.

As Mr Macgregor entered the Club gate he heard the sound of music.
Yellow chinks of lantern-light showed through the creeper that
covered the tennis-screen.  Mr Macgregor was in a happy mood this
evening.  He had promised himself a good, long talk with Miss
Lackersteen--such an exceptionally intelligent girl, that!--and he
had a most interesting anecdote to tell her (as a matter of fact,
it had already seen the light in one of those little articles of
his in Blackwood's) about a dacoity that had happened in Sagaing in
1913.  She would love to hear it, he knew.  He rounded the tennis-
screen expectantly.  On the court, in the mingled light of the
waning moon and of lanterns slung among the trees, Verrall and
Elizabeth were dancing.  The chokras had brought out chairs and a
table for the gramophone, and round these the other Europeans were
sitting or standing.  As Mr Macgregor halted at the corner of the
court, Verrall and Elizabeth circled round and glided past him,
barely a yard away.  They were dancing very close together, her
body bent backwards under his.  Neither noticed Mr Macgregor.

Mr Macgregor made his way round the court.  A chilly, desolate
feeling had taken possession of his entrails.  Good-bye, then, to
his talk with Miss Lackersteen!  It was an effort to screw his face
into its usual facetious good-humour as he came up to the table.

'A Terpsichorean evening!' he remarked in a voice that was doleful
in spite of himself.

No one answered.  They were all watching the pair on the tennis
court.  Utterly oblivious of the others, Elizabeth and Verrall
glided round and round, round and round, their shoes sliding easily
on the slippery concrete.  Verrall danced as he rode, with
matchless grace.  The gramophone was playing 'Show Me the Way to Go
Home,' which was then going round the world like a pestilence and
had got as far as Burma:


'Show me the way to go home,
I'm tired an' I wanna go to bed;
I had a little drink 'bout an hour ago,
An' it's gone right TO my head!' etc.


The dreary, depressing trash floated out among the shadowy trees
and the streaming scents of flowers, over and over again, for Mrs
Lackersteen was putting the gramophone needle back to the start
when it neared the centre.  The moon climbed higher, very yellow,
looking, as she rose from the murk of dark clouds at the horizon,
like a sick woman creeping out of bed.  Verrall and Elizabeth
danced on and on, indefatigably, a pale voluptuous shape in the
gloom.  They moved in perfect unison like some single animal.  Mr
Macgregor, Ellis, Westfield and Mr Lackersteen stood watching them,
their hands in their pockets, finding nothing to say.  The
mosquitoes came nibbling at their ankles.  Someone called for
drinks, but the whisky was like ashes in their mouths.  The bowels
of all four older men were twisted with bitter envy.

Verrall did not ask Mrs Lackersteen for a dance, nor, when he and
Elizabeth finally sat down, did he take any notice of the other
Europeans.  He merely monopolized Elizabeth for half an hour more,
and then, with a brief good night to the Lackersteens and not a
word to anyone else, left the Club.  The long dance with Verrall
had left Elizabeth in a kind of dream.  He had asked her to come
out riding with him!  He was going to lend her one of his ponies!
She never even noticed that Ellis, angered by her behaviour, was
doing his best to be openly rude.  It was late when the Lackersteens
got home, but there was no sleep yet for Elizabeth or her aunt.
They were feverishly at work till midnight, shortening a pair of Mrs
Lackersteen's jodhpurs, and letting out the calves, to fit
Elizabeth.

'I hope, dear, you CAN ride a horse?' said Mrs Lackersteen.

'Oh, of course!  I've ridden ever such a lot, at home.'

She had ridden perhaps a dozen times in all, when she was sixteen.
No matter, she would manage somehow!  She would have ridden a
tiger, if Verrall were to accompany her.

When at last the jodhpurs were finished and Elizabeth had tried
them on, Mrs Lackersteen sighed to see her.  She looked ravishing
in jodhpurs, simply ravishing!  And to think that in only a day or
two they had got to go back to camp, for weeks, months perhaps,
leaving Kyauktada and this most DESIRABLE young man!  The pity of
it!  As they moved to go upstairs Mrs Lackersteen paused at the
door.  It had come into her head to make a great and painful
sacrifice.  She took Elizabeth by the shoulders and kissed her with
a more real affection than she had ever shown.

'My dear, it would be such a SHAME for you to go away from
Kyauktada just now!'

'It would, rather.'

'Then I'll tell you what, dear.  We WON'T go back to that horrid
jungle!  Your uncle shall go alone.  You and I shall stay in
Kyauktada.'



19


The heat was growing worse and worse.  April was nearly over, but
there was no hope of rain for another three weeks, five weeks it
might be.  Even the lovely transient dawns were spoiled by the
thought of the long, blinding hours to come, when one's head would
ache and the glare would penetrate through every covering and glue
up one's eyelids with restless sleep.  No one, Oriental or
European, could keep awake in the heat of the day without a
struggle; at night, on the other hand, with the howling dogs and
the pools of sweat that collected and tormented one's prickly heat,
no one could sleep.  The mosquitoes at the Club were so bad that
sticks of incense had to be kept burning in all the corners, and
the women sat with their legs in pillowslips.  Only Verrall and
Elizabeth were indifferent to the heat.  They were young and their
blood was fresh, and Verrall was too stoical and Elizabeth too
happy to pay any attention to the climate.

There was much bickering and scandal-mongering at the Club these
days.  Verrall had put everyone's nose out of joint.  He had taken
to coming to the Club for an hour or two in the evenings, but he
ignored the other members, refused the drinks they offered him, and
answered attempts at conversation with surly monosyllables.  He
would sit under the punkah in the chair that had once been sacred
to Mrs Lackersteen, reading such of the papers as interested him,
until Elizabeth came, when he would dance and talk with her for an
hour or two and then make off without so much as a good-night to
anybody.  Meanwhile Mr Lackersteen was alone in his camp, and,
according to the rumours which drifted back to Kyauktada, consoling
loneliness with quite a miscellany of Burmese women.

Elizabeth and Verrall went out riding together almost every evening
now.  Verrall's mornings, after parade, were sacred to polo
practice, but he had decided that it was worth while giving up the
evenings to Elizabeth.  She took naturally to riding, just as she
had to shooting; she even had the assurance to tell Verrall that
she had 'hunted quite a lot' at home.  He saw at a glance that she
was lying, but at least she did not ride so badly as to be a
nuisance to him.

They used to ride up the red road into the jungle, ford the stream
by the big pyinkado tree covered with orchids, and then follow the
narrow cart-track, where the dust was soft and the horses could
gallop.  It was stifling hot in the dusty jungle, and there were
always mutterings of faraway, rainless thunder.  Small martins
flitted round the horses, keeping pace with them, to hawk for the
flies their hooves turned up.  Elizabeth rode the bay pony, Verrall
the white.  On the way home they would walk their sweat-dark horses
abreast, so close sometimes his knee brushed against hers, and
talk.  Verrall could drop his offensive manner and talk amicably
enough when he chose, and he did choose with Elizabeth.

Ah, the joy of those rides together!  The joy of being on horseback
and in the world of horses--the world of hunting and racing, polo
and pigsticking!  If Elizabeth had loved Verrall for nothing else,
she would have loved him for bringing horses into her life.  She
tormented him to talk about horses as once she had tormented Flory
to talk about shooting.  Verrall was no talker, it was true.  A few
gruff, jerky sentences about polo and pigsticking, and a catalogue
of Indian stations and the names of regiments, were the best he
could do.  And yet somehow the little he said could thrill
Elizabeth as all Flory's talk had never done.  The mere sight of
him on horseback was more evocative than any words.  An aura of
horsemanship and soldiering surrounded him.  In his tanned face and
his hard, straight body Elizabeth saw all the romance, the splendid
panache of a cavalryman's life.  She saw the North-West Frontier
and the Cavalry Club--she saw the polo grounds and the parched
barrack yards, and the brown squadrons of horsemen galloping with
their long lances poised and the trains of their pagris streaming;
she heard the bugle-calls and the jingle of spurs, and the
regimental bands playing outside the messrooms while the officers
sat at dinner in their stiff, gorgeous uniforms.  How splendid it
was, that equestrian world, how splendid!  And it was HER world,
she belonged to it, she had been born of it.  These days, she
lived, thought, dreamed horses, almost like Verrall himself.  The
time came when she not only TOLD her taradiddle about having
'hunted quite a lot', she even came near believing it.

In every possible way they got on so well together.  He never bored
her and fretted her as Flory had done.  (As a matter of fact, she
had almost forgotten Flory, these days; when she thought of him, it
was for some reason always his birthmark that she remembered.)  It
was a bond between them that Verrall detested anything 'highbrow'
even more than she did.  He told her once that he had not read a
book since he was eighteen, and that indeed he 'loathed' books;
'except, of course, Jorrocks and all that'.  On the evening of
their third or fourth ride they were parting at the Lackersteens'
gate.  Verrall had successfully resisted all Mrs Lackersteen's
invitations to meals; he had not yet set foot inside the
Lackersteens' house, and he did not intend to do so.  As the syce
was taking Elizabeth's pony, Verrall said:

'I tell you what.  Next time we come out you shall ride Belinda.
I'll ride the chestnut.  I think you've got on well enough not to
go and cut Belinda's mouth up.'

Belinda was the Arab mare.  Verrall had owned her two years, and
till this moment he had never once allowed anyone else to mount
her, not even the syce.  It was the greatest favour that he could
imagine.  And so perfectly did Elizabeth appreciate Verrall's point
of view that she understood the greatness of the favour, and was
thankful.

The next evening, as they rode home side by side, Verrall put his
arm round Elizabeth's shoulder, lifted her out of the saddle and
pulled her against him.  He was very strong.  He dropped the
bridle, and with his free hand, lifted her face up to meet his;
their mouths met.  For a moment he held her so, then lowered her to
the ground and slipped from his horse.  They stood embraced, their
thin, drenched shirts pressed together, the two bridles held in the
crook of his arm.

It was about the same time that Flory, twenty miles away, decided
to come back to Kyauktada.  He was standing at the jungle's edge by
the bank of a dried-up stream, where he had walked to tire himself,
watching some tiny, nameless finches eating the seeds of the tall
grasses.  The cocks were chrome-yellow, the hens like hen sparrows.
Too tiny to bend the stalks, they came whirring towards them,
seized them in midflight and bore them to the ground by their own
weight.  Flory watched the birds incuriously, and almost hated them
because they could light no spark of interest in him.  In his
idleness he flung his dah at them, scaring them away.  If she were
here, if she were here!  Everything--birds, trees, flowers,
everything--was deadly and meaningless because she was not here.
As the days passed the knowledge that he had lost her had grown
surer and more actual until it poisoned every moment.

He loitered a little way into the jungle, flicking at creepers with
his dah.  His limbs felt slack and leaden.  He noticed a wild
vanilla plant trailing over a bush, and bent down to sniff at its
slender, fragrant pods.  The scent brought him a feeling of
staleness and deadly ennui.  Alone, alone, in the sea of life
enisled!  The pain was so great that he struck his fist against a
tree, jarring his arm and splitting two knuckles.  He must go back
to Kyauktada.  It was folly, for barely a fortnight had passed
since the scene between them, and his only chance was to give her
time to forget it.  Still, he must go back.  He could not stay any
longer in this deadly place, alone with his thoughts among the
endless, mindless leaves.

A happy thought occurred to him.  He could take Elizabeth the
leopard-skin that was being cured for her in the jail.  It would be
a pretext for seeing her, and when one comes bearing gifts one is
generally listened to.  This time he would not let her cut him
short without a word.  He would explain, extenuate--make her
realize that she had been unjust to him.  It was not right that she
should condemn him because of Ma Hla May, whom he had turned out of
doors for Elizabeth's own sake.  Surely she must forgive him when
she heard the truth of the story?  And this time she SHOULD hear
it; he would force her to listen to him if he had to hold her by
the arms while he did it.

He went back the same evening.  It was a twenty-mile journey, by
rutted cart-tracks, but Flory decided to march by night, giving the
reason that it was cooler.  The servants almost mutinied at the
idea of a night-march, and at the very last moment old Sammy
collapsed in a semi-genuine fit and had to be plied with gin before
he could start.  It was a moonless night.  They made their way by
the light of lanterns, in which Flo's eyes gleamed like emeralds
and the bullocks' eyes like moonstones.  When the sun was up the
servants halted to gather sticks and cook breakfast, but Flory was
in a fever to be at Kyauktada, and he hurried ahead.  He had no
feeling of tiredness.  The thought of the leopard-skin had filled
him with extravagant hopes.  He crossed the glittering river by
sampan and went straight to Dr Veraswami's bungalow, getting there
about ten.

The doctor invited him to breakfast, and--having shooed the women
into some suitable hiding-place--took him into his own bath-room so
that he could wash and shave.  At breakfast the doctor was very
excited and full of denunciations of 'the crocodile'; for it
appeared that the pseudo-rebellion was now on the point of breaking
out.  It was not till after breakfast that Flory had an opportunity
to mention the leopard-skin.

'Oh, by the way, doctor.  What about that skin I sent to the jail
to be cured?  Is it done yet?'

'Ah--' said the doctor in a slightly disconcerted manner, rubbing
his nose.  He went inside the house--they were breakfasting on the
veranda, for the doctor's wife had protested violently against
Flory being brought indoors--and came back in a moment with the
skin rolled up in a bundle.

'Ass a matter of fact--' he began, unrolling it.

'Oh, doctor!'

The skin had been utterly ruined.  It was as stiff as cardboard,
with the leather cracked and the fur discoloured and even rubbed
off in patches.  It also stank abominably.  Instead of being cured,
it had been converted into a piece of rubbish.

'Oh, doctor!  What a mess they've made of it!  How the devil did it
happen?'

'I am so sorry, my friend!  I wass about to apologize.  It wass the
best we could do.  There iss no one at the jail who knows how to
cure skins now.'

'But, damn it, that convict used to cure them so beautifully!'

'Ah, yes.  But he iss gone from us these three weeks, alas.'

'Gone?  I thought he was doing seven years?'

'What?  Did you not hear, my friend?  I thought you knew who it
wass that used to cure the skins.  It was Nga Shwe O.'

'Nga Shwe O?'

'The dacoit who escaped with U Po Kyin's assistance.'

'Oh, hell!'

The mishap had daunted him dreadfully.  Nevertheless, in the
afternoon, having bathed and put on a clean suit, he went up to the
Lackersteens' house, at about four.  It was very early to call, but
he wanted to make sure of catching Elizabeth before she went down
to the Club.  Mrs Lackersteen, who had been asleep and was not
prepared for visitors, received him with an ill grace, not even
asking him to sit down.

'I'm afraid Elizabeth isn't down yet.  She's dressing to go out
riding.  Wouldn't it be better if you left a message?'

'I'd like to see her, if you don't mind.  I've brought her the skin
of that leopard we shot together.'

Mrs Lackersteen left him standing up in the drawing-room, feeling
lumpish and abnormally large as one does at such times.  However,
she fetched Elizabeth, taking the opportunity of whispering to her
outside the door:  'Get rid of that dreadful man as soon as you
can, dear.  I can't bear him about the house at this time of day.'

As Elizabeth entered the room Flory's heart pounded so violently
that a reddish mist passed behind his eyes.  She was wearing a silk
shirt and jodhpurs, and she was a little sunburned.  Even in his
memory she had never been so beautiful.  He quailed; on the instant
he was lost--every scrap of his screwed-up courage had fled.
Instead of stepping forward to meet her he actually backed away.
There was a fearful crash behind him; he had upset an occasional
table and sent a bowl of zinnias hurtling across the floor.

'I'm so sorry!' he exclaimed in horror.

'Oh, not at ALL!  PLEASE don't worry about it!'

She helped him to pick up the table, chattering all the while as
gaily and easily as though nothing had happened:  'You HAVE been
away a long time, Mr Flory!  You're quite a STRANGER!  We've SO
missed you at the Club!' etc., etc.  She was italicizing every
other word, with that deadly, glittering brightness that a woman
puts on when she is dodging a moral obligation.  He was terrified
of her.  He could not even look her in the face.  She took up a box
of cigarettes and offered him one, but he refused it.  His hand was
shaking too much to take it.

'I've brought you that skin,' he said flatly.

He unrolled it on the table they had just picked up.  It looked so
shabby and miserable that he wished he had never brought it.  She
came close to him to examine the skin, so close that her flower-
like cheek was not a foot from his own, and he could feel the
warmth of her body.  So great was his fear of her that he stepped
hurriedly away.  And in the same moment she too stepped back with a
wince of disgust, having caught the foul odour of the skin.  It
shamed him terribly.  It was almost as though it had been himself
and not the skin that stank.

'Thank you EVER so much, Mr Flory!'  She had put another yard
between herself and the skin.  'Such a LOVELY big skin, isn't it?'

'It was, but they've spoiled it, I'm afraid.'

'Oh no!  I shall love having it!--Are you back in Kyauktada for
long?  How dreadfully hot it must have been in camp!'

'Yes, it's been very hot.'

For three minutes they actually talked of the weather.  He was
helpless.  All that he had promised himself to say, all his
arguments and pleadings, had withered in his throat.  'You fool,
you fool,' he thought, 'what are you doing?  Did you come twenty
miles for this?  Go on, say what you came to say!  Seize her in
your arms; make her listen, kick her, beat her--anything sooner
than let her choke you with this drivel!'  But it was hopeless,
hopeless.  Not a word could his tongue utter except futile
trivialities.  How could he plead or argue, when that bright easy
air of hers, that dragged every word to the level of Club-chatter
silenced him before he spoke?  Where do they learn it, that
dreadful tee-heeing brightness?  In these brisk modern girls'
schools, no doubt.  The piece of carrion on the table made him more
ashamed every moment.  He stood there almost voiceless, lumpishly
ugly with his face yellow and creased after the sleepless night,
and his birthmark like a smear of dirt.

She got rid of him after a very few minutes.  'And now, Mr Flory,
if you DON'T mind, I ought really--'

He mumbled rather than said, 'Won't you come out with me again some
time?  Walking, shooting--something?'

'I have so LITTLE time nowadays!  ALL my evenings seem to be full.
This evening I'm going out riding.  With Mr Verrall,' she added.

It was possible that she added that in order to wound him.  This
was the first that he had heard of her friendship with Verrall.  He
could not keep the dread, flat tone of envy out of his voice as he
said:

'Do you go out riding much with Verrall?'

'Almost every evening.  He's such a wonderful horseman!  And he has
absolute STRINGS of polo ponies!'

'Ah.  And of course I have no polo ponies.'

It was the first thing he had said that even approached seriousness,
and it did no more than offend her.  However, she answered him with
the same gay easy air as before, and then showed him out.  Mrs
Lackersteen came back to the drawing-room, sniffed the air, and
immediately ordered the servants to take the reeking leopard-skin
outside and burn it.

Flory lounged at his garden gate, pretending to feed the pigeons.
He could not deny himself the pain of seeing Elizabeth and Verrall
start on their ride.  How vulgarly, how cruelly she had behaved to
him!  It is dreadful when people will not even have the decency to
quarrel.  Presently Verrall rode up to the Lackersteens' house on
the white pony, with a syce riding the chestnut, then there was a
pause, then they emerged together, Verrall on the chestnut pony,
Elizabeth on the white, and trotted quickly up the hill.  They were
chattering and laughing, her silk-shirted shoulder very close to
his.  Neither looked towards Flory.

When they had disappeared into the jungle, Flory still loafed in
the garden.  The glare was waning to yellow.  The mali was at work
grubbing up the English flowers, most of which had died, slain by
too much sunshine, and planting balsams, cockscombs, and more
zinnias.  An hour passed, and a melancholy, earth-coloured Indian
loitered up the drive, dressed in a loin-cloth and a salmon-pink
pagri on which a washing-basket was balanced.  He laid down his
basket and salaamed to Flory.

'Who are you?'

'Book-wallah, sahib.'

The book-wallah was an itinerant peddler of books who wandered from
station to station throughout Upper Burma.  His system of exchange
was that for any book in his bundle you gave him four annas, and
any other book.  Not quite ANY book, however, for the book-wallah,
though analphabetic, had learned to recognize and refuse a Bible.

'No, sahib,' he would say plaintively, 'no.  This book (he would
turn it over disapprovingly in his flat brown hands) this book with
a black cover and gold letters--this one I cannot take.  I know not
how it is, but all sahibs are offering me this book, and none are
taking it.  What can it be that is in this black book?  Some evil,
undoubtedly.'

'Turn out your trash,' Flory said.

He hunted among them for a good thriller--Edgar Wallace or Agatha
Christie or something; anything to still the deadly restlessness
that was at his heart.  As he bent over the books he saw that both
Indians were exclaiming and pointing towards the edge of the
jungle.

'Dekko!' said the mali in his plum-in-the-mouth voice.

The two ponies were emerging from the jungle.  But they were
riderless.  They came trotting down the hill with the silly guilty
air of a horse that has escaped from its master, with the stirrups
swinging and clashing under their bellies.

Flory remained unconsciously clasping one of the books against his
chest.  Verrall and Elizabeth had dismounted.  It was not an
accident; by no effort of the mind could one imagine Verrall
falling off his horse.  They had dismounted, and the ponies had
escaped.

They had dismounted--for what?  Ah, but he knew for what!  It was
not a question of suspecting; he KNEW.  He could see the whole
thing happening, in one of those hallucinations that are so perfect
in detail, so vilely obscene, that they are past bearing.  He threw
the book violently down and made for the house, leaving the book-
wallah disappointed.  The servants heard him moving about indoors,
and presently he called for a bottle of whisky.  He had a drink and
it did him no good.  Then he filled a tumbler two-thirds full,
added enough water to make it drinkable, and swallowed it.  The
filthy, nauseous dose was no sooner down his throat than he
repeated it.  He had done the same thing in camp once, years ago,
when he was tortured by toothache and three hundred miles from a
dentist.  At seven Ko S'la came in as usual to say that the bath-
water was hot.  Flory was lying in one of the long chairs, with his
coat off and his shirt torn open at the throat.

'Your bath, thakin,' said Ko S'la.

Flory did not answer, and Ko S'la touched his arm, thinking him
asleep.  Flory was much too drunk to move.  The empty bottle had
rolled across the floor, leaving a trail of whisky-drops behind it.
Ko S'la called for Ba Pe and picked up the bottle, clicking his
tongue.

'Just look at this!  He has drunk more than three-quarters of a
bottle!'

'What, again?  I thought he had given up drinking?'

'It is that accursed woman, I suppose.  Now we must carry him
carefully.  You take his heels, I'll take his head.  That's right.
Hoist him up!'

They carried Flory into the other room and laid him gently on the
bed.

'Is he really going to marry this "Ingaleikma"?' said Ba Pe.

'Heaven knows.  She is the mistress of the young police officer at
present, so I was told.  Their ways are not our ways.  I think I
know what he will be wanting tonight,' he added as he undid Flory's
braces--for Ko S'la had the art, so necessary in a bachelor's
servant, of undressing his master without waking him.

The servants were rather more pleased than not to see this return
to bachelor habits.  Flory woke about midnight, naked in a pool of
sweat.  His head felt as though some large, sharp-cornered metal
object were bumping about inside it.  The mosquito net was up, and
a young woman was sitting beside the bed fanning him with a wicker
fan.  She had an agreeable negroid face, bronze-gold in the
candlelight.  She explained that she was a prostitute, and that Ko
S'la had engaged her on his own responsibility for a fee of ten
rupees.

Flory's head was splitting.  'For God's sake get me something to
drink,' he said feebly to the woman.  She brought him some soda-
water which Ko S'la had cooled in readiness and soaked a towel and
put a wet compress round his forehead.  She was a fat, good-
tempered creature.  She told him that her name was Ma Sein Galay,
and that besides plying her other trade she sold paddy baskets in
the bazaar near Li Yeik's shop.  Flory's head felt better
presently, and he asked for a cigarette; whereupon Ma Sein Galay,
having fetched the cigarette, said naively, 'Shall I take my
clothes off now, thakin?'

Why not? he thought dimly.  He made room for her in the bed.  But
when he smelled the familiar scent of garlic and coco-nut oil,
something painful happened within him, and with his head pillowed
on Ma Sein Galay's fat shoulder he actually wept, a thing he had
not done since he was fifteen years old.



20


Next morning there was great excitement in Kyauktada, for the long-
rumoured rebellion had at last broken out.  Flory heard only a
vague report of it at the time.  He had gone back to camp as soon
as he felt fit to march after the drunken night, and it was not
until several days later that he learned the true history of the
rebellion, in a long, indignant letter from Dr Veraswami.

The doctor's epistolary style was queer.  His syntax was shaky and
he was as free with capital letters as a seventeenth-century
divine, while in the use of italics he rivalled Queen Victoria.
There were eight pages of his small but sprawling handwriting.


MY DEAR FRIEND [the letter ran],--You will much regret to hear that
the WILES OF THE CROCODILE have matured.  The rebellion--the SO-
CALLED rebellion--is all over and finished.  And it has been, alas!
a more Bloody affair than I had hoped should have been the case.

All has fallen out as I have prophesied to you it would be.  On the
day when you came back to Kyauktada U Po Kyin's SPIES have informed
him that the poor unfortunate men whom he have Deluded are
assembling in the jungle near Thongwa.  The same night he sets out
secretly with U Lugale, the Police Inspector, who is as great a
Rogue as he, if that could be, and twelve constables.  They make a
swift raid upon Thongwa and surprise the rebels, of whom they are
only Seven!! in a ruined field hut in the jungle.  Also Mr Maxwell,
who have heard rumours of the rebellion, came across from his camp
bringing his Rifle and was in time to join U Po Kyin and the police
in their attack on the hut.  The next morning the clerk Ba Sein,
who is U Po Kyin's JACKALL and DIRTY WORKER, have orders to raise
the cry of rebellion as Sensationally as possible, which was done,
and Mr Macgregor, Mr Westfield and Lieutenant Verrall all rush out
to Thongwa carrying fifty sepoys armed with rifles besides Civil
Police.  But they arrive to find it is all over and U Po Kyin was
sitting under a big teak tree in the middle of the village and
PUTTING ON AIRS and lecturing the villages, whereat they are all
bowing very frightened and touching the ground with their foreheads
and swearing they will be forever loyal to the Government, and the
rebellion is already at an end.  The SO-CALLED weiksa, who is no
other than a circus conjurer and the MINION of U Po Kyin, have
vanished for parts unknown, but six rebels have been Caught.  So
there is an end.

Also I should inform you that there was most regrettably a Death.
Mr Maxwell was I think TOO ANXIOUS to use his Rifle and when one of
the rebels try to run away he fired and shoot him in the abdomen,
at which he died.  I think the villagers have some BAD FEELING
towards Mr Maxwell because of it.  But from the point of view legal
all is well for Mr Maxwell, because the men were undoubtedly
conspiring against the Government.

Ah, but, my Friend, I trust that you understand how disastrous may
all this be for me!  You will realise, I think, what is its bearing
upon the Contest between U Po Kyin and myself, and the supreme LEG-
UP it must give to him.  It is the TRIUMPH OF THE CROCODILE.  U Po
Kyin is now the Hero of the district.  He is the PET of the
Europeans.  I am told that even Mr Ellis has praised his conduct.
If you could witness the abominable Conceitedness and the LIES he
is now telling as to how there were not seven rebels but Two
Hundred!! and how he crushed upon them revolver in hand--he who
only directing operations from a SAFE DISTANCE while the police and
Mr Maxwell creep up upon the hut--you would find is veritably
Nauseous I assure you.  He has had the effrontery to send in an
official report of the matter which started, 'By my loyal
promptitude and reckless daring', and I hear that positively he had
had this Conglomeration of lies written out in readiness days
BEFORE THE OCCURRENCE.  It is Disgusting.  And to think that now
when he is at the Height of his triumph he will again begin to
calumniate me with all the venom at his disposal etc. etc.


The rebels' entire stock of weapons had been captured.  The armoury
with which, when their followers were assembled, they had proposed
to march upon Kyauktada, consisted of the following:

Item, one shotgun with a damaged left barrel, stolen from a Forest
Officer three years earlier.

Item, six home-made guns with barrels of zinc piping stolen from
the railway.  These could be fired, after a fashion, by thrusting a
nail through the touch-hole and striking it with a stone.

Item, thirty-nine twelve-bore cartridges.

Item, eleven dummy guns carved out of teakwood.

Item, some large Chinese crackers which were to have been fired in
terrorem.

Later, two of the rebels were sentenced to fifteen years'
transportation, three to three years' imprisonment and twenty-five
lashes, and one to two years' imprisonment.

The whole miserable rebellion was so obviously at an end that the
Europeans were not considered to be in any danger, and Maxwell had
gone back to his camp unguarded.  Flory intended to stay in camp
until the rains broke, or at least until the general meeting at the
Club.  He had promised to be in for that, to propose the doctor's
election; though now, with his own trouble to think of, the whole
business of the intrigue between U Po Kyin and the doctor sickened
him.

More weeks crawled by.  The heat was dreadful now.  The overdue
rain seemed to have bred a fever in the air.  Flory was out of
health, and worked incessantly, worrying over petty jobs that
should have been left to the overseer, and making the coolies and
even the servants hate him.  He drank gin at all hours, but not
even drinking could distract him now.  The vision of Elizabeth in
Verrall's arms haunted him like a neuralgia or an earache.  At any
moment it would come upon him, vivid and disgusting, scattering his
thoughts, wrenching him back from the brink of sleep, turning his
food to dust in his mouth.  At times he flew into savage rages, and
once even struck Ko S'la.  What was worse than all was the DETAIL--
the always filthy detail--in which the imagined scene appeared.
The very perfection of the detail seemed to prove that it was true.

Is there anything in the world more graceless, more dishonouring,
than to desire a woman whom you will never have?  Throughout all
these weeks Flory's mind held hardly a thought which was not
murderous or obscene.  It is the common effect of jealousy.  Once
he had loved Elizabeth spiritually, sentimentally indeed, desiring
her sympathy more than her caresses; now, when he had lost her, he
was tormented by the basest physical longing.  He did not even
idealize her any longer.  He saw her now almost as she was--silly,
snobbish, heartless--and it made no difference to his longing for
her.  Does it ever make any difference?  At nights when he lay
awake, his bed dragged outside the tent for coolness, looking at
the velvet dark from which the barking of a gyi sometimes sounded,
he hated himself for the images that inhabited his mind.  It was so
base, this envying of the better man who had beaten him.  For it
was only envy--even jealousy was too good a name for it.  What
right had he to be jealous?  He had offered himself to a girl who
was too young and pretty for him, and she had turned him down--
rightly.  He had got the snub he deserved.  Nor was there any
appeal from that decision; nothing would ever make him young again,
or take away his birthmark and his decade of lonely debaucheries.
He could only stand and look on while the better man took her, and
envy him, like--but the simile was not even mentionable.  Envy is a
horrible thing.  It is unlike all other kinds of suffering in that
there is no disguising it, no elevating it into tragedy.  It is
more than merely painful, it is disgusting.

But meanwhile, was it true, what he suspected?  Had Verrall really
become Elizabeth's lover?  There is no knowing, but on the whole
the chances were against it, for, had it been so, there would have
been no concealing it in such a place as Kyauktada.  Mrs Lackersteen
would probably have guessed it, even if the others had not.  One
thing was certain, however, and that was that Verrall had as yet
made no proposal of marriage.  A week went by, two weeks, three
weeks; three weeks is a very long time in a small Indian station.
Verrall and Elizabeth rode together every evening, danced together
every night; yet Verrall had never so much as entered the
Lackersteens' house.  There was endless scandal about Elizabeth, of
course.  All the Orientals of the town had taken it for granted that
she was Verrall's mistress.  U Po Kyin's version (he had a way of
being essentially right even when he was wrong in detail) was that
Elizabeth had been Flory's concubine and had deserted him for
Verrall because Verrall paid her more.  Ellis, too, was inventing
tales about Elizabeth that made Mr Macgregor squirm.  Mrs
Lackersteen, as a relative, did not hear these scandals, but she was
growing nervous.  Every evening when Elizabeth came home from her
ride she would meet her hopefully, expecting the 'Oh, aunt!  What DO
you think!'--and then the glorious news.  But the news never came,
and however carefully she studied Elizabeth's face, she could divine
nothing.

When three weeks had passed Mrs Lackersteen became fretful and
finally half angry.  The thought of her husband, alone--or rather,
not alone--in his camp, was troubling her.  After all, she had sent
him back to camp in order to give Elizabeth her chance with Verrall
(not that Mrs Lackersteen would have put it so vulgarly as that).
One evening she began lecturing and threatening Elizabeth in her
oblique way.  The conversation consisted of a sighing monologue
with very long pauses--for Elizabeth made no answer whatever.

Mrs Lackersteen began with some general remarks, apropos of a
photograph in the Tatler, about these fast MODERN girls who went
about in beach pyjamas and all that and made themselves so
dreadfully CHEAP with men.  A girl, Mrs Lackersteen said, should
NEVER make herself too cheap with a man; she should make herself--
but the opposite of 'cheap' seemed to be 'expensive', and that did
not sound at all right, so Mrs Lackersteen changed her tack.  She
went on to tell Elizabeth about a letter she had had from home with
further news of that poor, POOR dear girl who was out in Burma for
a while and had so foolishly neglected to get married.  Her
sufferings had been quite heartrending, and it just showed how glad
a girl ought to be to marry anyone, literally ANYONE.  It appeared
that the poor, poor dear girl had lost her job and been practically
STARVING for a long time, and now she had actually had to take a
job as a common kitchen maid under a horrid, vulgar cook who
bullied her most shockingly.  And it seemed that the black beetles
in the kitchen were simply beyond belief!  Didn't Elizabeth think
it too absolutely dreadful?  BLACK BEETLES!

Mrs Lackersteen remained silent for some time, to allow the black
beetles to sink in, before adding:

'SUCH a pity that Mr Verrall will be leaving us when the rains
break.  Kyauktada will seem quite EMPTY without him!'

'When do the rains break, usually?' said Elizabeth as indifferently
as she could manage.

'About the beginning of June, up here.  Only a week or two now. . . .
My dear, it seems absurd to mention it again, but I cannot get out
of my head the thought of that poor, poor dear girl in the kitchen
among the BLACK BEETLES!'

Black beetles recurred more than once in Mrs Lackersteen's
conversation during the rest of the evening.  It was not until the
following day that she remarked in the tone of someone dropping an
unimportant piece of gossip:

'By the way, I believe Flory is coming back to Kyauktada at the
beginning of June.  He said he was going to be in for the general
meeting at the Club.  Perhaps we might invite him to dinner some
time.'

It was the first time that either of them had mentioned Flory since
the day when he had brought Elizabeth the leopard-skin.  After
being virtually forgotten for several weeks, he had returned to
each woman's mind, a depressing pis aller.

Three days later Mrs Lackersteen sent word to her husband to come
back to Kyauktada.  He had been in camp long enough to earn a short
spell in headquarters.  He came back, more florid than ever--
sunburn, he explained--and having acquired such a trembling of the
hands that he could barely light a cigarette.  Nevertheless, that
evening he celebrated his return by manoeuvring Mrs Lackersteen out
of the house, coming into Elizabeth's bedroom and making a spirited
attempt to rape her.

During all this time, unknown to anyone of importance, further
sedition was afoot.  The 'weiksa' (now far away, peddling the
philosopher's stone to innocent villagers in Martaban) had perhaps
done his job a little better than he intended.  At any rate, there
was a possibility of fresh trouble--some isolated, futile outrage,
probably.  Even U Po Kyin knew nothing of this yet.  But as usual
the gods were fighting on his side, for any further rebellion would
make the first seem more serious than it had been, and so add to
his glory.



21


O western wind, when wilt thou blow, that the small rain down can
rain?  It was the first of June, the day of the general meeting,
and there had not been a drop of rain yet.  As Flory came up the
Club path the sun of afternoon, slanting beneath his hat-brim, was
still savage enough to scorch his neck uncomfortably.  The mali
staggered along the path, his breast-muscles slippery with sweat,
carrying two kerosene-tins of water on a yoke.  He dumped them
down, slopping a little water over his lank brown feet, and
salaamed to Flory.

'Well, mali, is the rain coming?'

The man gestured vaguely towards the west.  'The hills have
captured it, sahib.'

Kyauktada was ringed almost round by hills, and these caught the
earlier showers, so that sometimes no rain fell till almost the end
of June.  The earth of the flower-beds, hoed into large untidy
lumps, looked grey and hard as concrete.  Flory went into the
lounge and found Westfield loafing by the veranda, looking out over
the river, for the chicks had been rolled up.  At the foot of the
veranda a chokra lay on his back in the sun, pulling the punkah
rope with his heel and shading his face with a broad strip of
banana leaf.

'Hullo, Flory!  You've got thin as a rake.'

'So've you.'

'H'm, yes.  Bloody weather.  No appetite except for booze.  Christ,
won't I be glad when I hear the frogs start croaking.  Let's have a
spot before the others come.  Butler!'

'Do you know who's coming to the meeting?' Flory said, when the
butler had brought whisky and tepid soda.

'Whole crowd, I believe.  Lackersteen got back from camp three days
ago.  By God, that man's been having the time of his life away from
his missus!  My inspector was telling me about the goings-on at his
camp.  Tarts by the score.  Must have imported 'em specially from
Kyauktada.  He'll catch it all right when the old woman sees his
Club bill.  Eleven bottles of whisky sent out to his camp in a
fortnight.'

'Is young Verrall coming?'

'No, he's only a temporary member.  Not that he'd trouble to come
anyway, young tick.  Maxwell won't be here either.  Can't leave
camp just yet, he says.  He sent word Ellis was to speak for him if
there's any voting to be done.  Don't suppose there'll be anything
to vote about, though eh?' he added, looking at Flory obliquely,
for both of them remembered their previous quarrel on this subject.

'I suppose it lies with Macgregor.'

'What I mean is, Macgregor'll have dropped that bloody rot about
electing a native member, eh?  Not the moment for it just now.
After the rebellion and all that.'

'What about the rebellion, by the way?' said Flory.  He did not
want to start wrangling about the doctor's election yet.  There was
going to be trouble and to spare in a few minutes.  'Any more news--
are they going to have another try, do you think?'

'No.  All over, I'm afraid.  They caved in like the funks they are.
The whole district's as quiet as a bloody girls' school.  Most
disappointing.'

Flory's heart missed a beat.  He had heard Elizabeth's voice in the
next room.  Mr Macgregor came in at this moment, Ellis and Mr
Lackersteen following.  This made up the full quota, for the women
members of the Club had no votes.  Mr Macgregor was already dressed
in a silk suit, and was carrying the Club account books under his
arm.  He managed to bring a sub-official air even into such petty
business as a Club meeting.

'As we seem to be all here,' he said after the usual greetings,
'shall we--ah--proceed with our labours?'

'Lead on, Macduff,' said Westfield, sitting down.

'Call the butler, someone, for Christ's sake,' said Mr Lackersteen.
'I daren't let my missus hear me calling him.'

'Before we apply ourselves to the agenda,' said Mr Macgregor when
he had refused a drink and the others had taken one, 'I expect you
will want me to run through the accounts for the half-year?'

They did not want it particularly, but Mr Macgregor, who enjoyed
this kind of thing, ran through the accounts with great thoroughness.
Flory's thoughts were wandering.  There was going to be such a row
in a moment--oh, such a devil of a row!  They would be furious when
they found that he was proposing the doctor after all.  And
Elizabeth was in the next room.  God send she didn't hear the noise
of the row when it came.  It would make her despise him all the more
to see the others baiting him.  Would he see her this evening?
Would she speak to him?  He gazed across the quarter-mile of
gleaming river.  By the far bank a knot of men, one of them wearing
a green gaungbaung, were waiting beside a sampan.  In the channel,
by the nearer bank, a huge, clumsy Indian barge struggled with
desperate slowness against the racing current.  At each stroke the
ten rowers, Dravidian starvelings, ran forward and plunged their
long primitive oars, with heart-shaped blades, into the water.  They
braced their meagre bodies, then tugged, writhed, strained backwards
like agonized creatures of black rubber, and the ponderous hull
crept onwards a yard or two.  Then the rowers sprang forward,
panting, to plunge their oars again before the current should check
her.

'And now,' said Mr Macgregor more gravely, 'we come to the main
point of the agenda.  That, of course, is this--ah--distasteful
question, which I am afraid must be faced, of electing a native
member to this Club.  When we discussed the matter before--'

'What the hell!'

It was Ellis who had interrupted.  He was so excited that he had
sprung to his feet.

'What the hell!  Surely we aren't starting THAT over again?  Talk
about electing a damned nigger so this Club, after everything
that's happened!  Good God, I thought even Flory had dropped it by
this time!'

'Our friend Ellis appears surprised.  The matter has been discussed
before, I believe.'

'I should think it damned well was discussed before!  And we all
said what we thought of it.  By God--'

'If our friend Ellis will sit down for a few moments--' said Mr
Macgregor tolerantly.

Ellis threw himself into his chair again, exclaiming, 'Bloody
rubbish!'  Beyond the river Flory could see the group of Burmans
embarking.  They were lifting a long, awkward-shaped bundle into
the sampan.  Mr Macregor had produced a letter from his file of
papers.

'Perhaps I had better explain how this question arose in the first
place.  The Commissioner tells me that a circular has been sent
round by the Government, suggesting that in those Clubs where there
are no native members, one at least shall be co-opted; that is,
admitted automatically.  The circular says--ah yes! here it is:
"It is mistaken policy to offer social affronts to native officials
of high standing."  I may say that I disagree most emphatically.
No doubt we all do.  We who have to do the actual work of
government see things very differently from these--ah--Paget M.P.s
who interfere with us from above.  The Commissioner quite agrees
with me.  However--'

'But it's all bloody rot!' broke in Ellis.  'What's it got to do
with the Commissioner or anyone else?  Surely we can do as we like
in our own bloody Club?  They've no right to dictate to us when
we're off duty.'

'Quite,' said Westfield.

'You anticipate me.  I told the Commissioner that I should have to
put the matter before the other members.  And the course he
suggests is this.  If the idea finds any support in the Club, he
thinks it would be better if we co-opted our native member.  On the
other hand, if the entire Club is against it, it can be dropped.
That is, if opinion is quite unanimous.'

'Well, it damned well is unanimous,' said Ellis.

'D'you mean,' said Westfield, 'that it depends on ourselves whether
we have 'em in here or no?'

'I fancy we can take it as meaning that.'

'Well, then, let's say we're against it to a man.'

'And say it bloody firmly, by God.  We want to put our foot down on
this idea once and for all.'

'Hear, hear!' said Mr Lackersteen gruffly.  'Keep the black swabs
out of it.  Esprit de corps and all that.'

Mr Lackersteen could always be relied upon for sound sentiments in
a case like this.  In his heart he did not care and never had cared
a damn for the British Raj, and he was as happy drinking with an
Oriental as with a white man; but he was always ready with a loud
'Hear, hear!' when anyone suggested the bamboo for disrespectful
servants or boiling oil for Nationalists.  He prided himself that
though he might booze a bit and all that, dammit, he WAS loyal.  It
was his form of respectability.  Mr Macgregor was secretly rather
relieved by the general agreement.  If any Oriental member were co-
opted, that member would have to be Dr Veraswami, and he had had
the deepest distrust of the doctor ever since Nga Shwe O's
suspicious escape from the jail.

'Then I take it that you are all agreed?' he said.  'If so, I will
inform the Commissioner.  Otherwise, we must begin discussing the
candidate for election.'

Flory stood up.  He had got to say his say.  His heart seemed to
have risen into his throat and to be choking him.  From what Mr
Macgregor had said, it was clear that it was in his power to secure
the doctor's election by speaking the word.  But oh, what a bore,
what a nuisance it was!  What an infernal uproar there would be!
How he wished he had never given the doctor that promise!  No
matter, he had given it, and he could not break it.  So short a
time ago he would have broken it, en bon pukka sahib, how easily!
But not now.  He had got to see this thing through.  He turned
himself sidelong so that his birthmark was away from the others.
Already he could feel his voice going flat and guilty.

'Our friend Flory has something to suggest?'

'Yes.  I propose Dr Veraswami as a member of this Club.'

There was such a yell of dismay from three of the others that Mr
Macgregor had to rap sharply on the table and remind them that the
ladies were in the next room.  Ellis took not the smallest notice.
He had sprung to his feet again, and the skin round his nose had
gone quite grey.  He and Flory remained facing one another, as
though on the point of blows.

'Now, you damned swab, will you take that back?'

'No, I will not.'

'You oily swine!  You nigger's Nancy Boy!  You crawling, sneaking,--
bloody bastard!'

'Order!' exclaimed Mr Macgregor.

'But look at him, look at him!' cried Ellis almost tearfully.
'Letting us all down for the sake of a pot-bellied nigger!  After
all we've said to him!  When we've only got to hang together and we
can keep the stink of garlic out of this Club for ever.  My God,
wouldn't it make you spew your guts up to see anyone behaving like
such a--?'

'Take it back, Flory, old man!' said Westfield.  'Don't be a bloody
fool!'

'Downright Bolshevism, dammit!' said Mr Lackersteen.

'Do you think I care what you say?  What business is it of yours?
It's for Macgregor to decide.'

'Then do you--ah--adhere to your decision?' said Mr Macgregor
gloomily.

'Yes.'

Mr Macgregor sighed.  'A pity!  Well, in that case I suppose I have
no choice--'

'No, no, no!' cried Ellis, dancing about in his rage.  'Don't give
in to him!  Put it to the vote.  And if that son of a bitch doesn't
put in a black ball like the rest of us, we'll first turf him out
of the Club himself, and then--well!  Butler!'

'Sahib!' said the butler, appearing.

'Bring the ballot box and the balls.  Now clear out!' he added
roughly when the butler had obeyed.

The air had gone very stagnant; for some reason the punkah had
stopped working.  Mr Macgregor stood up with a disapproving but
judicial mien, taking the two drawers of black and white balls out
of the ballot box.

'We must proceed in order.  Mr Flory proposes Dr Veraswami, the
Civil Surgeon, as a member of this Club.  Mistaken, in my opinion,
greatly mistaken; however--!  Before putting the matter to the
vote--'

'Oh, why make a song and dance about it?' said Ellis.  'Here's my
contribution!  And another for Maxwell.'  He plumped two black
balls into the box.  Then one of his sudden spasms of rage seized
him, and he took the drawer of white balls and pitched them across
the floor.  They went flying in all directions.  'There!  Now pick
one up if you want to use it!'

'You damned fool!  What good do you think that does?'

'Sahib!'

They all started and looked round.  The chokra was goggling at them
over the veranda rail, having climbed up from below.  With one
skinny arm he clung to the rail and with the other gesticulated
towards the river.

'Sahib!  Sahib!'

'What's up?' said Westfield.

They all moved for the window.  The sampan that Flory had seen
across the river was lying under the bank at the foot of the lawn,
one of the men clinging to a bush to steady it.  The Burman in the
green gaungbaung was climbing out.

'That's one of Maxwell's Forest Rangers!' said Ellis in quite a
different voice.  'By God! something's happened!'

The Forest Ranger saw Mr Macgregor, shikoed in a hurried,
preoccupied way and turned back to the sampan.  Four other men,
peasants, climbed out after him, and with difficulty lifted ashore
the strange bundle that Flory had seen in the distance.  It was six
feet long, swathed in cloths, like a mummy.  Something happened in
everybody's entrails.  The Forest Ranger glanced at the veranda,
saw that there was no way up, and led the peasants round the path
to the front of the Club.  They had hoisted the bundle on to their
shoulders as funeral bearers hoist a coffin.  The butler had
flitted into the lounge again, and even his face was pale after its
fashion--that is, grey.

'Butler!' said Mr Macgregor sharply.

'Sir!'

'Go quickly and shut the door of the card-room.  Keep it shut.
Don't let the memsahibs see.'

'Yes, sir!'

The Burmans, with their burden, came heavily down the passage.  As
they entered the leading man staggered and almost fell; he had
trodden on one of the white balls that were scattered about the
floor.  The Burmans knelt down, lowered their burden to the floor
and stood over it with a strange reverent air, slightly bowing,
their hands together in a shiko.  Westfield had fallen on his
knees, and he pulled back the cloth.

'Christ!  Just look at him!' he said, but without much surprise.
'Just look at the poor little b--!'

Mr Lackersteen had retreated to the other end of the room, with a
bleating noise.  From the moment when the bundle was lifted ashore
they had all known what it contained.  It was the body of Maxwell,
cut almost to pieces with dahs by two relatives of the man whom he
had shot.



22


Maxwell's death had caused a profound shock in Kyauktada.  It would
cause a shock throughout the whole of Burma, and the case--'the
Kyauktada case, do you remember?'--would still be talked of years
after the wretched youth's name was forgotten.  But in a purely
personal way no one was much distressed.  Maxwell had been almost a
nonentity--just a 'good fellow' like any other of the ten thousand
ex colore good fellows of Burma--and with no close friends.  No one
among the Europeans genuinely mourned for him.  But that is not to
say that they were not angry.  On the contrary, for the moment they
were almost mad with rage.  For the unforgivable had happened--A
WHITE MAN had been killed.  When that happens, a sort of shudder
runs through the English of the East.  Eight hundred people,
possibly, are murdered every year in Burma; they matter nothing;
but the murder of A WHITE MAN is a monstrosity, a sacrilege.  Poor
Maxwell would be avenged, that was certain.  But only a servant or
two, and the Forest Ranger who had brought in his body and who had
been fond of him, shed any tears for his death.

On the other hand, no one was actually pleased, except U Po Kyin.

'This is a positive gift from heaven!' he told Ma Kin.  'I could
not have arranged it better myself.  The one thing I needed to make
them take my rebellion seriously was a little bloodshed.  And here
it is!  I tell you, Ma Kin, every day I grow more certain that some
higher power is working on my behalf.'

'Ko Po Kyin, truly you are without shame!  I do not know how you
dare to say such things.  Do you not shudder to have murder upon
your soul?'

'What! I?  Murder upon my soul?  What are you talking about?  I
have never killed so much as a chicken in my life.'

'But you are profiting by this poor boy's death.'

'Profiting by it!  Of course I am profiting by it!  And why not,
indeed?  Am I to blame if somebody else choose to commit murder?
The fisherman catches fish, and he is damned for it.  But are we
damned for eating the fish?  Certainly not.  Why NOT eat the fish,
once it is dead?  You should study the Scriptures more carefully,
my dear Kin Kin.'

The funeral took place next morning, before breakfast.  All the
Europeans were present, except Verrall, who was careering about the
maidan quite as usual, almost opposite the cemetery.  Mr Macgregor
read the burial service.  The little group of Englishmen stood
round the grave, their topis in their hands, sweating into the dark
suits that they had dug out from the bottom of their boxes.  The
harsh morning light beat without mercy upon their faces, yellower
than ever against the ugly, shabby clothes.  Every face except
Elizabeth's looked lined and old.  Dr Veraswami and half a dozen
other Orientals were present, but they kept themselves decently in
the background.  There were sixteen gravestones in the little
cemetery; assistants of timber firms, officials, soldiers killed in
forgotten skirmishes.

'Sacred to the memory of John Henry Spagnall, late of the Indian
Imperial Police, who was cut down by cholera while in the unremitting
exercise of' etc., etc., etc.

Flory remembered Spagnall dimly.  He had died very suddenly in camp
after his second go of delirium tremens.  In a corner there were
some graves of Eurasians, with wooden crosses.  The creeping
jasmine, with tiny orange-hearted flowers, had overgrown
everything.  Among the jasmine, large rat-holes led down into the
graves.

Mr Macgregor concluded the burial service in a ripe, reverent
voice, and led the way out of the cemetery, holding his grey topi--
the Eastern equivalent of a top hat--against his stomach.  Flory
lingered by the gate, hoping that Elizabeth would speak to him, but
she passed him without a glance.  Everyone had shunned him this
morning.  He was in disgrace; the murder had made his disloyalty of
last night seem somehow horrible.  Ellis had caught Westfield by
the arm, and they halted at the grave-side, taking out their
cigarette-cases.  Flory could hear their slangy voices coming
across the open grave.

'My God, Westfield, my God, when I think of that poor little b--
lying down there--oh, my God, how my blood does boil!  I couldn't
sleep all night, I was so furious.'

'Pretty bloody, I grant.  Never mind, promise you a couple of chaps
shall swing for it.  Two corpses against their one--best we can
do.'

'Two!  It ought to be fifty!  We've got to raise heaven and hell to
get these fellows hanged.  Have you got their names yet?'

'Yes, rather!!  Whole blooming district knows who did it.  We
always do know who's done it in these cases.  Getting the bloody
villagers to talk--that's the only trouble.'

'Well, for God's sake get them to talk this time.  Never mind the
bloody law.  Whack it out of them.  Torture them--anything.  If you
want to bribe any witnesses, I'm good for a couple of hundred
chips.'

Westfield sighed.  'Can't do that sort of thing, I'm afraid.  Wish
we could.  My chaps'd know how to put the screw on a witness if you
gave 'em the word.  Tie 'em down on an ant-hill.  Red peppers.  But
that won't do nowadays.  Got to keep our own bloody silly laws.
But never mind, those fellows'll swing all right.  We've got all
the evidence we want.'

'Good!  And when you've arrested them, if you aren't sure of
getting a conviction, shoot them, jolly well shoot them!  Fake up
an escape or something.  Anything sooner than let those b--s go
free.'

'They won't go free, don't you fear.  We'll get 'em.  Get SOMEBODY,
anyhow.  Much better hang wrong fellow than no fellow,' he added,
unconsciously quoting.

'That's the stuff!  I'll never sleep easy again till I've seen them
swinging,' said Ellis as they moved away from the grave.  'Christ!
Let's get out of this sun!  I'm about perishing with thirst.'

Everyone was perishing, more or less, but it seemed hardly decent
to go down to the Club for drinks immediately after the funeral.
The Europeans scattered for their houses, while four sweepers with
mamooties flung the grey, cement-like earth back into the grave,
and shaped it into a rough mound.

After breakfast, Ellis was walking down to his office, cane in
hand.  It was blinding hot.  Ellis had bathed and changed back into
shirt and shorts, but wearing a thick suit even for an hour had
brought on his prickly heat abominably.  Westfield had gone out
already, in his motor launch, with an inspector and half a dozen
men, to arrest the murderers.  He had ordered Verrall to accompany
him--not that Verrall was needed, but, as Westfield said, it would
do the young swab good to have a spot of work.

Ellis wriggled his shoulders--his prickly heat was almost beyond
bearing.  The rage was stewing in his body like a bitter juice.  He
had brooded all night over what had happened.  They had killed a
white man, killed A WHITE MAN, the bloody sods, the sneaking,
cowardly hounds!  Oh, the swine, the swine, how they ought to be
made to suffer for it!  Why did we make these cursed kid-glove laws?
Why did we take everything lying down?  Just suppose this had
happened in a German colony, before the War!  The good old Germans!
They knew how to treat the niggers.  Reprisals!  Rhinoceros hide
whips!  Raid their villages, kill their cattle, burn their crops,
decimate them, blow them from the guns.

Ellis gazed into the horrible cascades of light that poured through
the gaps in the trees.  His greenish eyes were large and mournful.
A mild, middle-aged Burman came by, balancing a huge bamboo, which
he shifted from one shoulder to the other with a grunt as he passed
Ellis.  Ellis's grip tightened on his stick.  If that swine, now,
would only attack you!  Or even insult you--anything, so that you
had the right to smash him!  If only these gutless curs would ever
show fight in any conceivable way!  Instead of just sneaking past
you, keeping within the law so that you never had a chance to get
back at them.  Ah, for a real rebellion--martial law proclaimed and
no quarter given!  Lovely, sanguinary images moved through his
mind.  Shrieking mounds of natives, soldiers slaughtering them.
Shoot them, ride them down, horses' hooves trample their guts out,
whips cut their faces in slices!

Five High School boys came down the road abreast.  Ellis saw them
coming, a row of yellow, malicious faces--epicene faces, horribly
smooth and young, grinning at him with deliberate insolence.  It
was in their minds to bait him, as a white man.  Probably they had
heard of the murder, and--being Nationalists, like all schoolboys--
regarded it as a victory.  They grinned full in Ellis's face as
they passed him.  They were trying openly to provoke him, and they
knew that the law was on their side.  Ellis felt his breast swell.
The look of their faces, jeering at him like a row of yellow
images, was maddening.  He stopped short.

'Here!  What are you laughing at, you young ticks?'

The boys turned.

'I said what the bloody hell are you laughing at?'

One of the boys answered, insolently--but perhaps his bad English
made him seem more insolent than he intended.

'Not your business.'

There was about a second during which Ellis did not know what he
was doing.  In that second he had hit out with all his strength,
and the cane landed, crack! right across the boy's eyes.  The boy
recoiled with a shriek, and in the same instant the other four had
thrown themselves upon Ellis.  But he was too strong for them.  He
flung them aside and sprang back, lashing out with his stick so
furiously that none of them dared come near.

'Keep your distance, you --s!  Keep off, or by God I'll smash
another of you!'  Though they were four to one he was so formidable
that they surged back in fright.  The boy who was hurt had fallen
on his knees with his arms across his face, and was screaming 'I am
blinded!  I am blinded!'  Suddenly the other four turned and darted
for a pile of laterite, used for road-mending, which was twenty
yards away.  One of Ellis's clerks had appeared on the veranda of
the office and was leaping up and down in agitation.

'Come up, sir come up at once.  They will murder you!'

Ellis disdained to run, but he moved for the veranda steps.  A lump
of laterite came sailing through the air and shattered itself
against a pillar, whereat the clerk scooted indoors.  But Ellis
turned on the veranda to face the boys, who were below, each
carrying an armful of laterite.  He was cackling with delight.

'You damned, dirty little niggers!' he shouted down at them.  'You
got a surprise that time, didn't you?  Come up on this veranda and
fight me, all four of you!  You daren't.  Four to one and you
daren't face me!  Do you call yourselves men?  You sneaking, mangy
little rats!'

He broke into Burmese, calling them the incestuous children of
pigs.  All the while they were pelting him with lumps of laterite,
but their arms were feeble and they threw ineptly.  He dodged the
stones, and as each one missed him he cackled in triumph.
Presently there was a sound of shouts up the road, for the noise
had been heard at the police station, and some constables were
emerging to see what was the matter.  The boys took fright and
bolted, leaving Ellis a complete victor.

Ellis had heartily enjoyed the affray, but he was furiously angry
as soon as it was over.  He wrote a violent note to Mr Macgregor,
telling him that he had been wantonly assaulted and demanding
vengeance.  Two clerks who had witnessed the scene, and a chaprassi,
were sent along to Mr Macgregor's office to corroborate the story.
They lied in perfect unison.  'The boys had attacked Mr Ellis
without any provocation whatever, he had defended himself,' etc.,
etc.  Ellis, to do him justice, probably believed this to be a
truthful version of the story.  Mr Macgregor was somewhat disturbed,
and ordered the police to find the four schoolboys and interrogate
them.  The boys, however, had been expecting something of the kind,
and were lying very low; the police searched the bazaar all day
without finding them.  In the evening the wounded boy was taken to
a Burmese doctor, who, by applying some poisonous concoction of
crushed leaves to his left eye, succeeded in blinding him.

The Europeans met at the Club as usual that evening, except for
Westfield and Verrall, who had not yet returned.  Everyone was in a
bad mood.  Coming on top of the murder, the unprovoked attack on
Ellis (for that was the accepted description of it) had scared them
as well as angered them.  Mrs Lackersteen was twittering to the
tune of 'We shall all be murdered in our beds'.  Mr Macgregor, to
reassure her, told her in cases of riot the European ladies were
always locked inside the jail until everything was over; but she
did not seem much comforted.  Ellis was offensive to Flory, and
Elizabeth cut him almost dead.  He had come down to the Club in the
insane hope of making up their quarrel, and her demeanour made him
so miserable that for the greater part of the evening he skulked in
the library.  It was not till eight o'clock when everyone had
swallowed a number of drinks, that the atmosphere grew a little
more friendly, and Ellis said:

'What about sending a couple of chokras up to our houses and
getting our dinners sent down here?  We might as well have a few
rubbers of bridge.  Better than mooning about at home.'

Mrs Lackersteen, who was in dread of going home, jumped at the
suggestion.  The Europeans occasionally dined at the Club when they
wanted to stay late.  Two of the chokras were sent for, and on
being told what was wanted of them, immediately burst into tears.
It appeared that if they went up the hill they were certain of
encountering Maxwell's ghost.  The mali was sent instead.  As the
man set out Flory noticed that it was again the night of the full
moon--four weeks to a day since that evening, now unutterably
remote, when he had kissed Elizabeth under the frangipani tree.

They had just sat down at the bridge table, and Mrs Lackersteen had
just revoked out of pure nervousness, when there was a heavy thump
on the roof.  Everyone started and look up.

'A coco-nut falling!' said Mr Macgregor.

'There aren't any coco-nut trees here,' said Ellis.

The next moment a number of things happened all together.  There
was another and much louder bang, one of the petrol lamps broke
from its hook and crashed to the ground, narrowly missing Mr
Lackersteen, who jumped aside with a yelp, Mrs Lackersteen began
screaming, and the butler rushed into the room, bareheaded, his
face the colour of bad coffee.

'Sir, sir!  Bad men come!  Going to murder us all, sir!'

'What?  Bad men?  What do you mean?'

'Sir, all the villagers are outside!  Big stick and dah in their
hands, and all dancing about!  Going to cut master's throat, sir!'

Mrs Lackersteen threw herself backwards in her chair.  She was
setting up such a din of screams as to drown the butler's voice.

'Oh, be quiet!' said Ellis sharply, turning on her.  'Listen, all
of you!  Listen to that!'

There was a deep, murmurous, dangerous sound outside, like the
humming of an angry giant.  Mr Macgregor, who had stood up,
stiffened as he heard it, and settled his spectacles pugnaciously
on his nose.

'This is some kind of disturbance!  Butler, pick that lamp up.
Miss Lackersteen, look to your aunt.  See if she is hurt.  The rest
of you come with me!'

They all made for the front door, which someone, presumably the
butler, had closed.  A fusillade of small pebbles was rattling
against it like hail.  Mr Lackersteen wavered at the sound and
retreated behind the others.

'I say, dammit, bolt that bloody door, someone!' he said.

'No, no!' said Mr Macgregor.  'We must go outside.  It's fatal not
to face them!'

He opened the door and presented himself boldly at the top of the
steps.  There were about twenty Burmans on the path, with dahs or
sticks in their hands.  Outside the fence, stretching up the road
in either direction and far out on to the maidan, was an enormous
crowd of people.  It was like a sea of people, two thousand at the
least, black and white in the moon, with here and there a curved
dah glittering.  Ellis had coolly placed himself beside Mr
Macgregor, with his hands in his pockets.  Mr Lackersteen had
disappeared.

Mr Macgregor raised his hand for silence.  'What is the meaning of
this?' he shouted sternly.

There were yells, and some lumps of laterite the size of cricket
balls came sailing from the road, but fortunately hit no one.  One
of the men on the path turned and waved his arms to the others,
shouting that they were not to begin throwing yet.  Then he stepped
forward to address the Europeans.  He was a strong debonair fellow
of about thirty, with down-curving moustaches, wearing a singlet,
with his longyi kilted to the knee.

'What is the meaning of this?' Mr Macgregor repeated.

The man spoke up with a cheerful grin, and not very insolently.

'We have no quarrel with you, min gyi.  We have come for the timber
merchant, Ellis.'  (He pronounced it Ellit.)  'The boy whom he
struck this morning has gone blind.  You must send Ellit out to us
here, so that we can punish him.  The rest of you will not be
hurt.'

'Just remember that fellow's face,' said Ellis over his shoulder to
Flory.  'We'll get him seven years for this afterwards.'

Mr Macgregor had turned temporarily quite purple.  His rage was so
great that it almost choked him.  For several moments he could not
speak, and when he did so it was in English.

'Whom do you think you are speaking to?  In twenty years I have
never heard such insolence!  Go away this instant, or I shall call
out the Military Police!'

'You'd better be quick, min gyi.  We know that there is no justice
for us in your courts, so we must punish Ellit ourselves.  Send him
out to us here.  Otherwise, all of you will weep for it.'

Mr Macgregor made a furious motion with his fist, as though
hammering in a nail, 'Go away, son of a dog!' he cried, using his
first oath in many years.

There was a thunderous roar from the road, and such a shower of
stones, that everyone was hit, including the Burmans on the path.
One stone took Mr Macgregor full in the face, almost knocking him
down.  The Europeans bolted hastily inside and barred the door.  Mr
Macgregor's spectacles were smashed and his nose streaming blood.
They got back to the lounge to find Mrs Lackersteen looping about
in one of the long chairs like a hysterical snake, Mr Lackersteen
standing irresolutely in the middle of the room, holding an empty
bottle, the butler on his knees in the corner, crossing himself (he
was a Roman Catholic), the chokras crying, and only Elizabeth calm,
though she was very pale.

'What's happened?' she exclaimed.

'We're in the soup, that's what's happened!' said Ellis angrily,
feeling at the back of his neck where a stone had hit him.  'The
Burmans are all round, shying rocks.  But keep calm!  They haven't
the guts to break the doors in.'

'Call out the police at once!' said Mr Macgregor indistinctly, for
he was stanching his nose with his handkerchief.

'Can't!' said Ellis.  'I was looking round while you were talking
to them.  They've cut us off, rot their damned souls!  No one could
possibly get to the police lines.  Veraswami's compound is full of
men.'

'Then we must wait.  We can trust them to turn out of their own
accord.  Calm yourself, my dear Mrs Lackersteen, PLEASE calm
yourself!  The danger is very small.'

It did not sound small.  There were no gaps in the noise now, and
the Burmans seemed to be pouring into the compounds by hundreds.
The din swelled suddenly to such a volume that no one could make
himself heard except by shouting.  All the windows in the lounge
had been shut, and some perforated zinc shutters within, which were
sometimes used for keeping out insects, pulled to and bolted.
There was a series of crashes as the windows were broken, and then
a ceaseless thudding of stones from all sides, that shook the thin
wooden walls and seemed likely to split them.  Ellis opened a
shutter and flung a bottle viciously among the crowd, but a dozen
stones came hurtling in and he had to close the shutter hurriedly.
The Burmans seemed to have no plan beyond flinging stones, yelling
and hammering at the walls, but the mere volume of noise was
unnerving.  The Europeans were half dazed by it at first.  None of
them thought to blame Ellis, the sole cause of this affair; their
common peril seemed, indeed, to draw them closer together for the
while.  Mr Macgregor, half-blind without his spectacles, stood
distractedly in the middle of the room, yielding his right hand to
Mrs Lackersteen, who was caressing it, while a weeping chokra clung
to his left leg.  Mr Lackersteen had vanished again.  Ellis was
stamping furiously up and down, shaking his fist in the direction
of the police lines.

'Where are the police, the f-- cowardly sods?' he yelled, heedless
of the women.  'Why don't they turn out?  My God, we won't get
another chance like this in a hundred years!  If we'd only ten
rifles here, how we could slosh these b--s!'

'They'll be here presently!' Mr Macgregor shouted back.  'It will
take them some minutes to penetrate that crowd.'

'But why don't they use their rifles, the miserable sons of
bitches?  They could slaughter them in bloody heaps if they'd only
open fire.  Oh, God, to think of missing a chance like this!'

A lump of rock burst one of the zinc shutters.  Another followed
through the hole it had made, stove in a 'Bonzo' picture, bounced
off, cut Elizabeth's elbow, and finally landed on the table.  There
was a roar of triumph from outside, and then a succession of
tremendous thumps on the roof.  Some children had climbed into the
trees and were having the time of their lives sliding down the roof
on their bottoms.  Mrs Lackersteen outdid all previous efforts with
a shriek that rose easily above the din outside.

'Choke that bloody hag, somebody!' cried Ellis.  'Anyone'd think a
pig was being killed.  We've got to do something.  Flory, Macgregor,
come here!  Think of a way out of this mess, someone!'

Elizabeth had suddenly lost her nerve and begun crying.  The blow
from the stone had hurt her.  To Flory's astonishment, he found her
clinging tightly to his arm.  Even in that moment it made his heart
turn over.  He had been watching the scene almost with detachment--
dazed by the noise, indeed, but not much frightened.  He always
found it difficult to believe Orientals could be really dangerous.
Only when he felt Elizabeth's hand on his arm did he grasp the
seriousness of the situation.

'Oh, Mr Flory, please, please think of something!  You can, you
can!  Anything sooner than let those dreadful men get in here!'

'If only one of us could get to the police lines!' groaned Mr
Macgregor.  'A British officer to lead them!  At the worst I must
try and go myself.'

'Don't be a fool!  Only get your throat cut!' yelled Ellis. '_I_'ll
go if they really look like breaking in.  But, oh, to be killed by
swine like that!  How furious it'd make me!  And to think we could
murder the whole bloody crowd if only we could get the police
here!'

'Couldn't someone get along the river bank?' Flory shouted
despairingly.

'Hopeless!  Hundreds of them prowling up and down.  We're cut off--
Burmans on three sides and the river on the other!'

'The river!'

One of those startling ideas that are overlooked simply because
they are so obvious had sprung into Flory's mind.

'The river!  Of course!  We can get to the police lines as easy as
winking.  Don't you see?'

'How?'

'Why, down the river--in the water!  Swim!'

'Oh, good man!' cried Ellis, and smacked Flory on the shoulder.
Elizabeth squeezed his arm and actually danced a step or two in
glee.  'I'll go if you like!' Ellis shouted, but Flory shook his
head.  He had already begun slipping his shoes off.  There was
obviously no time to be lost.  The Burmans had behaved like fools
hitherto, but there was no saying what might happen if they
succeeded in breaking in.  The butler, who had got over his first
fright, prepared to open the window that gave on the lawn, and
glanced obliquely out.  There were barely a score of Burmans on the
lawn.  They had left the back of the Club unguarded, supposing that
the river cut off retreat.

'Rush down the lawn like hell!' Ellis shouted in Flory's ear.
'They'll scatter all right when they see you.'

'Order the police to open fire at once!' shouted Mr Macgregor from
the other side.  'You have my authority.'

'And tell them to aim low!  No firing over their heads.  Shoot to
kill.  In the guts for choice!'

Flory leapt down from the veranda, hurting his feet on the hard
earth, and was at the river bank in six paces.  As Ellis had said,
the Burmans recoiled for a moment when they saw him leaping down.
A few stones followed him, but no one pursued--they thought, no
doubt, that he was only attempting to escape, and in the clear
moonlight they could see that it was not Ellis.  In another moment
he had pushed his way through the bushes and was in the water.

He sank deep down, and the horrible river ooze received him,
sucking him knee-deep so that it was several seconds before he
could free himself.  When he came to the surface a tepid froth,
like the froth on stout, was lapping round his lips, and some
spongy thing had floated into his throat and was choking him.  It
was a sprig of water hyacinth.  He managed to spit it out, and
found that the swift current had floated him twenty yards already.
Burmans were rushing rather aimlessly up and down the bank,
yelling.  With his eye at the level of the water, Flory could not
see the crowd besieging the Club; but he could hear their deep,
devilish roaring, which sounded even louder than it had sounded on
shore.  By the time he was opposite the Military Police lines the
bank seemed almost bare of men.  He managed to struggle out of the
current and flounder through the mud, which sucked off his left
sock.  A little way down the bank two old men were sitting beside a
fence, sharpening fence-posts, as though there had not been a riot
within a hundred miles of them.  Flory crawled ashore, clambered
over the fence and ran heavily across the moonwhite parade-ground,
his wet trousers sagging.  As far as he could tell in the noise,
the lines were quite empty.  In some stalls over to the right
Verrall's horses were plunging about in a panic.  Flory ran out on
to the road, and saw what had happened.

The whole body of policemen, military and civil, about a hundred
and fifty men in all, had attacked the crowd from the rear, armed
only with sticks.  They had been utterly engulfed.  The crowd was
so dense that it was like an enormous swarm of bees seething and
rotating.  Everywhere one could see policemen wedged helplessly
among the hordes of Burmans, struggling furiously but uselessly,
and too cramped even to use their sticks.  Whole knots of men were
tangled Laocoon-like in the folds of unrolled pagris.  There was a
terrific bellowing of oaths in three or four languages, clouds of
dust, and a suffocating stench of sweat and marigolds--but no one
seemed to have been seriously hurt.  Probably the Burmans had not
used their daks for fear of provoking rifle-fire.  Flory pushed his
way into the crowd and was immediately swallowed up like the
others.  A sea of bodies closed in upon him and flung him from side
to side, bumping his ribs and choking him with their animal heat.
He struggled onwards with an almost dreamlike feeling, so absurd
and unreal was the situation.  The whole riot had been ludicrous
from the start, and what was most ludicrous of all was that the
Burmans, who might have killed him, did not know what to do with
him now he was among them.  Some yelled insults in his face, some
jostled him and stamped on his feet, some even tried to make way
for him, as a white man.  He was not certain whether he was
fighting for his life, or merely pushing his way through the crowd.
For quite a long time he was jammed, helpless, with his arms pinned
against his sides, then he found himself wrestling with a stumpy
Burman much stronger than himself, then a dozen men rolled against
him like a wave and drove him deeper into the heart of the crowd.
Suddenly he felt an agonizing pain in his right big toe--someone in
boots had trodden on it.  It was the Military Police subahdar, a
Rajput, very fat, moustachioed, with his pagri gone.  He was
grasping a Burman by the throat and trying to hammer his face,
while the sweat rolled off his bare, bald crown.  Flory threw his
arm round the subahdar's neck and managed to tear him away from his
adversary and shout in his ear.  His Urdu deserted him, and he
bellowed in Burmese:

'Why did you not open fire?'

For a long time he could not hear the man's answer.  Then he caught
it:

'Hukm ne aya'--'I have had no order!'

'Idiot!'

At this moment another bunch of men drove against them, and for a
minute or two they were pinned and quite unable to move.  Flory
realized that the subabdar had a whistle in his pocket and was
trying to get at it.  Finally he got it loose and blew piercing
blasts, but there was no hope of rallying any men until they could
get into a clear space.  It was a fearful labour to struggle our of
the crowd--it was like wading neck-deep through a viscous sea.  At
times the exhaustion of Flory's limbs was so complete that he stood
passive, letting the crowd hold him and even drive him backwards.
At last, more from the natural eddying of the crowd than by his own
effort, he found himself flung out into the open.  The subahdar had
also emerged, ten or fifteen sepoys, and a Burmese Inspector of
Police.  Most of the sepoys collapsed on their haunches almost
falling with fatigue, and limping, their feet having been trampled
on.

'Come on, get up!  Run like hell for the lines!  Get some rifles
and a clip of ammunition each.'

He was too overcome even to speak in Burmese, but the men understood
him and lopped heavily towards the police lines.  Flory followed
them, to get away from the crowd before they turned on him again.
When he reached the gate the sepoys were returning with their rifles
and already preparing to fire.

'The sahib will give the order!' the subahdar panted.

'Here you!' cried Flory to the Inspector.  'Can you speak
Hindustani?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Then tell them to fire high, right over the people's heads.  And
above all, to fire all together.  Make them understand that.'

The fat Inspector, whose Hindustani was even worse than Flory's,
explained what was wanted, chiefly by leaping up and down and
gesticulating.  The sepoys raised their rifles, there was a roar,
and a rolling echo from the hillside.  For a moment Flory thought
that his order had been disregarded, for almost the entire section
of the crowd nearest them had fallen like a swath of hay.  However,
they had only flung themselves down in panic.  The sepoys fired a
second volley, but it was not needed.  The crowd had immediately
begun to surge outwards from the Club like a river changing its
course.  They came pouring down the road, saw the armed men barring
their way, and tried to recoil, whereupon there was a fresh battle
between those in front and those behind; finally the whole crowd
bulged outwards and began to roll slowly up the maidan.  Flory and
the sepoys moved slowly towards the Club on the heels of the
retreating crowd.  The policemen who had been engulfed were
straggling back by ones and twos.  Their pagris were gone and their
puttees trailing yards behind them, but they had no damage worse
than bruises.  The Civil Policemen were dragging a very few
prisoners among them.  When they reached the Club compound the
Burmans were still pouring out, an endless line of young men
leaping gracefully through a gap in the hedge like a procession of
gazelles.  It seemed to Flory that it was getting very dark.  A
small white-clad figure extricated itself from the last of the
crowd and tumbled limply into Flory's arms.  It was Dr Veraswami,
with his tie torn off but his spectacles miraculously unbroken.

'Doctor!'

'Ach, my friend!  Ach, how I am exhausted!'

'What are you doing here?  Were you right in the middle of that
crowd?'

'I was trying to restrain them, my friend.  It was hopeless until
you came.  But there is at least one man who bears the mark of
this, I think!'

He held out a small fist for Flory to see the damaged knuckles.
But it was certainly quite dark now.  At the same moment Flory
heard a nasal voice behind him.

'Well, Mr Flory, so it's all over already!  A mere flash in the pan
as usual.  You and I together were a little too much for them--
ha, ha!'

It was U Po Kyin.  He came towards them with a martial air,
carrying a huge stick, and with a revolver thrust into his belt.
His dress was a studious negligee--singlet and Shan trousers--to
give the impression that he had rushed out of his house post-haste.
He had been lying low until the danger should be over, and was now
hurrying forth to grab a share of any credit that might be going.

'A smart piece of work, sir!' he said enthusiastically.  'Look how
they are flying up the hillside!  We have routed them most
satisfactory.'

'WE!' panted the doctor indignantly.

'Ah, my dear doctor!  I did not perceive that you were there.  It
is possible that YOU also have been in the fighting?  YOU--risking
your most valuable life!  Who would have believed such a thing?'

'You've taken your time getting here yourself!' said Flory angrily.

'Well, well sir, it is enough that we have dispersed them.
Although,' he added with a touch of satisfaction, for he had
noticed Flory's tone, 'they are going in the direction of the
European houses, you will observe.  I fancy that it will occur to
them to do a little plundering on their way.'

One had to admire the man's impudence.  He tucked his great stick
under his arm and strolled beside Flory in an almost patronizing
manner, while the doctor dropped behind, abashed in spite of
himself.  At the Club gate all three men halted.  It was now
extraordinarily dark, and the moon had vanished.  Low overhead,
just visible, black clouds were streaming eastward like a pack of
hounds.  A wind, almost cold, blew down the hillside and swept a
cloud of dust and fine water-vapour before it.  There was a sudden
intensely rich scent of damp.  The wind quickened, the trees
rustled, then began beating themselves furiously together, the big
frangipani tree by the tennis court flinging out a nebula of dimly
seen blossom.  All three men turned and hurried for shelter, the
Orientals to their houses, Flory to the Club.  It had begun
raining.



23


Next day the town was quieter than a cathedral city on Monday
morning.  It is usually the case after a riot.  Except for the
handful of prisoners, everyone who could possibly have been
concerned in the attack on the Club had a watertight alibi.  The
Club garden looked as though a herd of bison had stampeded across
it, but the houses had not been plundered, and there were no new
casualties among the Europeans, except that after everything was
over Mr Lackersteen had been found very drunk under the billiard-
table, where he had retired with a bottle of whisky.  Westfield and
Verrall came back early in the morning, bringing Maxwell's
murderers under arrest; or at any rate, bringing two people who
would presently be hanged for Maxwell's murder.  Westfield, when he
heard the news of the riot, was gloomy but resigned.  AGAIN it
happened--a veritable riot, and he not there to quell it!  It
seemed fated that he should never kill a man.  Depressing,
depressing.  Verrall's only comment was that it had been 'damned
lip' on the part of Flory (a civilian) to give orders to the
Military Police.

Meanwhile, it was raining almost without cease.  As soon as he woke
up and heard the rain hammering on the roof Flory dressed and
hurried out, Flo following.  Out of sight of the houses he took off
his clothes and let the rain sluice down on his bare body.  To his
surprise, he found that he was covered with bruises from last
night; but the rain had washed away every trace of his prickly heat
within three minutes.  It is wonderful, the healing power of
rainwater.  Flory walked down to Dr Veraswami's house, with his
shoes squelching and periodical jets of water flowing down his neck
from the brim of his Terai hat.  The sky was leaden, and
innumerable whirling storms chased one another across the maidan
like squadrons of cavalry.  Burmans passed, under vast wooden hats
in spite of which their bodies streamed water like the bronze gods
in the fountains.  A network of rivulets was already washing the
stones of the road bare.  The doctor had just got home when Flory
arrived, and was shaking a wet umbrella over the veranda rail.  He
hailed Flory excitedly.

'Come up, Mr Flory, come up at once!  You are just apropos.  I was
on the point of opening a bottle of Old Tommy Gin.  Come up and let
me drink to your health, ass the saviour of Kyauktada!'

They had a long talk together.  The doctor was in a triumphant
mood.  It appeared that what had happened last night had righted
his troubles almost miraculously.  U Po Kyin's schemes were undone.
The doctor was no longer at his mercy--in fact, it was the other
way about.  The doctor explained to Flory:

'You see, my friend, this riot--or rather, your most noble
behaviour in it--wass quite outside U Po Kyin's programme.  He had
started the SO-CALLED rebellion and had the glory of crushing it,
and he calculated that any further outbreak would simply mean more
glory still.  I am told that when he heard of Mr Maxwell's death,
hiss joy was positively'--the doctor nipped his thumb and forefinger
together--'what iss the word I want?'

'Obscene?'

'Ah yes.  Obscene.  It iss said that actually he attempted to
dance--can you imagine such a disgusting spectacle?--and exclaimed,
"Now at least they will take my rebellion seriously!"  Such iss his
regard for human life.  But now hiss triumph iss at an end.  The
riot hass tripped up in mid-career.'

'How?'

'Because, do you not see, the honours of the riot are not hiss, but
yours!  And I am known to be your friend.  I stand, so to speak, in
the reflection of your glory.  Are you not the hero of the hour?
Did not your European friends receive you with open arms when you
returned to the Club last night?'

'They did, I must admit.  It was quite a new experience for me.
Mrs Lackersteen was all over me. "DEAR Mr Flory", she calls me now.
And she's got her knife properly in Ellis.  She hasn't forgotten
that he called her a bloody hag and told her to stop squealing like
a pig.'

'Ah, Mr Ellis iss sometimes over-emphatic in hiss expressions.  I
have noticed it.'

'The only fly in the ointment is that I told the police to fire
over the crowd's heads instead of straight at them.  It seems
that's against all the Government regulations.  Ellis was a little
vexed about it.  "Why didn't you plug some of the b--s when you had
the chance?" he said.  I pointed out that it would have meant
hitting the police who were in the middle of the crowd; but as he
said, they were only niggers anyway.  However, all my sins are
forgiven me.  And Macgregor quoted something in Latin--Horace, I
believe.'

It was half an hour later when Flory walked along to the Club.  He
had promised to see Mr Macgregor and settle the business of the
doctor's election.  But there would be no difficulty about it now.
The others would eat out of his hand until the absurd riot was
forgotten; he could have gone into the Club and made a speech in
favour of Lenin, and they would have put up with it.  The lovely
rain streamed down, drenching him from head to foot, and filling
his nostrils with the scent of earth, forgotten during the bitter
months of drought.  He walked up the wrecked garden, where the
mali, bending down with the rain splashing on his bare back, was
trowelling holes for zinnias.  Nearly all the flowers had been
trampled out of existence.  Elizabeth was there, on the side
veranda, almost as though she were waiting for him.  He took off
his hat, spilling a pool of water from the brim, and went round to
join her.

'Good morning!' he said, raising his voice because of the rain that
beat noisily on the low roof.

'Good morning!  ISN'T it coming down?  Simply PELTING!'

'Oh, this isn't real rain.  You wait till July.  The whole Bay of
Bengal is going to pour itself on us, by instalments.'

It seemed that they must never meet without talking of the weather.
Nevertheless, her face said something very different from the banal
words.  Her demeanour had changed utterly since last night.  He
took courage.

'How is the place where that stone hit you?'

She held her arm out to him and let him take it.  Her air was
gentle, even submissive.  He realized that his exploit of last
night had made him almost a hero in her eyes.  She could not know
how small the danger had really been, and she forgave him
everything, even Ma Hla May, because he had shown courage at the
right moment.  It was the buffalo and the leopard over again.  His
heart thumped in his breast.  He slipped his hand down her arm and
clasped her fingers in his own.

'Elizabeth--'

'Someone will see us!' she said, and she withdrew her hand, but not
angrily.

'Elizabeth, I've something I want to say to you.  Do you remember a
letter I wrote you from the jungle, after our--some weeks ago?'

'Yes.'

'You remember what I said in it?'

'Yes.  I'm sorry I didn't answer it.  Only--'

'I couldn't expect you to answer it, then.  But I just wanted to
remind you of what I said.'

In the letter, of course, he had only said, and feebly enough, that
he loved her--would always love her, no matter what happened.  They
were standing face to face, very close together.  On an impulse--
and it was so swiftly done that afterwards he had difficulty in
believing that it had ever happened--he took her in his arms and
drew her towards him.  For a moment she yielded and let him lift up
her face and kiss her; then suddenly she recoiled and shook her
head.  Perhaps she was frightened that someone would see them,
perhaps it was only because his moustache was so wet from the rain.
Without saying anything more she broke from him and hurried away
into the Club.  There was a look of distress or compunction in her
face; but she did not seem angry.

He followed her more slowly into the Club, and ran into Mr
Macgregor, who was in a very good humour.  As soon as he saw Flory
he boomed genially, 'Aha!  The conquering hero comes!' and then, in
a more serious vein, offered him fresh congratulations.  Flory
improved the occasion by saying a few words on behalf of the
doctor.  He painted quite a lively picture of the doctor's heroism
in the riot.  'He was right in the middle of the crowd, fighting
like a tiger,' etc., etc.  It was not too much exaggerated--for the
doctor had certainly risked his life.  Mr Macgregor was impressed,
and so were the others when they heard of it.  At all times the
testimony of one European can do an Oriental more good than that of
a thousand of his fellow countrymen; and at this moment Flory's
opinion carried weight.  Practically, the doctor's good name was
restored.  His election to the Club could be taken as assured.

However, it was not finally agreed upon yet, because Flory was
returning to camp.  He set out the same evening, marching by night,
and he did not see Elizabeth again before leaving.  It was quite
safe to travel in the jungle now, for the futile rebellion was
obviously finished.  There is seldom any talk of rebellion after
the rains have started--the Burmans are too busy ploughing, and in
any case the waterlogged fields are impassable for large bodies of
men.  Flory was to return to Kyauktada in ten days, when the
padre's six-weekly visit fell due.  The truth was that he did not
care to be in Kyauktada while both Elizabeth and Verrall were
there.  And yet, it was strange, but all the bitterness--all the
obscene, crawling envy that had tormented him before--was gone now
that he knew she had forgiven him.  It was only Verrall who stood
between them now.  And even the thought of her in Verrall's arms
could hardly move him, because he knew that at the worst the affair
must have an end.  Verrall, it was quite certain, would never marry
Elizabeth; young men of Verrall's stamp do not marry penniless
girls met casually at obscure Indian stations.  He was only amusing
himself with Elizabeth.  Presently he would desert her, and she
would return to him--to Flory.  It was enough--it was far better
than he had hoped.  There is a humility about genuine love that is
rather horrible in some ways.

U Po Kyin was furiously angry.  The miserable riot had taken him
unawares, so far as anything ever took him unawares, and it was
like a handful of grit thrown into the machinery of his plans.  The
business of disgracing the doctor had got to be begun all over
again.  Begun it was, sure enough, with such a spate of anonymous
letters that Hla Pe had to absent himself from office for two whole
days--it was bronchitis this time--to get them written.  The doctor
was accused of every crime from pederasty to stealing Government
postage stamps.  The prison warder who had let Nga Shwe O escape
had now come up for trial.  He was triumphantly acquitted, U Po
Kyin having spent as much as two hundred rupees in bribing the
witnesses.  More letters showered up on Mr Macgregor, proving in
detail that Dr Veraswami, the real author of the escape, had tried
to shift the blame on to a helpless subordinate.  Nevertheless, the
results were disappointing.  The confidential letter which Mr
Macgregor wrote to the Commissioner, reporting on the riot, was
steamed open, and its tone was so alarming--Mr Macgregor had spoken
of the doctor as 'behaving most creditably' on the night of the
riot--that U Po Kyin called a council of war.

'The time has come for a vigorous move,' he said to the others--
they were in conclave on the front veranda, before breakfast.  Ma
Kin was there, and Ba Sein and Hla Pe--the latter a bright-faced,
promising boy of eighteen, with the manner of one who will
certainly succeed in life.

'We are hammering against a brick wall,' U Po Kyin continued; 'and
that wall is Flory.  Who could have foreseen that that miserable
coward would stand by his friend?  However, there it is.  So long
as Veraswami has his backing, we are helpless.'

'I have been talking to the Club butler, sir,' said Ba Sein.  'He
tells me that Mr Ellis and Mr Westfield still do not want the
doctor to be elected to the Club.  Do you not think they will
quarrel with Flory again as soon as this business of the riot is
forgotten?'

'Of course they will quarrel, they always quarrel.  But in the
meantime the harm is done.  Just suppose that man WERE elected!  I
believe I should die of rage if it happened.  No, there is only one
move left.  We must strike at Flory himself!'

'At Flory, sir!  But he is a white man!'

'What do I care?  I have ruined white men before now.  Once let
Flory be disgraced, and there is an end of the doctor.  And he
shall be disgraced!  I will shame him so that he will never dare
show his face in that Club again!'

'But, sir!  A white man!  What are we to accuse him of?  Who would
believe anything against a white man?'

'You have no strategy, Ko Ba Sein.  One does not ACCUSE a white
man; one has got to catch him in the act.  Public disgrace, in
flagrante delicto.  I shall know how to set about it.  Now be
silent while I think.'

There was a pause.  U Po Kyin stood gazing out into the rain with
his small hands clasped behind him and resting on the natural
plateau of his posterior.  The other three watched him from the end
of the veranda, almost frightened by this talk of attacking a white
man, and waiting for some masterstroke to cope with a situation
that was beyond them.  It was a little like the familiar picture
(is it Meissonier's?) of Napoleon at Moscow, poring over his maps
while his marshals wait in silence, with their cocked hats in their
hands.  But of course U Po Kyin was more equal to the situation
than Napoleon.  His plan was ready within two minutes.  When he
turned round his vast face was suffused with excessive joy.  The
doctor had been mistaken when he described U Po Kyin as attempting
to dance; U Po Kyin's figure was not designed for dancing; but, had
it been so designed, he would have danced at this moment.  He
beckoned to Ba Sein and whispered in his ear for a few seconds.

'That is the correct move, I think?' he concluded.

A broad, unwilling, incredulous grin stole slowly across Ba Sein's
face.

'Fifty rupees ought to cover all the expenses,' added U Po Kyin,
beaming.

The plan was unfolded in detail.  And when the others had taken it
in, all of them, even Ba Sein, who seldom laughed, even Ma Kin, who
disapproved from the bottom of her soul, burst into irrepressible
peals of laughter.  The plan was really too good to be resisted.
It was genius.

All the while it was raining, raining.  The day after Flory went
back to camp it rained for thirty-eight hours at a stretch,
sometimes slowing to the pace of English rain, sometimes pouring
down in such cataracts that one thought the whole ocean must by now
have been sucked up into the clouds.  The rattling on the roof
became maddening after a few hours.  In the intervals between the
rain the sun glared as fiercely as ever, the mud began to crack and
steam, and patches of prickly heat sprang out all over one's body.
Hordes of flying beetles had emerged from their cocoons as soon as
the rain started; there was a plague of loathly creatures known as
stink-bugs, which invaded the houses in incredible numbers,
littered themselves over the dining-table and made one's food
uneatable.  Verrall and Elizabeth still went out riding in the
evenings, when the rain was not too fierce.  To Verrall, all
climates were alike, but he did not like to see his ponies
plastered with mud.  Nearly a week went by.  Nothing was changed
between them--they were neither less nor more intimate than they
had been before.  The proposal of marriage, still confidently
expected, was still unuttered.  Then an alarming thing happened.
The news filtered to the Club, through Mr Macgregor, that Verrall
was leaving Kyauktada; the Military Police were to be kept at
Kyauktada, but another officer was coming in Verrall's place, no
one was certain when.  Elizabeth was in horrible suspense.  Surely,
if he was going away, he must say something definite soon?  She
could not question him--dared not even ask him whether he was
really going; she could only wait for him to speak.  He said
nothing.  Then one evening, without warning, he failed to turn up
at the Club.  And two whole days passed during which Elizabeth did
not see him at all.

It was dreadful, but there was nothing that could be done.  Verrall
and Elizabeth had been inseparable for weeks, and yet in a way they
were almost strangers.  He had kept himself so aloof from them all--
had never even seen the inside of the Lackersteens' house.  They
did not know him well enough to seek him out at the dakbungalow, or
write to him; nor did he reappear at morning parade on the maidan.
There was nothing to do except wait until he chose to present
himself again.  And when he did, would he ask her to marry him?
Surely, surely he must!  Both Elizabeth and her aunt (but neither
of them had even spoken of it openly) held it as an article of
faith that he must ask her.  Elizabeth looked forward to their next
meeting with a hope that was almost painful.  Please God it would
be a week at least before he went!  If she rode with him four times
more, or three times--even if it were only twice, all might yet be
well.  Please God he would come back to her soon!  It was
unthinkable that when he came, it would only be to say good-bye!
The two women went down to the Club each evening and sat there
until quite late, listening for Verrall's footsteps outside while
seeming not to listen; but he never appeared.  Ellis, who
understood the situation perfectly, watched Elizabeth with spiteful
amusement.  What made it worst of all was that Mr Lackersteen was
now pestering Elizabeth unceasingly.  He had become quite reckless.
Almost under the eyes of the servants he would waylay her, catch
hold of her and begin pinching and fondling her in the most
revolting way.  Her sole defence was to threaten that she would
tell her aunt; happily he was too stupid to realize that she would
never dare do it.

On the third morning Elizabeth and her aunt arrived at the Club
just in time to escape a violent storm of rain.  They had been
sitting in the lounge for a few minutes when they heard the sound
of someone stamping the water off his shoes in the passage.  Each
woman's heart stirred, for this might be Verrall.  Then a young man
entered the lounge, unbuttoning a long raincoat as he came.  He was
a stout, rollicking, chuckle-headed youth of about twenty-five,
with fat fresh cheeks, butter-coloured hair, no forehead, and, as
it turned out afterwards, a deafening laugh.

Mrs Lackersteen made some inarticulate sound--it was jerked out of
her by her disappointment.  The youth, however, hailed them with
immediate bonhomie, being one of those who are on terms of slangy
intimacy with everyone from the moment of meeting them.

'Hullo, hullo!' he said 'Enter the fairy prince!  Hope I don't sort
of intrude and all that?  Not shoving in on any family gatherings
or anything?'

'Not at all!' said Mrs Lackersteen in surprise.

'What I mean to say--thought I'd just pop in at the Club and have
a glance round, don't you know.  Just to get acclimatized to the
local brand of whisky.  I only got here last night.'

'Are you STATIONED here?' said Mrs Lackersteen, mystified--for they
had not been expecting any newcomers.

'Yes, rather.  Pleasure's mine, entirely.'

'But we hadn't heard. . . .  Oh, of course!  I suppose you're from
the Forest Department?  In place of poor Mr Maxwell?'

'What?  Forest Department?  No fear!  I'm the new Military Police
bloke, you know.'

'The--what?'

'New Military Police bloke.  Taking over from dear ole Verrall.
The dear ole chap got orders to go back to his regiment.  Going off
in a fearful hurry.  And a nice mess he's left everything in for
yours truly, too.'

The Military Policeman was a crass youth, but even he noticed that
Elizabeth's face turned suddenly sickly.  She found herself quite
unable to speak.  It was several seconds before Mrs Lackersteen
managed to exclaim:

'Mr Verrall--going?  Surely he isn't going away YET?'

'Going?  He's gone!'

'GONE?'

'Well, what I mean to say--train's due to start in about half an
hour.  He'll be along at the station now.  I sent a fatigue party
to look after him.  Got to get his ponies aboard and all that.'

There were probably further explanations, but neither Elizabeth nor
her aunt heard a word of them.  In any case, without even a good-
bye to the Military Policeman, they were out on the front steps
within fifteen seconds.  Mrs Lackersteen called sharply for the
butler.

'Butler!  Send my rickshaw round to the front at once!  To the
station, jaldi!' she added as the rickshaw-man appeared, and,
having settled herself in the rickshaw, poked him in the back with
the ferrule of her umbrella to start him.

Elizabeth had put on her raincoat and Mrs Lackersteen was cowering
in the rickshaw behind her umbrella, but neither was much use
against the rain.  It came driving towards them in such sheets that
Elizabeth's frock was soaked before they had reached the gate, and
the rickshaw almost overturned in the wind.  The rickshaw-wallah
put his head down and struggled into it, groaning.  Elizabeth was
in agony.  It was a mistake, SURELY it was a mistake.  He had
written to her and the letter had gone astray.  That was it, that
MUST be it!  It could not be that he had meant to leave her without
even saying good-bye!  And if it were so--no, not even then would
she give up hope!  When he saw her on the platform, for the last
time, he could not be so brutal as to forsake her!  As they neared
the station she fell behind the rickshaw and pinched her cheeks to
bring the blood into them.  A squad of Military Police sepoys
shuffled hurriedly by, their thin uniforms sodden into rags,
pushing a handcart among them.  Those would be Verrall's fatigue
party.  Thank God, there was a quarter of an hour yet.  The train
was not due to leave for another quarter of an hour.  Thank God, at
least, for this last chance of seeing him!

They arrived on the platform just in time to see the train draw out
of the station and gather speed with a series of deafening snorts.
The stationmaster, a little round, black man, was standing on the
line looking ruefully after the train, and holding his waterproof-
covered topi on to his head with one hand, while with the other he
fended off two clamorous Indians who were bobbing at him and trying
to thrust something upon his attention.  Mrs Lackersteen leaned out
of the rickshaw and called agitatedly through the rain.

'Stationmaster!'

'Madam!'

'What train is that?'

'That is the Mandalay train, madam.'

'The Mandalay train!  It can't be!'

'But I assure you, madam!  It is precisely the Mandalay train.'  He
came towards them, removing his topi.

'But Mr Verrall--the Police officer?  Surely he's not on it?'

'Yes, madam, he have departed.'  He waved his hand towards the
train, now receding rapidly in a cloud of rain and steam.

'But the train wasn't due to start yet!'

'No, madam.  Not due to start for another ten minutes.'

'Then why has it gone?'

The stationmaster waved his topi apologetically from side to side.
His dark, squabby face looked quite distressed.

'I know, madam, I know!  MOST unprecedented!  But the young Military
Police officer have positively COMMANDED me to start the train!  He
declare that all is ready and he do not wish to be kept waiting.
I point out the irregularity.  He say he do not care about
irregularity.  I expostulate.  He insist.  And in short--'

He made another gesture.  It meant that Verrall was the kind of man
who would have his way, even when it came to starting a train ten
minutes early.  There was a pause.  The two Indians, imagining that
they saw their chance, suddenly rushed forward, wailing, and
offered some grubby notebooks for Mrs Lackersteen's inspection.

'What DO these men want?' cried Mrs Lackersteen distractedly.

'They are grass-wallahs, madam.  They say that Lieutenant Verrall
have departed owing them large sums of money.  One for hay, the
other for corn.  Of mine it is no affair.'

There was a hoot from the distant train.  It rolled round the bend,
like a black-behinded caterpillar that looks over its shoulder as
it goes, and vanished.  The stationmaster's wet white trousers
flapped forlornly about his legs.  Whether Verrall had started the
train early to escape Elizabeth, or to escape the grass-wallahs,
was an interesting question that was never cleared up.

They made their way back along the road, and then struggled up the
hill in such a wind that sometimes they were driven several paces
backwards.  When they gained the veranda they were quite out of
breath.  The servants took their streaming raincoats, and Elizabeth
shook some of the water from her hair.  Mrs Lackersteen broke her
silence for the first time since they had left the station:

'WELL!  Of all the unmannerly--of the simply ABOMINABLE. . . !'

Elizabeth looked pale and sickly, in spite of the rain and wind
that had beaten into her face.  But she would betray nothing.

'I think he might have waited to say good-bye to us,' she said
coldly.

'Take my word for it, dear, you are thoroughly well rid of him! . . .
As I said from the start, a most ODIOUS young man!'

Some time later, when they were sitting down to breakfast, having
bathed and got into dry clothes, and feeling better, she remarked:

'Let me see, what day is this?'

'Saturday, Aunt.'

'Ah, Saturday.  Then the dear padre will be arriving this evening.
How many shall we be for the service tomorrow?  Why, I think we
shall ALL be here!  How very nice!  Mr Flory will be here too.  I
think he said he was coming back from the jungle tomorrow.'  She
added almost lovingly, 'DEAR Mr Flory!'



24


It was nearly six o'clock in the evening, and the absurd bell in
the six-foot tin steeple of the church went clank-clank, clank-
clank! as old Mattu pulled the rope within.  The rays of the
setting sun, refracted by distant rainstorms, flooded the maidan
with a beautiful, lurid light.  It had been raining earlier in the
day, and would rain again.  The Christian community of Kyauktada,
fifteen in number, were gathering at the church door for the
evening service.

Flory was already there, and Mr Macgregor, grey topi and all, and
Mr Francis and Mr Samuel, frisking about in freshly laundered drill
suits--for the six-weekly church service was the great social event
of their lives.  The padre, a tall man with grey hair and a
refined, discoloured face, wearing pince-nez, was standing on the
church steps in his cassock and surplice, which he had put on in Mr
Macgregor's house.  He was smiling in an amiable but rather
helpless way at four pink-cheeked Karen Christians who had come to
make their bows to him; for he did not speak a word of their
language nor they of his.  There was one other Oriental Christian,
a mournful, dark Indian of uncertain race, who stood humbly in the
background.  He was always present at the church services, but no
one knew who he was or why he was a Christian.  Doubtless he had
been captured and baptized in infancy by the missionaries, for
Indians who are converted when adults almost invariably lapse.

Flory could see Elizabeth coming down the hill, dressed in lilac-
colour, with her aunt and uncle.  He had seen her that morning at
the Club--they had had just a minute alone together before the
others came in.  He had only asked her one question.

'Has Verrall gone--for good?'

'Yes.'

There had been no need to say any more.  He had simply taken her by
the arms and drawn her towards him.  She came willingly, even
gladly--there in the clear daylight, merciless to his disfigured
face.  For a moment she had clung to him almost like a child.  It
was a though he had saved her or protected her from something.  He
raised her face to kiss her, and found with surprise that she was
crying.  There had been no time to talk then, not even to say,
'Will you marry me?'  No matter, after the service there would be
time enough.  Perhaps at his next visit, only six weeks hence, the
padre would marry them.

Ellis and Westfield and the new Military Policeman were approaching
from the Club, where they had been having a couple of quick ones to
last them through the service.  The Forest Officer who had been
sent to take Maxwell's place, a sallow, tall man, completely bald
except for two whisker-like tufts in front of his ears, was
following them.  Flory had not time to say more than 'Good evening'
to Elizabeth when she arrived.  Mattu, seeing that everyone was
present, stopped ringing the bell, and the clergyman led the way
inside, followed by Mr Macgregor, with his topi against his
stomach, and the Lackersteens and the native Christians.  Ellis
pinched Flory's elbow and whispered boozily in his ear:

'Come on, line up.  Time for the snivel-parade.  Quick march!'

He and the Military Policeman went in behind the others, arm-in-
arm, with a dancing step--the policeman, till they got inside,
wagging his fat behind in imitation of a pwe-dancer.  Flory sat
down in the same pew as these two, opposite Elizabeth, on her
right.  It was the first time that he had ever risked sitting with
his birthmark towards her.  'Shut your eyes and count twenty-five',
whispered Ellis as they sat down, drawing a snigger from the
policeman.  Mrs Lackersteen had already taken her place at the
harmonium, which was no bigger than a writing-desk.  Mattu
stationed himself by the door and began to pull the punkah--it was
so arranged that it only flapped over the front pews, where the
Europeans sat.  Flo came nosing up the aisle, found Flory's pew and
settled down underneath it.  The service began.

Flory was only attending intermittently.  He was dimly aware of
standing and kneeling and muttering 'Amen' to interminable prayers,
and of Ellis nudging him and whispering blasphemies behind his hymn
book.  But he was too happy to collect his thoughts.  Hell was
yielding up Eurydice.  The yellow light flooded in through the open
door, gilding the broad back of Mr Macgregor's silk coat like
cloth-of-gold.  Elizabeth, across the narrow aisle, was so close to
Flory that he could hear every rustle of her dress and feel, as it
seemed to him, the warmth of her body; yet he would not look at her
even once, lest the others should notice it.  The harmonium
quavered bronchitically as Mrs Lackersteen struggled to pump
sufficient air into it with the sole pedal that worked.  The
singing was a queer, ragged noise--an earnest booming from Mr
Macgregor, a kind of shamefaced muttering from the other Europeans,
and from the back a loud, wordless lowing, for the Karen Christians
knew the tunes of the hymns but not the words.

They were kneeling down again.  'More bloody knee-drill,' Ellis
whispered.  The air darkened, and there was a light patter of rain
on the roof; the trees outside rustled, and a cloud of yellow
leaves whirled past the window.  Flory watched them through the
chinks of his fingers.  Twenty years ago, on winter Sundays in his
pew in the parish church at home, he used to watch the yellow
leaves, as at this moment, drifting and fluttering against leaden
skies.  Was it not possible, now, to begin over again as though
those grimy years had never touched him?  Through his fingers he
glanced sidelong at Elizabeth, kneeling with her head bent and her
face hidden in her youthful, mottled hands.  When they were
married, when they were married!  What fun they would have together
in this alien yet kindly land!  He saw Elizabeth in his camp,
greeting him as he came home tired from work and Ko S'la hurried
from the tent with a bottle of beer; he saw her walking in the
forest with him, watching the hornbills in the peepul trees and
picking nameless flowers, and in the marshy grazing-grounds,
tramping through the cold-weather mist after snipe and teal.  He
saw his home as she would remake it.  He saw his drawing-room,
sluttish and bachelor-like no longer, with new furniture from
Rangoon, and a bowl of pink balsams like rosebuds on the table, and
books and water-colours and a black piano.  Above all the piano!
His mind lingered upon the piano--symbol, perhaps because he was
unmusical, of civilized and settled life.  He was delivered for
ever from the sub-life of the past decade--the debaucheries, the
lies, the pain of exile and solitude, the dealings with whores and
moneylenders and pukka sahibs.

The clergyman stepped to the small wooden lectern that also served
as a pulpit, slipped the band from a roll of sermon paper, coughed,
and announced a text.  'In the name of the Father, the Son and the
Holy Ghost.  Amen.'

'Cut it short, for Christ's sake,' murmured Ellis.

Flory did not notice how many minutes passed.  The words of the
sermon flowed peacefully through his head, an indistinct burbling
sound, almost unheard.  When they were married, he was still
thinking, when they were married--

Hullo!  What was happening?

The clergyman had stopped short in the middle of a word.  He had
taken off his pince-nez and was shaking them with a distressed air
at someone in the doorway.  There was a fearful, raucous scream.

'Pike-san pay-like!  Pike-san pay-like!'

Everyone jumped in their seats and turned round.  It was Ma Hla
May.  As they turned she stepped inside the church and shoved old
Mattu violently aside.  She shook her fist at Flory.

'Pike-san pay-like!  Pike-san pay-like!  Yes, THAT'S the one I
mean--Flory, Flory!  (She pronounced it Porley.)  That one sitting
in front there, with the black hair!  Turn round and face me, you
coward!  Where is the money you promised me?'

She was shrieking like a maniac.  The people gaped at her, too
astounded to move or speak.  Her face was grey with powder, her
greasy hair was tumbling down, her longyi was ragged at the bottom.
She looked like a screaming hag of the bazaar.  Flory's bowels
seemed to have turned to ice.  Oh God, God!  Must they know--must
Elizabeth know--that THAT was the woman who had been his mistress?
But there was not a hope, not the vestige of a hope, of any
mistake.  She had screamed his name over and over again.  Flo,
hearing the familiar voice, wriggled from under the pew, walked
down the aisle and wagged her tail at Ma Hla May.  The wretched
woman was yelling out a detailed account of what Flory had done to
her.

'Look at me, you white men, and you women, too, look at me!  Look
how he has ruined me!  Look at these rags I am wearing!  And he is
sitting there, the liar, the coward, pretending not to see me!  He
would let me starve at his gate like a pariah dog.  Ah, but I will
shame you!  Turn round and look at me!  Look at this body that you
have kissed a thousand times--look--look--'

She began actually to tear her clothes open--the last insult of a
base-born Burmese woman.  The harmonium squeaked as Mrs Lackersteen
made a convulsive movement.  People had at last found their wits
and began to stir.  The clergyman, who had been bleating
ineffectually, recovered his voice, 'Take that woman outside!' he
said sharply.

Flory's face was ghastly.  After the first moment he had turned his
head away from the door and set his teeth in a desperate effort to
look unconcerned.  But it was useless, quite useless.  His face was
as yellow as bone, and the sweat glistened on his forehead.
Francis and Samuel, doing perhaps the first useful deed of their
lives, suddenly sprang from their pew, grabbed Ma Hla May by the
arms and hauled her outside, still screaming.

It seemed very silent in the church when they had finally dragged
her out of hearing.  The scene had been so violent, so squalid,
that everyone was upset by it.  Even Ellis looked disgusted.  Flory
could neither speak nor stir.  He sat staring fixedly at the altar,
his face rigid and so bloodless that the birth-mark seemed to glow
upon it like a streak of blue paint.  Elizabeth glanced across the
aisle at him, and her revulsion made her almost physically sick.
She had not understood a word of what Ma Hla May was saying, but
the meaning of the scene was perfectly clear.  The thought that he
had been the lover of that grey-faced, maniacal creature made her
shudder in her bones.  But worse than that, worse than anything,
was his ugliness at this moment.  His face appalled her, it was so
ghastly, rigid and old.  It was like a skull.  Only the birthmark
seemed alive in it.  She hated him now for his birthmark.  She had
never known till this moment how dishonouring, how unforgivable a
thing it was.

Like the crocodile, U Po Kyin had struck at the weakest spot.  For,
needless to say, this scene was U Po Kyin's doing.  He had seen his
chance, as usual, and tutored Ma Hla May for her part with
considerable care.  The clergyman brought his sermon to an end
almost at once.  As soon as it was over Flory hurried outside, not
looking at any of the others.  It was getting dark, thank God.  At
fifty yards from the church he halted, and watched the others
making in couples for the Club.  It seemed to him that they were
hurrying.  Ah, they would, of course!  There would be something to
talk about at the Club tonight!  Flo rolled belly-upwards against
his ankles, asking for a game.  'Get out, you bloody brute!' he
said, and kicked her.  Elizabeth had stopped at the church door.
Mr Macgregor, happy chance, seemed to be introducing her to the
clergyman.  In a moment the two men went on in the direction of Mr
Macgregor's house, where the clergyman was to stay for the night,
and Elizabeth followed the others, thirty yards behind them.  Flory
ran after her and caught up with her almost at the Club gate.

'Elizabeth!'

She looked round, saw him, turned white, and would have hurried on
without a word.  But his anxiety was too great, and he caught her
by the wrist.

'Elizabeth!  I must--I've got to speak to you!'

'Let me go, will you!'

They began to struggle, and then stopped abruptly.  Two of the
Karens who had come out of the church were standing fifty yards
away, gazing at them through the half-darkness with deep interest.
Flory began again in a lower tone:

'Elizabeth, I know I've no right to stop you like this.  But I must
speak to you, I must!  Please hear what I've got to say.  Please
don't run away from me!'

'What are you doing?  Why are you holding on to my arm?  Let me go
this instant!'

'I'll let you go--there, look!  But do listen to me, please!
Answer me this one thing.  After what's happened, can you ever
forgive me?'

'Forgive you?  What do you mean, FORGIVE you?'

'I know I'm disgraced.  It was the vilest thing to happen!  Only,
in a sense it wasn't my fault.  You'll see that when you're calmer.
Do you think--not now, it was too bad, but later--do you think you
can forget it?'

'I really don't know what you're talking about.  Forget it?  What
has it got to do with ME?   I thought it was very disgusting, but
it's not MY business.  I can't think why you're questioning me like
this at all.'

He almost despaired at that.  Her tone and even her words were the
very ones she had used in that earlier quarrel of theirs.  It was
the same move over again.  Instead of hearing him out she was going
to evade him and put him off--snub him by pretending that he had no
claim upon her.

'Elizabeth!  Please answer me.  Please be fair to me!  It's serious
this time.  I don't expect you to take me back all at once.  You
couldn't, when I'm publicly disgraced like this.  But, after all,
you virtually promised to marry me--'

'What!  Promised to marry you?  WHEN did I promise to marry you?'

'Not in words, I know.  But it was understood between us.'

'Nothing of the kind was understood between us!  I think you are
behaving in the most horrible way.  I'm going along to the Club at
once.  Good evening!'

'Elizabeth!  Elizabeth!  Listen.  It's not fair to condemn me
unheard.  You knew before what I'd done, and you knew that I'd
lived a different life since I met you.  What happened this evening
was only an accident.  That wretched woman, who, I admit, was once
my--well--'

'I won't listen, I won't listen to such things!  I'm going!'

He caught her by the wrists again, and this time held her.  The
Karens had disappeared, fortunately.

'No, no, you shall hear me!  I'd rather offend you to the heart
than have this uncertainty.  It's gone on week after week, month
after month, and I've never once been able to speak straight out to
you.  You don't seem to know or care how much you make me suffer.
But this time you've got to answer me.'

She struggled in his grip, and she was surprisingly strong.  Her
face was more bitterly angry than he had ever seen or imagined it.
She hated him so that she would have struck him if her hands were
free.

'Let me go!  Oh, you beast, you beast, let me go!'

'My God, my God, that we should fight like this!  But what else can
I do?  I can't let you go without even hearing me.  Elizabeth, you
MUST listen to me!'

'I will not!  I will not discuss it!  What right have you to
question me?  Let me go!'

'Forgive me, forgive me!  This one question.  Will you--not now,
but later, when this vile business is forgotten--will you marry
me?'

'No, never, never!'

'Don't say it like that!  Don't make it final.  Say no for the
present if you like--but in a month, a year, five years--'

'Haven't I said no?  Why must you keep on and on?'

'Elizabeth, listen to me.  I've tried again and again to tell you
what you mean to me--oh, it's so useless talking about it!  But do
try and understand.  Haven't I told you something of the life we
live here?  The sort of horrible death-in-life!  The decay, the
loneliness, the self-pity?  Try and realize what it means, and that
you're the sole person on earth who could save me from it.'

'Will you let me go?  Why do you have to make this dreadful scene?'

'Does it mean nothing to you when I say that I love you?  I don't
believe you've ever realized what it is that I want from you.  If
you like, I'd marry you and promise never even touch you with my
finger.  I wouldn't mind even that, so long as you were with me.
But I can't go on with my life alone, always alone.  Can't you
bring yourself ever to forgive me?'

'Never, never!  I wouldn't marry you if you were the last man on
earth.  I'd as soon marry the--the sweeper!'

She had begun crying now.  He saw that she meant what she said.
The tears came into his own eyes.  He said again:

'For the last time.  Remember that it's something to have one
person in the world who loves you.  Remember that though you'll
find men who are richer, and younger, and better in every way than
I, you'll never find one who cares for you so much.  And though I'm
not rich, at least I could make you a home.  There's a way of
living--civilized, decent--'

'Haven't we said enough?' she said more calmly.  'Will you let me
go before somebody comes?'

He relaxed his grip on her wrists.  He had lost her, that was
certain.  Like a hallucination, painfully clear, he saw again their
home as he had imagined it; he saw their garden, and Elizabeth
feeding Nero and the pigeons on the drive by the sulphur-yellow
phloxes that grew as high as her shoulder; and the drawing-room,
with the water-colours on the walls, and the balsams in the china
bowl mirrored by the table, and the book-shelves, and the black
piano.  The impossible, mythical piano--symbol of everything that
that futile accident had wrecked!

'You should have a piano,' he said despairingly.

'I don't play the piano.'

He let her go.  It was no use continuing.  She was no sooner free
of him than she took to her heels and actually ran into the Club
garden, so hateful was his presence to her.  Among the trees she
stopped to take off her spectacles and remove the signs of tears
from her face.  Oh, the beast, the beast!  He had hurt her wrists
abominably.  Oh, what an unspeakable beast he was!  When she
thought of his face as it had looked in church, yellow and
glistening with the hideous birthmark upon it, she could have
wished him dead.  It was not what he had done that horrified her.
He might have committed a thousand abominations and she could have
forgiven him.  But not after that shameful, squalid scene, and the
devilish ugliness of his disfigured face in that moment.  It was,
finally, the birthmark that had damned him.

Her aunt would be furious when she heard that she had refused
Flory.  And there was her uncle and his leg-pinching--between the
two of them, life here would become impossible.  Perhaps she would
have to go Home unmarried after all.  Black beetles!  No matter.
Anything--spinsterhood, drudgery, anything--sooner than the
alternative.  Never, never, would she yield to a man who had been
so disgraced!  Death sooner, far sooner.  If there had been
mercenary thoughts in her mind an hour ago, she had forgotten them.
She did not even remember that Verrall had jilted her and that to
have married Flory would have saved her face.  She knew only that
he was dishonoured and less than a man, and that she hated him as
she would have hated a leper or a lunatic.  The instinct was deeper
than reason or even self-interest, and she could no more have
disobeyed it than she could have stopped breathing.

Flory, as he turned up the hill, did not run, but he walked as fast
as he could.  What he had to do must be done quickly.  It was
getting very dark.  The wretched Flo, who even now had not grasped
that anything serious was the matter, trotted close to his heels,
whimpering in a self-pitying manner to reproach him for the kick he
had given her.  As he came up the path a wind blew through the
plaintain trees, rattling the tattered leaves and bringing a scent
of damp.  It was going to rain again.  Ko S'la had laid the dinner-
table and was removing some flying beetles that had committed
suicide against the petrol-lamp.  Evidently he had not heard about
the scene in church yet.

'The holy one's dinner is ready.  Will the holy one dine now?'

'No, not yet.  Give me that lamp.'

He took the lamp, went into the bedroom and shut the door, The
stale scent of dust and cigarette-smoke met him, and in the white,
unsteady glare of the lamp he could see the mildewed books and the
lizards on the wall.  So he was back again to this--to the old,
secret life--after everything, back where he had been before.

Was it not possible to endure it!  He had endured it before.  There
were palliatives--books, his garden, drink, work, whoring, shooting,
conversations with the doctor.

No, it was not endurable any longer.  Since Elizabeth's coming the
power to suffer and above all to hope, which he had thought dead in
him, had sprung to new life.  The half-comfortable lethargy in
which he had lived was broken.  And if he suffered now, there was
far worse to come.  In a little while someone else would marry her.
How he could picture it--the moment when he heard the news!--'Did
you hear the Lackersteen kid's got off at last?  Poor old So-and-
so--booked for the altar, God help him,' etc., etc.  And the casual
question--'Oh, really?  When is it to be?'--stiffening one's face,
pretending to be uninterested.  And then her wedding day approaching,
her bridal night--ah, not that!  Obscene, obscene.  Keep your eyes
fixed on that.  Obscene.  He dragged his tin uniform-case from under
the bed, took out his automatic pistol, slid a clip of cartridges
into the magazine, and pulled one into the breech.

Ko S'la was remembered in his will.  There remained Flo.  He laid
his pistol on the table and went outside.  Flo was playing with Ba
Shin, Ko S'la's youngest son, under the lee of the cookhouse, where
the servants had left the remains of a woodfire.  She was dancing
round him with her small teeth bared, pretending to bite him, while
the tiny boy, his belly red in the glow of the embers, smacked
weakly at her, laughing, and yet half frightened.

'Flo!  Come here, Flo!'

She heard him and came obediently, and then stopped short at the
bedroom door.  She seemed to have grasped now that there was
something wrong.  She backed a little and stood looking timorously
up at him, unwilling to enter the bedroom.

'Come in here!'

She wagged her tail, but did not move.

'Come on, Flo!  Good old Flo!  Come on!'

Flo was suddenly stricken with terror.  She whined, her tail went
down, and she shrank back.  'Come here, blast you!' he cried, and
he took her by the collar and flung her into the room, shutting the
door behind her.  He went to the table for the pistol.

'No come here!  Do as you're told!'

She crouched down and whined for forgiveness.  It hurt him to hear
it.  'Come on, old girl!  Dear old Flo!  Master wouldn't hurt you.
Come here!'  She crawled very slowly towards his feet, flat on her
belly, whining, her head down as though afraid to look at him.
When she was a yard away he fired, blowing her skull to fragments.

Her shattered brain looked like red velvet.  Was that what he would
look like?  The heart, then, not the head.  He could hear the
servants running out of their quarters and shouting--they must have
heard the sound of the shot.  He hurriedly tore open his coat and
pressed the muzzle of the pistol against his shirt.  A tiny lizard,
translucent like a creature of gelatine, was stalking a white moth
along the edge of the table.  Flory pulled the trigger with his
thumb.

As Ko S'la burst into the room, for a moment he saw nothing but the
dead body of the dog.  Then he saw his master's feet, heels
upwards, projecting from beyond the bed.  He yelled to the others
to keep the children out of the room, and all of them surged back
from the doorway with screams.  Ko S'la fell on his knees behind
Flory's body, at the same moment as Ba Pe came running through the
veranda.

'Has he shot himself?'

'I think so.  Turn him over on his back.  Ah, look at that!  Run
for the Indian doctor!  Run for your life!'

There was a neat hole, no bigger than that made by a pencil passing
through a sheet of blotting-paper, in Flory's shirt.  He was
obviously quite dead.  With great difficulty Ko S'la managed to
drag him on to the bed, for the other servants refused to touch the
body.  It was only twenty minutes before the doctor arrived.  He
had heard only a vague report that Flory was hurt, and had bicycled
up the hill at top speed through a storm of rain.  He threw his
bicycle down in the flower-bed and hurried in through the veranda.
He was out of breath, and could not see through his spectacles.  He
took them off, peering myopically at the bed.  'What iss it, my
friend?' he said anxiously.  'Where are you hurt?'  Then, coming
closer, he saw what was on the bed, and uttered a harsh sound.

'Ach, what is this?  What has happened to him?'

The doctor fell on his knees, tore Flory's shirt open and put his
ear to his chest.  An expression of agony came into his face, and
he seized the dead man by the shoulders and shook him as though
mere violence could bring him to life.  One arm fell limply over
the edge of the bed.  The doctor lifted it back again, and then,
with the dead hand between his own, suddenly burst into tears.  Ko
S'la was standing at the foot of the bed, his brown face full of
lines.  The doctor stood up, and then losing control of himself for
a moment, leaned against the bedpost and wept noisily and
grotesquely his back turned on Ko S'la.  His fat shoulders were
quivering.  Presently he recovered himself and turned round again.

'How did this happen?'

'We heard two shots.  He did it himself, that is certain.  I do not
know why.'

'How did you know that he did it on purpose?  How do you know that
it was not an accident?'

For answer, Ko S'la pointed silently to Flo's corpse.  The doctor
thought for a moment, and then, with gentle, practised hands,
swathed the dead man in the sheet and knotted it at foot and head.
With death, the birthmark had faded immediately, so that it was no
more than a faint grey stain.

'Bury the dog at once.  I will tell Mr Macgregor that this happened
accidentally while he was cleaning his revolver.  Be sure that you
bury the dog.  Your master was my friend.  It shall not be written
on his tombstone that he committed suicide.'



25


It was lucky that the padre should have been at Kyauktada, for he
was able, before catching the train on the following evening, to
read the burial service in due form and even to deliver a short
address on the virtues of the dead man.  All Englishmen are
virtuous when they are dead.  'Accidental death' was the official
verdict (Dr Veraswami had proved with all his medico-legal skill
that the circumstances pointed to accident) and it was duly
inscribed upon the tombstone.  Not that anyone believed it, of
course.  Flory's real epitaph was the remark, very occasionally
uttered--for an Englishman who dies in Burma is so soon forgotten--
'Flory?  Oh yes, he was a dark chap, with a birthmark.  He shot
himself in Kyauktada in 1926.  Over a girl, people said.  Bloody
fool.'  Probably no one, except Elizabeth, was much surprised at
what had happened.  There is a rather large number of suicides
among the Europeans in Burma, and they occasion very little
surprise.

Flory's death had several results.  The first and most important of
them was that Dr Veraswami was ruined, even as he had foreseen.
The glory of being a white man's friend--the one thing that had
saved him before--had vanished.  Flory's standing with the other
Europeans had never been good, it is true; but he was after all a
white man, and his friendship conferred a certain prestige.  Once
he was dead, the doctor's ruin was assured.  U Po Kyin waited the
necessary time, and then struck again, harder than ever.  It was
barely three months before he had fixed it in the head of every
European in Kyauktada that the doctor was an unmitigated scoundrel.
No public accusation was ever made against him--U Po Kyin was most
careful of that.  Even Ellis would have been puzzled to say just
what scoundrelism the doctor had been guilty of; but still, it was
agreed that he was a scoundrel.  By degrees, the general suspicion
of him crystallized in a single Burmese phrase--'shok de'.
Veraswami, it was said, was quite a clever little chap in his way--
quite a good doctor for a native--but he was THOROUGHLY shok de.
Shok de means, approximately, untrustworthy, and when a 'native'
official comes to be known as shok de, there is an end of him.

The dreaded nod and wink passed somewhere in high places, and
the doctor was reverted to the rank of Assistant Surgeon and
transferred to Mandalay General Hospital.  He is still there, and
is likely to remain.  Mandalay is rather a disagreeable town--it
is dusty and intolerably hot, and it is said to have five main
products all beginning with P, namely, pagodas, pariahs, pigs,
priests and prostitutes--and the routine-work of the hospital is a
dreary business.  The doctor lives just outside the hospital
grounds in a little bake-house of a bungalow with a corrugated iron
fence round its tiny compound, and in the evenings he runs a
private clinic to supplement his reduced pay.  He has joined a
second-rate club frequented by Indian pleaders.  Its chief glory is
a single European member--a Glasgow electrician named Macdougall,
sacked from the Irrawaddy Flotilla Company for drunkenness, and now
making a precarious living out of a garage.  Macdougall is a dull
lout, only interested in whisky and magnetos.  The doctor, who will
never believe that a white man can be a fool, tries almost every
night to engage him in what he still calls 'cultured conversation';
but the results are very unsatisfying.

Ko S'la inherited four hundred rupees under Flory's will, and with
his family he set up a tea-shop in the bazaar.  But the shop
failed, as it was bound to do with the two women fighting in it at
all hours, and Ko S'la and Ba Pe were obliged to go back to
service.  Ko S'la was an accomplished servant.  Besides the useful
arts of pimping, dealing with money-lenders, carrying master to bed
when drunk and making pick-me-ups known as prairie oysters on the
following morning, he could sew, darn, refill cartridges, attend to
a horse, press a suit, and decorate a dinner-table with wonderful,
intricate patterns of chopped leaves and dyed rice-grains.  He was
worth fifty rupees a month.  But he and Ba Pe had fallen into lazy
ways in Flory's service, and, they were sacked from one job after
another.  They had a bad year of poverty, and little Ba Shin
developed a cough, and finally coughed himself to death one
stifling hot-weather night.  Ko S'la is now a second boy to a
Rangoon rice-broker with a neurotic wife who makes unending kit-
kit, and Ba Pe is pani-wallah in the same house at sixteen rupees a
month.  Ma Hla May is in a brothel in Mandalay.  Her good looks are
all but gone, and her clients pay her only four annas and sometimes
kick her and beat her.  Perhaps more bitterly than any of the
others, she regrets the good time when Flory was alive, and when
she had not the wisdom to put aside any of the money she extracted
from him.

U Po Kyin realized all his dreams except one.  After the doctor's
disgrace, it was inevitable that U Po Kyin should be elected to the
Club, and elected he was, in spite of bitter protests from Ellis.
In the end the other Europeans came to be rather glad that they had
elected him, for he was a bearable addition to the Club.  He did
not come too often, was ingratiating in his manner, stood drinks
freely, and developed almost at once into a brilliant bridge-
player.  A few months later he was transferred from Kyauktada and
promoted.  For a whole year, before his retirement, he officiated
as Deputy Commissioner, and during that year alone he made twenty
thousand rupees in bribes.  A month after his retirement he was
summoned to a durbar in Rangoon, to receive the decoration that had
been awarded to him by the Indian Government.

It was an impressive scene, that durbar.  On the platform, hung
with flags and flowers, sat the Governor, frock-coated, upon a
species of throne, with a bevy of aides-de-camp and secretaries
behind him.  All round the hall, like glittering waxworks, stood
the tall, bearded sowars of the Governor's bodyguard, with pennoned
lances in their hands.  Outside, a band was blaring at intervals.
The gallery was gay with the white ingyis and pink scarves of
Burmese ladies, and in the body of the hall a hundred men or more
were waiting to receive their decorations.  There were Burmese
officials in blazing Mandalay pasos, and Indians in cloth-of-gold
pagris, and British officers in full-dress uniform with clanking
sword-scabbards, and old thugyis with their grey hair knotted
behind their heads and silver-hilted dahs slung from their
shoulders.  In a high, clear voice a secretary was reading out the
list of awards, which varied from the C.I.E. to certificates of
honour in embossed silver cases.  Presently U Po Kyin's turn came
and the secretary read from his scroll:

'To U Po Kyin, Deputy Assistant Commissioner, retired, for long and
loyal service and especially for his timely aid in crushing a most
dangerous rebellion in Kyauktada district'--and so on and so on.

Then two henchmen, placed there for the purpose hoisted U Po Kyin
upright, and he waddled to the platform, bowed as low as his belly
would permit, and was duly decorated and felicitated, while Ma Kin
and other supporters clapped wildly and fluttered their scarves
from the gallery.

U Po Kyin had done all that mortal man could do.  It was time now
to be making ready for the next world--in short, to begin building
pagodas.  But unfortunately, this was the very point at which his
plans went wrong.  Only three days after the Governor's durbar,
before so much as a brick of those atoning pagodas had been laid, U
Po Kyin was stricken with apoplexy and died without speaking again.
There is no armour against fate.  Ma Kin was heartbroken at the
disaster.  Even if she had built the pagodas herself, it would have
availed U Po Kyin nothing; no merit can be acquired save by one's
own act.  She suffers greatly to think of U Po Kyin where he must
be now--wandering in God knows what dreadful subterranean hell of
fire, and darkness, and serpents, and genii.  Or even if he has
escaped the worst, his other fear has been realized, and he has
returned to the earth in the shape of a rat or a frog.  Perhaps at
this very moment a snake is devouring him.

As to Elizabeth, things fell out better than she had expected.
After Flory's death Mrs Lackersteen, dropping all pretences for
once, said openly that there were no men in this dreadful place and
the only hope was to go and stay several months in Rangoon or
Maymyo.  But she could not very well send Elizabeth to Rangoon or
Maymyo alone, and to go with her practically meant condemning Mr
Lackersteen to death from delirium tremens.  Months passed, and the
rains reached their climax, and Elizabeth had just made up her mind
that she must go home after all, penniless and unmarried, when--Mr
Macgregor proposed to her.  He had had it in his mind for a long
time; indeed, he had only been waiting for a decent interval to
elapse after Flory's death.

Elizabeth accepted him gladly.  He was rather old, perhaps, but a
Deputy Commissioner is not to be despised--certainly he was a far
better match than Flory.  They are very happy.  Mr Macgregor was
always a good-hearted man, but he has grown more human and likeable
since his marriage.  His voice booms less, and he has given up his
morning exercises.  Elizabeth has grown mature surprisingly
quickly, and a certain hardness of manner that always belonged to
her has become accentuated.  Her servants live in terror of her,
though she speaks no Burmese.  She has an exhaustive knowledge of
the Civil List, gives charming little dinner-parties and knows how
to put the wives of subordinate officials in their places--in
short, she fills with complete success the position for which
Nature had designed her from the first, that of a burra memsahib.



THE END

Project Gutenberg Australia


Title:      Down and Out in Paris and London
Author:     George Orwell


*
_O scathful harm, condition of poverte!_
CHAUCER
*

I


THE rue du Coq d'Or, Paris, seven in the morning. A succession of
furious, choking yells from the street. Madame Monce, who kept the little
hotel opposite mine, had come out on to the pavement to address a lodger on
the third floor. Her bare feet were stuck into sabots and her grey hair was
streaming down.

MADAME MONCE: '_Salope! Salope!_ How many times have I told you not to
squash bugs on the wallpaper? Do you think you've bought the hotel, eh? Why
can't you throw them out of the window like everyone else? _Putain! Salope!_'

THE WOMAN ON THE THIRD FLOOR: '_Vache!_'

Thereupon a whole variegated chorus of yells, as windows were flung
open on every side and half the street joined in the quarrel. They shut up
abruptly ten minutes later, when a squadron of cavalry rode past and people
stopped shouting to look at them.

I sketch this scene, just to convey something of the spirit of the rue
du Coq d'Or. Not that quarrels were the only thing that happened there--
but still, we seldom got through the morning without at least one outburst
of this description. Quarrels, and the desolate cries of street hawkers,
and the shouts of children chasing orange-peel over the cobbles, and at
night loud singing and the sour reek of the refuse-carts, made up the
atmosphere of the street.

It was a very narrow street--a ravine of tall, leprous houses,
lurching towards one another in queer attitudes, as though they had all
been frozen in the act of collapse. All the houses were hotels and packed
to the tiles with lodgers, mostly Poles, Arabs and Italians. At the foot of
the hotels were tiny _bistros_, where you could be drunk for the equivalent
of a shilling. On Saturday nights about a third of the male population of
the quarter was drunk. There was fighting over women, and the Arab navvies
who lived in the cheapest hotels used to conduct mysterious feuds, and
fight them out with chairs and occasionally revolvers. At night the
policemen would only come through the street two together. It was a fairly
rackety place. And yet amid the noise and dirt lived the usual respectable
French shopkeepers, bakers and laundresses and the like, keeping themselves
to themselves and quietly piling up small fortunes. It was quite a
representative Paris slum.

My hotel was called the Hôtel des Trois Moineaux. It was a dark,
rickety warren of five storeys, cut up by wooden partitions into forty
rooms. The rooms were small arid inveterately dirty, for there was no maid,
and Madame F., the _patronne_, had no time to do any sweeping. The walls were
as thin as matchwood, and to hide the cracks they had been covered with
layer after layer of pink paper, which had come loose and housed
innumerable bugs. Near the ceiling long lines of bugs marched all day like
columns of soldiers, and at night came down ravenously hungry, so that one
had to get up every few hours and kill them in hecatombs. Sometimes when
the bugs got too bad one used to burn sulphur and drive them into the next
room; whereupon the lodger next door would retort by having _his_ room
sulphured, and drive the bugs back. It was a dirty place, but homelike, for
Madame F. and her husband were good sorts. The rent of the rooms varied
between thirty and fifty francs a week.

The lodgers were a floating population, largely foreigners, who used
to turn up without luggage, stay a week and then disappear again. They were
of every trade--cobblers, bricklayers, stonemasons, navvies, students,
prostitutes, rag-pickers. Some of them were fantastically poor. In one of
the attics there was a Bulgarian student who made fancy shoes for the
American market. From six to twelve he sat on his bed, making a dozen pairs
of shoes and earning thirty-five francs; the rest of the day he attended
lectures at the Sorbonne. He was studying for the Church, and books of
theology lay face-down on his leather-strewn floor. In another room lived a
Russian woman and her son, who called himself an artist. The mother worked
sixteen hours a day, darning socks at twenty-five centimes a sock, while
the son, decently dressed, loafed in the Montparnasse cafés. One room was
let to two different lodgers, one a day worker and the other a night
worker. In another room a widower shared the same bed with his two grown-up
daughters, both consumptive.

There were eccentric characters in the hotel. The Paris slums are a
gathering-place for eccentric people--people who have fallen into
solitary, half-mad grooves of life and given up trying to be normal or
decent. Poverty frees them from ordinary standards of behaviour, just as
money frees people from work. Some of the lodgers in our hotel lived lives
that were curious beyond words.

There were the Rougiers, for instance, an old, ragged, dwarfish couple
who plied an extraordinary trade. They used to sell postcards on the
Boulevard St Michel. The curious thing was that the postcards were sold in
sealed packets as pornographic ones, but were actually photographs of
chateaux on the Loire; the buyers did not discover this till too late, and
of course never complained. The Rougiers earned about a hundred francs a
week, and by strict economy managed to be always half starved and half
drunk. The filth of their room was such that one could smell it on the
floor below. According to Madame F., neither of the Rougiers had taken off
their clothes for four years.

Or there was Henri, who worked in the sewers. He was a tall,
melancholy man with curly hair, rather romantic-looking in his long,
sewer-man's boots. Henri's peculiarity was that he did not speak, except
for the purposes of work, literally for days together. Only a year before
he had been a chauffeur in good employ and saving money. One day he fell in
love, and when the girl refused him he lost his temper and kicked her. On
being kicked the girl fell desperately in love with Henri, and for a
fortnight they lived together and spent a thousand francs of Henri's money.
Then the girl was unfaithful; Henri planted a knife in her upper arm and
was sent to prison for six months. As soon as she had been stabbed the girl
fell more in love with Henri than ever, and the two made up their quarrel
and agreed that when Henri came out of jail he should buy a taxi and they
would marry and settle down. But a fortnight later the girl was unfaithful
again, and when Henri came out she was with child, Henri did not stab her
again. He drew out all his savings and went on a drinking-bout that ended
in another month's imprisonment; after that he went to work in the sewers.
Nothing would induce Henri to talk. If you asked him why he worked in the
sewers he never answered, but simply crossed his wrists to signify
handcuffs, and jerked his head southward, towards the prison. Bad luck
seemed to have turned him half-witted in a single day.

Or there was R., an Englishman, who lived six months of the year in
Putney with his parents and six months in France. During his time in France
he drank four litres of wine a day, and six litres on Saturdays; he had
once travelled as far as the Azores, because the wine there is cheaper than
anywhere in Europe. He was a gentle, domesticated creature, never rowdy or
quarrelsome, and never sober. He would lie in bed till midday, and from
then till midnight he was in his comer of the _bistro_, quietly and
methodically soaking. While he soaked he talked, in a refined, womanish
voice, about antique furniture. Except myself, R. was the only Englishman
in the quarter.

There were plenty of other people who lived lives just as eccentric as
these: Monsieur Jules, the Roumanian, who had a glass eye and would not
admit it, Furex the Limousin stonemason, Roucolle the miser--he died
before my time, though--old Laurent the rag-merchant, who used to copy
his signature from a slip of paper he carried in his pocket. It would be
fun to write some of their biographies, if one had time. I am trying to
describe the people in our quarter, not for the mere curiosity, but because
they are all part of the story. Poverty is what I am writing about, and I
had my first contact with poverty in this slum. The slum, with its dirt and
its queer lives, was first an object-lesson in poverty, and then the
background of my own experiences. It is for that reason that I try to give
some idea of what life was like there.




II



LIFE in the quarter. Our _bistro_, for instance, at the foot of the
Hôtel des Trois Moineaux. A tiny brick-floored room, half underground, with
wine-sodden tables, and a photograph of a funeral inscribed '_Crédit est
mort_'; and red-sashed workmen carving sausage with big jack-knives; and
Madame F., a splendid Auvergnat peasant woman with the face of a
strong-minded cow, drinking Malaga all day 'for her stomach'; and games of
dice for _apéritifs_; and songs about '_Les Fraises et Les Framboises_', and
about Madelon, who said, '_Comment épouser un soldat, moi qui aime tout le
régiment?_'; and extraordinarily public love-making. Half the hotel used to
meet in the _bistro_ in the evenings. I wish one could find a pub in London a
quarter as cheery.

One heard queer conversations in the _bistro_. As a sample I give you
Charlie, one of the local curiosities, talking.

Charlie was a youth of family and education who had run away from home
and lived on occasional remittances. Picture him very pink and young, with
the fresh cheeks and soft brown hair of a nice little boy, and lips
excessively red and wet, like cherries. His feet are tiny, his arms
abnormally short, his hands dimpled like a baby's. He has a way of dancing
and capering while he talks, as though he were too happy and too full of
life to keep still for an instant. It is three in the afternoon, and there
is no one in the _bistro_ except Madame F. and one or two men who are out of
work; but it is all the same to Charlie whom he talks to, so long as he
can talk about himself. He declaims like an orator on a barricade, rolling
the words on his tongue and gesticulating with his short arms. His small,
rather piggy eyes glitter with enthusiasm. He is, somehow, profoundly
disgusting to see.

He is talking of love, his favourite subject.

'_Ah, l'amour, l'amour! Ah, que les femmes m'ont tué!_ Alas, _messieurs
et dames_, women have been my ruin, beyond all hope my ruin. At twenty-two I
am utterly worn out and finished. But what things I have learned, what
abysses of wisdom have I not plumbed! How great a thing it is to have
acquired the true wisdom, to have become in the highest sense of the word a
civilized man, to have become _raffiné, vicieux_,' etc. etc.

'_Messieurs et dames_, I perceive that you are sad. Ah, mais la vie
est belle--you must not be sad. Be more gay, I beseech you!


    'Fill high ze bowl vid Samian vine,
    Ve vill not sink of semes like zese!


'_Ah, que la vie est belle!_ Listen, _messieurs et dames_, out of the
fullness of my experience I will discourse to you of love. I will explain
to you what is the true meaning of love--what is the true sensibility,
the higher, more refined pleasure which is known to civilized men alone. I
will tell you of the happiest day of my life. Alas, but I am past the time
when I could know such happiness as that. It is gone for ever--the very
possibility, even the desire for it, are gone.

'Listen, then. It was two years ago; my brother was in Paris--he is
a lawyer--and my parents had told him to find me and take me out to
dinner. We hate each other, my brother and I, but we preferred not to
disobey my parents. We dined, and at dinner he grew very drunk upon three
bottles of Bordeaux. I took him back to his hotel, and on the way I bought
a bottle of brandy, and when we had arrived I made my brother drink a
tumblerful of it--I told him it was something to make him sober. He drank
it, and immediately he fell down like somebody in a fit, dead drunk. I
lifted him up and propped his back against the bed; then I went through his
pockets. I found eleven hundred francs, and with that I hurried down the
stairs, jumped into a taxi, and escaped. My brother did not know my address
--I was safe.

'Where does a man go when he has money? To the _bordels_, naturally. But
you do not suppose that I was going to waste my time on some vulgar
debauchery fit only for navvies? Confound it, one is a civilized man! I was
fastidious, exigeant, you understand, with a thousand francs in my pocket.
It was midnight before I found what I was looking for. I had fallen in with
a very smart youth of eighteen, dressed _en smoking_ and with his hair cut _à
l'américaine_, and we were talking in a quiet _bistro_ away from the
boulevards. We understood one another well, that youth and I. We talked of
this and that, and discussed ways of diverting oneself. Presently we took a
taxi together and were driven away.

'The taxi stopped in a narrow, solitary street with a single gas-lamp
flaring at the end. There were dark puddles among the stones. Down one side
ran the high, blank wall of a convent. My guide led me to a tall, ruinous
house with shuttered windows, and knocked several times at the door.
Presently there was a sound of footsteps and a shooting of bolts, and the
door opened a little. A hand came round the edge of it; it was a large,
crooked hand, that held itself palm upwards under our noses, demanding
money.

'My guide put his foot between the door and the step. "How much do you
want?" he said.

'"A thousand francs," said a woman's voice. "Pay up at once or you
don't come in."

'I put a thousand francs into the hand and gave the remaining hundred
to my guide: he said good night and left me. I could hear the voice inside
counting the notes, and then a thin old crow of a woman in a black dress
put her nose out and regarded me suspiciously before letting me in. It was
very dark inside: I could see nothing except a flaring gas-jet that
illuminated a patch of plaster wall, throwing everything else into deeper
shadow. There was a smell of rats and dust. Without speaking, the old woman
lighted a candle at the gas-jet, then hobbled in front of me down a stone
passage to the top of a flight of stone steps.

'"_Voilà!_" she said; "go down into the cellar there and do what you
like. I shall see nothing, hear nothing, know nothing. You are free, you
understand--perfectly free."

'Ha, _messieurs_, need I describe to you--_forcément_, you know it
yourselves--that shiver, half of terror and half of joy, that goes
through one at these moments? I crept down, feeling my way; I could hear my
breathing and the scraping of my shoes on the stones, otherwise all was
silence. At the bottom of the stairs my hand met an electric switch. I
turned it, and a great electrolier of twelve red globes flooded the cellar
with a red light. And behold, I was not in a cellar, but in a bedroom, a
great, rich, garish bedroom, coloured blood red from top to bottom. Figure
it to yourselves, _messieurs et dames_! Red carpet on the floor, red paper on
the walls, red plush on the chairs, even the ceiling red; everywhere red,
burning into the eyes. It was a heavy, stifling red, as though the light
were shining through bowls of blood. At the far end stood a huge, square
bed, with quilts red like the rest, and on it a girl was lying, dressed in
a frock of red velvet. At the sight of me she shrank away and tried to hide
her knees under the short dress.

'I had halted by the door. "Come here, my chicken," I called to her.

'She gave a whimper of fright. With a bound I was beside the bed; she
tried to elude me, but I seized her by the throat--like this, do you see?
--tight! She struggled, she began to cry out for mercy, but I held her
fast, forcing back her head and staring down into her face. She was twenty
years old, perhaps; her face was the broad, dull face of a stupid child,
but it was coated with paint and powder, and her blue, stupid eyes, shining
in the red light, wore that shocked, distorted look that one sees nowhere
save in the eyes of these women. She was some peasant girl, doubtless, whom
her parents had sold into slavery.

'Without another word I pulled her off the bed and threw her on to the
floor. And then I fell upon her like a tiger! Ah, the joy, the incomparable
rapture of that time! There, _messieurs et dames_, is what I would expound to
you; _Voilà l'amour_! There is the true love, there is the only thing in the
world worth striving for; there is the thing beside which all your arts and
ideals, all your philosophies and creeds, all your fine words and high
attitudes, are as pale and profitless as ashes. When one has experienced
love--the true love--what is there in the world that seems more than a
mere ghost of joy?

'More and more savagely I renewed the attack. Again and again the girl
tried to escape; she cried out for mercy anew, but I laughed at her.

'"Mercy!" I said, "do you suppose I have come here to show mercy? Do
you suppose I have paid a thousand francs for that?" I swear to you,
_messieurs et dames_, that if it were not for that accursed law that robs us
of our liberty, I would have murdered her at that moment.

'Ah, how she screamed, with what bitter cries of agony. But there was
no one to hear them; down there under the streets of Paris we were as
secure as at the heart of a pyramid. Tears streamed down the girl's face,
washing away the powder in long, dirty smears. Ah, that irrecoverable time!
You, _messieurs et dames_, you who have not cultivated the finer
sensibilities of love, for you such pleasure is almost beyond conception.
And I too, now that my youth is gone--ah, youth!--shall never again see
life so beautiful as that. It is finished.

'Ah yes, it is gone--gone for ever. Ah, the poverty, the shortness,
the disappointment of human joy! For in reality--_car en realité_, what is
the duration of the supreme moment of love. It is nothing, an instant, a
second perhaps. A second of ecstasy, and after that--dust, ashes,
nothingness.

'And so, just for one instant, I captured the supreme happiness, the
highest and most refined emotion to which human beings can attain. And in
the same moment it was finished, and I was left--to what? All my
savagery, my passion, were scattered like the petals of a rose. I was left
cold and languid, full of vain regrets; in my revulsion I even felt a kind
of pity for the weeping girl on the floor. Is it not nauseous, that we
should be the prey of such mean emotions? I did not look at the girl again;
my sole thought was to get away. I hastened up the steps of the vault and
out into the street. It was dark and bitterly cold, the streets were empty,
the stones echoed under my heels with a hollow, lonely ring. All my money
was gone, I had not even the price of a taxi fare. I walked back alone to
my cold, solitary room.

'But there, _messieurs et dames_, that is what I promised to expound to
you. That is Love. That was the happiest day of my life.'

He was a curious specimen, Charlie. I describe him, just to show what
diverse characters could be found flourishing in the Coq d'Or quarter.




III



I LIVED in the Coq d'Or quarter for about a year and a half. One day,
in summer, I found that I had just four hundred and fifty francs left, and
beyond this nothing but thirty-six francs a week, which I earned by giving
English lessons. Hitherto I had not thought about the future, but I now
realized that I must do something at once. I decided to start looking for a
job, and--very luckily, as it turned out--I took the precaution of
paying two hundred francs for a month's rent in advance. With the other two
hundred and fifty francs, besides the English lessons, I could live a
month, and in a month I should probably find work. I aimed at becoming a
guide to one of the tourist companies, or perhaps an interpreter. However,
a piece of bad luck prevented this.

One day there turned up at the hotel a young Italian who called
himself a compositor. He was rather an ambiguous person, for he wore side
whiskers, which are the mark either of an apache or an intellectual, and
nobody was quite certain in which class to put him. Madame F. did not like
the look of him, and made him pay a week's rent in advance. The Italian
paid the rent and stayed six nights at the hotel. During this time he
managed to prepare some duplicate keys, and on the last night he robbed a
dozen rooms, including mine. Luckily, he did not find the money that was in
my pockets, so I was not left penniless. I was left with just forty-seven
francs--that is, seven and tenpence.

This put an end to my plans of looking for work. I had now got to live
at the rate of about six francs a day, and from the start it was too
difficult to leave much thought for anything else. It was now that my
experiences of poverty began--for six francs a day, if not actual
poverty, is on the fringe of it. Six francs is a shilling, and you can live
on a shilling a day in Paris if you know how. But it is a complicated
business.

It is altogether curious, your first contact with poverty. You have
thought so much about poverty--it is the thing you have feared all your
life, the thing you knew would happen to you sooner or later; and it, is
all so utterly and prosaically different. You thought it would be quite
simple; it is extraordinarily complicated. You thought it would be
terrible; it is merely squalid and boring. It is the peculiar _lowness_ of
poverty that you discover first; the shifts that it puts you to, the
complicated meanness, the crust-wiping.

You discover, for instance, the secrecy attaching to poverty. At a
sudden stroke you have been reduced to an income of six francs a day. But
of course you dare not admit it--you have got to pretend that you are
living quite as usual. From the start it tangles you in a net of lies, and
even with the lies you can hardly manage it. You stop sending clothes to
the laundry, and the laundress catches you in the street and asks you why;
you mumble something, and she, thinking you are sending the clothes
elsewhere, is your enemy for life. The tobacconist keeps asking why you
have cut down your smoking. There are letters you want to answer, and
cannot, because stamps are too expensive. And then there are your meals--
meals are the worst difficulty of all. Every day at meal-times you go out,
ostensibly to a restaurant, and loaf an hour in the Luxembourg Gardens,
watching the pigeons. Afterwards you smuggle your food home in your
pockets. Your food is bread and margarine, or bread and wine, and even the
nature of the food is governed by lies. You have to buy rye bread instead
of household bread, because the rye loaves, though dearer, are round and
can be smuggled in your pockets. This wastes you a franc a day. Sometimes,
to keep up appearances, you have to spend sixty centimes on a drink, and go
correspondingly short of food. Your linen gets filthy, and you run out of
soap and razor-blades. Your hair wants cutting, and you try to cut it
yourself, with such fearful results that you have to go to the barber after
all, and spend the equivalent of a day's food. All day you are telling
lies, and expensive lies.

You discover the extreme precariousness of your six francs a day. Mean
disasters happen and rob you of food. You have spent your last eighty
centimes on half a litre of milk, and are boiling it over the spirit lamp.
While it boils a bug runs down your forearm; you give the bug a flick with
your nail, and it falls, plop! straight into the milk. There is nothing for
it but to throw the milk away and go foodless.

You go to the baker's to buy a pound of bread, and you wait while the
girl cuts a pound for another customer. She is clumsy, and cuts more than a
pound. '_Pardon, monsieur_,' she says, 'I suppose you don't mind paying two
sous extra?' Bread is a franc a pound, and you have exactly a franc. When
you think that you too might be asked to pay two sous extra, and would have
to confess that you could not, you bolt in panic. It is hours before you
dare venture into a baker's shop again.

You go to the greengrocer's to spend a franc on a kilogram of
potatoes. But one of the pieces that make up the franc is a Belgian piece,
and the shopman refuses it. You slink out of the shop, and can never go
there again.

You have strayed into a respectable quarter, and you see a prosperous
friend coming. To avoid him you dodge into the nearest café. Once in the
café you must buy something, so you spend your last fifty centimes on a
glass of black coffee with a dead fly in it. Once could multiply these
disasters by the hundred. They are part of the process of being hard up.

You discover what it is like to be hungry. With bread and margarine in
your belly, you go out and look into the shop windows. Everywhere there is
food insulting you in huge, wasteful piles; whole dead pigs, baskets of hot
loaves, great yellow blocks of butter, strings of sausages, mountains of
potatoes, vast Gruyère cheeses like grindstones. A snivelling self-pity
comes over you at the sight of so much food. You plan to grab a loaf and
run, swallowing it before they catch you; and you refrain, from pure funk.

You discover the boredom which is inseparable from poverty; the times
when you have nothing to do and, being underfed, can interest yourself in
nothing. For half a day at a time you lie on your bed, feeling like the
_jeune squelette_ in Baudelaire's poem. Only food could rouse you. You
discover that a man who has gone even a week on bread and margarine is not
a man any longer, only a belly with a few accessory organs.

This--one could describe it further, but it is all in the same style
--is life on six francs a day. Thousands of people in Paris live it--
struggling artists and students, prostitutes when their luck is out,
out-of-work people of all kinds. It is the suburbs, as it were, of poverty.

I continued in this style for about three weeks. The forty-seven
francs were soon gone, and I had to do what I could on thirty-six francs a
week from the English lessons. Being inexperienced, I handled the money
badly, and sometimes I was a day without food. When this happened I used to
sell a few of my clothes, smuggling them out of the hotel in small packets
and taking them to a secondhand shop in the rue de la Montagne St
Geneviève. The shopman was a red-haired Jew, an extraordinary disagreeable
man, who used to fall into furious rages at the sight of a client. From his
manner one would have supposed that we had done him some injury by coming
to him. '_Merde!_' he used to shout, '_you_ here again? What do you think this
is? A soup kitchen?' And he paid incredibly low prices. For a hat which I
had bought for twenty-five shillings and scarcely worn he gave five francs;
for a good pair of shoes, five francs; for shirts, a franc each. He always
preferred to exchange rather than buy, and he had a trick of thrusting some
useless article into one's hand and then pretending that one had accepted
it. Once I saw him take a good overcoat from an old woman, put two white
billiard-balls into her hand, and then push her rapidly out of the shop
before she could protest. It would have been a pleasure to flatten the
Jew's nose, if only one could have afforded it.

These three weeks were squalid and uncomfortable, and evidently there
was worse coming, for my rent would be due before long. Nevertheless,
things were not a quarter as bad as I had expected. For, when you are
approaching poverty, you make one discovery which outweighs some of the
others. You discover boredom and mean complications and the beginnings of
hunger, but you also discover the great redeeming feature of poverty: the
fact that it annihilates the future. Within certain limits, it is actually
true that the less money you have, the less you worry. When you have a
hundred francs in the world you are liable to the most craven panics. When
you have only three francs you are quite indifferent; for three francs will
feed you till tomorrow, and you cannot think further than that. You are
bored, but you are not afraid. You think vaguely, 'I shall be starving in a
day or two--shocking, isn't it?' And then the mind wanders to other
topics. A bread and margarine diet does, to some extent, provide its own
anodyne.

And there is another feeling that is a great consolation in poverty. I
believe everyone who has been hard up has experienced it. It is a feeling
of relief, almost of pleasure, at knowing yourself at last genuinely down
and out. You have talked so often of going to the dogs--and well, here
are the dogs, and you have reached them, and you can stand it. It takes off
a lot of anxiety,




IV



ONE day my English lessons ceased abruptly. The weather was getting
hot and one of my pupils, feeling too lazy to go on with his lessons,
dismissed me. The other disappeared from his lodgings without notice, owing
me twelve francs. I was left with only thirty centimes and no tobacco. For
a day and a half I had nothing to cat or smoke, and then, too hungry to put
it off any longer, I packed my remaining clothes into my suitcase and took
them to the pawnshop. This put an end to all pretence of being in funds,
for I could not take my clothes out of the hotel without asking Madame F.'s
leave. I remember, however, how surprised she was at my asking her instead
of removing the clothes on the sly, shooting the moon being a common trick
in our quarter.

It was the first time that I had been in a French pawnshop. One went
through grandiose stone portals (marked, of course, '_Liberté, Egalité,
Fraternité_'--they write that even over the police stations in France) into a
large, bare room like a school classroom, with a counter and rows of
benches. Forty or fifty people were waiting. One handed one's pledge over
the counter and sat down. Presently, when the clerk had assessed its value
he would call out, '_Numéro_ such and such, will you take fifty francs?'
Sometimes it was only fifteen francs, or ten, or five--whatever it was,
the whole room knew it. As I Came in the clerk called with an air of
offence, '_Numéro_ 83--here!' and gave a little whistle and a beckon, as
though calling a dog. _Numéro_ 83 stepped to the counter; he was an old
bearded man, with an overcoat buttoned up at the neck and frayed
trouser-ends. Without a word the clerk shot the bundle across the counter
--evidently it was worth nothing. It fell to the ground and came open,
displaying four pairs of men's woollen pants. No one could help laughing.
Poor _Numéro_ 83 gathered up his pants and shambled out, muttering to
himself.

The clothes I was pawning, together with the suitcase, had cost over
twenty pounds, and were in good condition. I thought they must be worth ten
pounds, and a quarter of this (one expects quarter value at a pawnshop) was
two hundred and fifty or three hundred francs. I waited without anxiety,
expecting two hundred francs at the worst.

At last the clerk called my number: '_Numéro_ 97!'

'Yes,' I said, standing up.

'Seventy francs?'

Seventy francs for ten pounds' worth of clothes! But it was no use
arguing; I had seen someone else attempt to argue, and the clerk had
instantly refused the pledge. I took the money and the pawnticket and
walked out. I had now no clothes except what I stood up in--the coat
badly out at the elbow--an overcoat, moderately pawnable, and one spare
shirt. Afterwards, when it was too late, I learned that it was wiser to go
to a pawnshop in the afternoon. The clerks are French, and, like most
French people, are in a bad temper till they have eaten their lunch.

When I got home, Madame F. was sweeping the _bistro_ floor. She came up
the steps to meet me. I could see in her eye that she was uneasy about my
rent.

'Well,' she said, 'what did you get for your clothes? Not much, eh?'

'Two hundred francs,' I said promptly.

'_Tiens!_' she said, surprised; 'well, _that's_ not bad. How expensive
those English clothes must be!'

The lie saved a lot of trouble, and, strangely enough, it came true. A
few days later I did receive exactly two hundred francs due to me for a
newspaper article, and, though it hurt to do it, I at once paid every penny
of it in rent. So, though I came near to starving in the following weeks, I
was hardly ever without a roof.

It was now absolutely necessary to find work, and I remembered a
friend of mine, a Russian waiter named Boris, who might be able to help me.
I had first met him in the public ward of a hospital, where he was being
treated for arthritis in the left leg. He had told me to come to him if I
were ever in difficulties.

I must say something about Boris, for he was a curious character and
my close friend for a long time. He was a big, soldierly man of about
thirty-five, and had been good looking, but since his illness he had grown
immensely fat from lying in bed. Like most Russian refugees, he had had an
adventurous life. His parents, killed in the Revolution, had been rich
people, and he had served through the war in the Second Siberian Rifles,
which, according to him, was the best regiment in the Russian Army. After
the war he had first worked in a brush factory, then as a porter at Les
Halles, then had become a dishwasher, and had finally worked his way up to
be a waiter. When he fell ill he was at the Hôtel Scribe, and taking a
hundred francs a day in tips. His ambition was to become a _maître d'hôtel_,
save fifty thousand francs, and set up a small, select restaurant on the
Right Bank.

Boris always talked of the war as the happiest time of his life. War
and soldiering were his passion; he had read innumerable books of strategy
and military history, and could tell you all about the theories of
Napoleon, Kutuzof, Clausewitz, Moltke and Foch. Anything to do with
soldiers pleased him. His favourite café was the Gloserie des Lilas in
Montparnasse, simply because the statue of Marshal Ney stands outside it.
Later on, Boris and I sometimes went to the rue du Commerce together. If we
went by Métro, Boris always got out at Cambronne station instead of
Commerce, though Commerce was nearer; he liked the association with General
Cambronne, who was called on to surrender at Waterloo, and answered simply,
'_Merde!_'

The only things left to Boris by the Revolution were his medals and
some photographs of his old regiment; he had kept these when everything
else went to the pawnshop. Almost every day he would spread the photographs
out on the bed and talk about them:

'_Voilà, mon ami_. There you see me at the head of my company. Fine big
men, eh? Not like these little rats of Frenchmen. A captain at twenty--
not bad, eh? Yes, a captain in the Second Siberian Rifles; and my father
was a colonel.

'_Ah, mais, mon ami_, the ups and downs of life! A captain in the
Russian Army, and then, piff! the Revolution--every penny gone. In 1916 I
stayed a week at the Hôtel Édouard Sept; in 1920 I was trying for a job as
night watchman there. I have been night watchman, cellarman, floor
scrubber, dishwasher, porter, lavatory attendant. I have tipped waiters,
and I have been tipped by waiters.

'Ah, but I have known what it is to live like a gentleman, _mon ami_. I
do not say it to boast, but the other day I was trying to compute how many
mistresses I have had in my life, and I made it out to be over two hundred.
Yes, at least two hundred... Ah, well, _ça reviendra_. Victory is to him who
fights the longest. Courage!' etc. etc.

Boris had a queer, changeable nature. He always wished himself back in
the army, but he had also been a waiter long enough to acquire the waiter's
outlook. Though he had never saved more than a few thousand francs, he took
it for granted that in the end he would be able to set up his own
restaurant and grow rich. All waiters, I afterwards found, talk and think
of this; it is what reconciles them to being waiters. Boris used to talk
interestingly about Hotel life:

'Waiting is a gamble,' he used to say; 'you may die poor, you may make
your fortune in a year. You are not paid wages, you depend on tips--ten
per cent of the bill, and a commission from the wine companies on champagne
corks. Sometimes the tips are enormous. The barman at Maxim's, for
instance, makes five hundred francs a day. More than five hundred, in the
season... I have made two hundred francs a day myself. It was at a Hotel in
Biarritz, in the season. The whole staff, from the manager down to the
_plongeurs_, was working twenty-one hours a day. Twenty-one hours' work and
two and a half hours in bed, for a month on end. Still, it was worth it, at
two hundred francs a day.

'You never know when a stroke of luck is coming. Once when I was at
the Hôtel Royal an American customer sent for me before dinner and ordered
twenty-four brandy cocktails. I brought them all together on a tray, in
twenty-four glasses. "Now, _garçon_," said the customer (he was drunk),
"I'll drink twelve and you'll drink twelve, and if you can walk to the door
afterwards you get a hundred francs." I walked to the door, and he gave me
a hundred francs. And every night for six days he did the same thing;
twelve brandy cocktails, then a hundred francs. A few months later I heard
he had been extradited by the American Government--embezzlement. There is
something fine, do you not think, about these Americans?'

I liked Boris, and we had interesting times together, playing chess
and talking about war and hotels. Boris used often to suggest that I should
become a waiter. 'The life would suit you,' he used to say; 'when you are
in work, with a hundred francs a day and a nice mistress, it's not bad. You
say you go in for writing. Writing is bosh. There is only one way to make
money at writing, and that is to marry a publisher's daughter. But you
would make a good waiter if you shaved that moustache off. You are tall and
you speak English--those are the chief things a waiter needs. Wait till I
can bend this accursed leg, _mon ami_. And then, if you are ever out of a
job, come to me.'

Now that I was short of my rent, and getting hungry, I remembered
Boris's promise, and decided to look him up at once. I did not hope to
become a waiter so easily as he had promised, but of course I knew how to
scrub dishes, and no doubt he could get me a job in the kitchen. He had
said that dishwashing jobs were to be had for the asking during the summer.
It was a great relief to remember that I had after all one influential
friend to fall back on.




V



A SHORT time before, Boris had given me an address in the rue du
Marché des Blancs Manteaux. All he had said in his letter was that 'things
were not marching too badly', and I assumed that he was back at the Hôtel
Scribe, touching his hundred francs a day. I was full of hope, and wondered
why I had been fool enough not to go to Boris before. I saw myself in a
cosy restaurant, with jolly cooks singing love-songs as they broke eggs
into the pan, and five solid meals a day. I even squandered two francs
fifty on a packet of Gaulois Bleu, in anticipation of my wages.

In the morning I walked down to the rue du Marché des Blancs Manteaux;
with a shock, I found it a shimmy back street-as bad as my own. Boris's
hotel was the dirtiest hotel in the street. From its dark doorway there
came out a vile, sour odour, a mixture of slops and synthetic soup--it
was Bouillon Zip, twenty-five centimes a packet. A misgiving came over me.
People who drink Bouillon Zip are starving, or near it. Could Boris
possibly be earning a hundred francs a day? A surly _patron_, sitting in the
office, said to me. Yes, the Russian was at home--in the attic. I went up
six nights of narrow, winding stairs, the Bouillon Zip growing stronger as
one got higher. Boris did not answer when I knocked at his door, so I
opened it and went in.

The room was an attic, ten feet square, lighted only by a skylight,
its sole furniture a narrow iron bedstead, a chair, and a washhand-stand
with one game leg. A long S-shaped chain of bugs marched slowly across the
wall above the bed. Boris was lying asleep, naked, his large belly making a
mound under the grimy sheet. His chest was spotted with insect bites. As I
came in he woke up, rubbed his eyes, and groaned deeply.

'Name of Jesus Christ!' he exclaimed, 'oh, name of Jesus Christ, my
back! Curse it, I believe my back is broken!'

'What's the matter?' I exclaimed.

'My back is broken, that is all. I have spent the night on the floor.
Oh, name of Jesus Christ! If you knew what my back feels like!'

'My dear Boris, are you ill?'

'Not ill, only starving--yes, starving to death if this goes on much
longer. Besides sleeping on the floor, I have lived on two francs a day for
weeks past. It is fearful. You have come at a bad moment, _mon ami_.'

It did not seem much use to ask whether Boris still had his job at the
Hôtel Scribe. I hurried downstairs and bought a loaf of bread. Boris threw
himself on the bread and ate half of it, after which he felt better, sat up
in bed, and told me what was the matter with him. He had failed to get a
job after leaving the hospital, because he was still very lame, and he had
spent all his money and pawned everything, and finally starved for several
days. He had slept a week on the quay under the Font d'Austerlitz, among
some empty wine barrels. For the past fortnight he had been living in this
room, together with a Jew, a mechanic. It appeared (there was some
complicated explanation.) that the Jew owed Boris three hundred francs, and
was repaying this by letting him sleep on the floor and allowing him two
francs a day for food. Two francs would buy a bowl of coffee and three
rolls. The Jew went to work at seven in the mornings, and after that Boris
would leave his sleeping-place (it was beneath the skylight, which let in
the rain) and get into the bed. He could not sleep much even there owing to
the bugs, but it rested his back after the floor.

It was a great disappointment, when I had come to Boris for help, to
find him even worse off than myself. I explained that I had only about
sixty francs left and must get a job immediately. By this time, however,
Boris had eaten the rest of the bread and was feeling cheerful and
talkative. He said carelessly:

'Good heavens, what are you worrying about? Sixty francs--why, it's
a fortune! Please hand me that shoe, _mon ami_. I'm going to smash some of
those bugs if they come within reach.'

'But do you think there's any chance of getting a job?'

'Chance? It's a certainty. In fact, I have got something already.
There is a new Russian restaurant which is to open in a few days in the rue
du Commerce. It is _une chose entendue_ that I am to be _maître d'hôtel_. I can
easily get you a job in the kitchen. Five hundred francs a month and your
food--tips, too, if you are lucky.'

'But in the meantime? I've got to pay my rent before long.'

'Oh, we shall find something. I have got a few cards-up my sleeve.
There are people who owe me money, for instance--Paris is full of them.
One of them is bound to pay up before long. Then think of all the women who
have been my mistress! A woman never forgets, you know--I have only to
ask and they will help me. Besides, the Jew tells me he is going to steal
some magnetos from the garage where he works, and he will pay us five
francs a day to clean them before he sells them. That alone would keep us.
Never worry, _mon ami_. Nothing is easier to get than money.'

'Well, let's go out now and look for a job.'

'Presently, _mon ami_. We shan't starve, don't you fear. This is only
the fortune of war--I've been in a worse hole scores of times. It's only
a question of persisting. Remember Foch's maxim: "_Attaquez! Attaquez!
Attaquez!_"'

It was midday before Boris decided to get up. All the clothes he now
had left were one suit, with one shirt, collar and tie, a pair of shoes
almost worn out, and a pair of socks all holes. He had also an overcoat
which was to be pawned in the last extremity. He had a suitcase, a wretched
twenty-franc cardboard thing, but very important, because the _patron_ of the
hotel believed that it was full of clothes--without that, he would
probably have turned Boris out of doors. What it actually contained were
the medals and photographs, various odds and ends, and huge bundles of
love-letters. In spite of all this Boris managed to keep a fairly smart
appearance. He shaved without soap and with a razor-blade two months old,
tied his tie so that the holes did not show, and carefully stuffed the
soles of his shoes with newspaper. Finally, when he was dressed, he
produced an ink-bottle and inked the skin of his ankles where it showed
through his socks. You would never have thought, when it was finished, that
he had recently been sleeping under the Seine bridges.

We went to a small café off the rue de Rivoli, a well-known rendezvous
of hotel managers and employees. At the back was a dark, cave-like room
where all kinds of hotel workers were sitting--smart young waiters,
others not so smart and clearly hungry, fat pink cooks, greasy
dish-washers, battered old scrubbing-women. Everyone had an untouched glass
of black coffee in front of him. The place was, in effect, an employment
bureau, and the money spent on drinks was the _patron_'s commission.
Sometimes a stout, important-looking man, obviously a restaurateur, would
come in and speak to the barman, and the barman would call to one of the
people at the back of the café. But he never called to Boris or me, and we
left after two hours, as the etiquette was that you could only stay two
hours for one drink. We learned afterwards, when it was too late, that the
dodge was to bribe the barman; if you could afford twenty francs he would
generally get you a job.

We went to the Hôtel Scribe and waited an hour on the pavement, hoping
that the manager would come out, but he never did. Then we dragged
ourselves down to the rue du Commerce, only to find that the new
restaurant, which was being redecorated, was shut up and the _patron_ away.
It was now night. We had walked fourteen kilometres over pavement, and we
were so tired that we had to waste one franc fifty on going home by Métro.
Walking was agony to Boris with his game leg, and his optimism wore thinner
and thinner as the day went on. When he got out of the Métro at the Place
d'Italie he was in despair. He began to say that it was no use looking for
work--there was nothing for it but to try crime.

'Sooner rob than starve, _mon ami_. I have often planned it. A fat, rich
American--some dark corner down Montparnasse way--a cobblestone in a
stocking--bang! And then go through his pockets and bolt. It is feasible,
do you not think? I would not flinch--I have been a soldier, remember.'

He decided against the plan in the end, because we were both
foreigners and easily recognized.

When we had got back to my room we spent another one franc fifty on
bread and chocolate. Boris devoured his share, and at once cheered up like
magic; food seemed to act on his system as rapidly as a cocktail. He took
out a pencil and began making a list of the people who would probably give
us jobs. There were dozens of them, he said.

'Tomorrow we shall find something, _mon ami_, I know it in my bones. The
luck always changes. Besides, we both have brains--a man with brains
can't starve.

'What things a man can do with brains! Brains will make money out of
anything. I had a friend once, a Pole, a real man of genius; and what do
you think he used to do? He would buy a gold ring and pawn it for fifteen
francs. Then--you know how carelessly the clerks fill up the tickets--
where the clerk had written "_en or_" he would add "_et diamants_" and he would
change "fifteen francs" to "fifteen thousand". Neat, eh? Then, you see, he
could borrow a thousand francs on the security of the ticket. That is what
I mean by brains...'

For the rest of the evening Boris was in a hopeful mood, talking of
the times we should have together when we were waiters together at Nice or
Biarritz, with smart rooms and enough money to set up mistresses. He was
too tired to walk the three kilometres back to his hotel, and slept the
night on the floor of my room, with his coat rolled round his shoes for a
pillow.




VI



WE again failed to find work the next day, and it was three weeks
before the luck changed. My two hundred francs saved me from trouble about
the rent, but everything else went as badly as possible. Day after day
Boris and I went up and down Paris, drifting at two miles an hour through
the crowds, bored and hungry, and finding nothing. One day, I remember, we
crossed the Seine eleven times. We loitered for hours outside service
doorways, and when the manager came out we would go up to him
ingratiatingly, cap in hand. We always got the same answer: they did not
want a lame man, nor a man without experience. Once we were very nearly
engaged. While we spoke to the manager Boris stood straight upright, not
supporting himself with his stick, and the .manager did not see that he was
lame. 'Yes,' he said, 'we want two men in the cellars. Perhaps you would
do. Come inside.' Then Boris moved, the game was up. 'Ah,' said the
manager, 'you limp. _Malheureusement_--'

We enrolled our names at agencies and answered advertisements, but
walking everywhere made us slow, and we seemed to miss every job by half an
hour. Once we very nearly got a job swabbing out railway trucks, but at the
last moment they rejected us in favour of Frenchmen. Once we answered an
advertisement calling for hands at a circus. You had to shift benches and
clean up litter, and, during the performance, stand on two tubs and let a
lion jump through your legs. When we got to the place, an hour before the
time named, we found a queue of fifty men already waiting. There is some
attraction in lions, evidently.

Once an agency to which I had applied months earlier sent me a _petit
bleu_, telling me of an Italian gentleman who wanted English lessons. The
_petit bleu_ said 'Come at once' and promised twenty francs an hour. Boris
and I were in despair. Here was a splendid chance, and I could not take it,
for it was impossible to go to the agency with my coat out at the elbow.
Then it occurred to us that I could wear Boris's coat--it did not match
my trousers, but the trousers were grey and might pass for flannel at a
short distance. The coat was so much too big for me that I had to wear it
unbuttoned and keep one hand in my pocket. I hurried out, and wasted
seventy-five centimes on a bus fare to get to the agency. When I got there
I found that the Italian had changed his mind and left Paris.

Once Boris suggested that I should go to Les Halles and try for a job
as a porter. I arrived at half-past four in the morning, when the work was
getting into its swing. Seeing a short, fat man in a bowler hat directing
some porters, I went up to him and asked for work. Before answering he
seized my right hand and felt the palm.

'You are strong, eh?' he said.

'Very strong,' I said untruly.

'_Bien_. Let me see you lift that crate.'

It was a huge wicker basket full of potatoes. I took hold of it, and
found that, so far from lifting it, I could not even move it. The man in
the bowler hat watched me, then shrugged his shoulders and turned away. I
made off. When I had gone some distance I looked back and saw _four_ men
lifting the basket on to a cart. It weighed three hundredweight, possibly.
The man had seen that I was no use, and taken this way of getting rid of me.

Sometimes in his hopeful moments Boris spent fifty centimes on a stamp
and wrote to one of his ex-mistresses, asking for money. Only one of them
ever replied. It was a woman who, besides having been his mistress, owed
him two hundred francs. When Boris saw the letter waiting and recognized
the handwriting, he was wild with hope. We seized the letter and rushed up
to Boris's room to read it, like a child with stolen sweets. Boris read the
letter, then handed it silently to me. It ran:


My Little Cherished Wolf,

With what delight did I open thy charming letter, reminding me
of the days of our perfect love, and of the so dear kisses which I
have received from thy lips. Such memories linger for ever in the
heart, like the perfume of a flower that is dead.

As to thy request for two hundred francs, alas! it is
impossible. Thou dost not know, my dear one, how I am desolated to
hear of thy embarrassments. But what wouldst thou? In this life
which is so sad, trouble conies to everyone. I too have had my
share. My little sister has been ill (ah, the poor little one, how
she suffered!) and we are obliged to pay I know not what to the
doctor. All our money is gone and we are passing, I assure thee,
very difficult days.

Courage, my little wolf, always the courage! Remember that the
bad days are not for ever, and the trouble which seems so terrible
will disappear at last.

Rest assured, my dear one, that I will remember thee always. And
receive the most sincere embraces of her who has never ceased to
love thee, thy

Yvonne


This letter disappointed Boris so much that he went straight to bed
and would not look for work again that day. My sixty francs lasted about a
fortnight. I had given up the pretence of going out to restaurants, and we
used to eat in my room, one of us sitting on the bed and the other on the
chair. Boris would contribute his two francs and I three or four francs,
and we would buy bread, potatoes, milk and cheese, and make soup over my
spirit lamp. We had a saucepan and a coffee-bowl and one spoon; every day
there was a polite squabble as to who should eat out of the saucepan and
who out of the coffee-bowl (the saucepan held more), and every day, to my
secret anger, Boris gave in first and had the saucepan. Sometimes we had
more bread in the evening, sometimes not. Our linen was getting filthy, and
it was three weeks since I had had a bath; Boris, so he said, had not had a
bath for months. It was tobacco that made everything tolerable. We had
plenty of tobacco, for some time before Boris had met a soldier (the
soldiers are given their tobacco free) and bought twenty or thirty packets
at fifty centimes each.

All this was far worse for Boris than for me. The walking and sleeping
on the floor kept his leg and back in constant pain, and with his vast
Russian appetite he suffered torments of hunger, though he never seemed to
grow thinner. On the whole he was surprisingly gay, and he had vast
capacities for hope. He used to say seriously that he had a patron saint
who watched over him, and when things were very bad he would search the
gutter for money, saying that the saint often dropped a two-franc piece
there. One day we were waiting in the rue Royale; there was a Russian
restaurant near by, and we were going to ask for a job there. Suddenly,
Boris made up his mind to go into the Madeleine and bum a fifty-centime
candle to his patron saint. Then, coming out, he said that he would be on
the safe side, and solemnly put a match to a fifty-centime stamp, as a
sacrifice to the immortal gods. Perhaps the gods and the saints did not get
on together; at any rate, we missed the job.

On some mornings Boris collapsed in the most utter despair. He would
lie in bed almost weeping, cursing the Jew with whom he lived. Of late the
Jew had become restive about paying the daily two francs, and, what was
worse, had begun putting on intolerable airs of patronage. Boris said that
I, as an Englishman, could not conceive what torture it was to a Russian of
family to be at the mercy of a Jew.

'A Jew, _mon ami_, a veritable Jew! And he hasn't even the decency to be
ashamed of it. To think that I, a captain in the Russian Army--have I
ever told you, _mon ami_, that I was a captain in the Second Siberian Rifles?
Yes, a captain, and my father was a colonel. And here I am, eating the
bread of a Jew. A Jew...

'I will tell you what Jews are like. Once, in the early months of the
war, we were on the march, and we had halted at a village for the night. A
horrible old Jew, with a red beard like Judas Iscariot, came sneaking up to
my billet. I asked him what he wanted. "Your honour," he said, "I have
brought a girl for you, a beautiful young girl only seventeen. It will only
be fifty francs." "Thank you," I said, "you can take her away again. I
don't want to catch any diseases." "Diseases!" cried the Jew, "_mais,
monsieur le capitaine_, there's no fear of that. It's my own daughter!" That
is the Jewish national character for you.

'Have I ever told you, _mon ami_, that in the old Russian Army it was
considered bad form to spit on a Jew? Yes, we thought a Russian officer's
spittle was too precious to be wasted on Jews...' etc. etc.

On these days Boris usually declared himself too ill to go out and
look for work. He would lie till evening in the greyish, verminous sheets,
smoking and reading old newspapers. Sometimes we played chess. We had no
board, but we wrote down the moves on a piece of paper, and afterwards we
made a board from the side of a packing--case, and a set of men from
buttons, Belgian coins and the like. Boris, like many Russians, had a
passion for chess. It was a saying of his that the rules of chess are the
same as the rules of love and war, and that if you can win at one you can
win at the others. But he also said that if you have a chessboard you do
not mind being hungry, which was certainly not true in my case.




VII



MY money oozed away--to eight francs, to four francs, to one franc,
to twenty-five centimes; and twenty-five centimes is useless, for it will
buy nothing except a newspaper. We went several days on dry bread, and then
I was two and a half days with nothing to eat whatever. This was an ugly
experience. There are people who do fasting cures of three weeks or more,
and they say that fasting is quite pleasant after the fourth day; I do not
know, never having gone beyond the third day. Probably it seems different
when one is doing it voluntarily and is not underfed at the start.

The first day, too inert to look for work, I borrowed a rod and went
fishing in the Seine, baiting with bluebottles. I hoped to catch enough for
a meal, but of course I did not. The Seine is full of dace, but they grew
cunning during the siege of Paris, and none of them has been caught since,
except in nets. On the second day I thought of pawning my overcoat, but it
seemed too far to walk to the pawnshop, and I spent the day in bed, reading
the _Memoirs Of Sherlock Holmes_. It was all that I felt equal to, without
food. Hunger reduces one to an utterly spineless, brainless condition, more
like the after-effects of influenza than anything else. It is as though one
had been turned into a jellyfish, or as though all one's blood had been
pumped out and luke-warm water substituted. Complete inertia is my chief
memory of hunger; that, and being obliged to spit very frequently, and the
spittle being curiously white and flocculent, like cuckoo-spit. I do not
know the reason for this, but everyone who has gone hungry several days has
noticed it.

On the third morning I felt very much better. I realized that I must
do something at once, and I decided to go and ask Boris to let me share his
two francs, at any rate for a day or two. When I arrived I found Boris in
bed, and furiously angry. As soon as I came in he burst out, almost
choking:

'He has taken it back, the dirty thief! He has taken it back!'

'Who's taken what?' I said.

'The Jew! Taken my two francs, the dog, the thief! He robbed me in my
sleep!'

It appeared that on the previous night the Jew had flatly refused to
pay the daily two francs. They had argued and argued, and at last the Jew
had consented to hand over the money; he had done it, Boris said, in the
most offensive manner, making a little speech about how kind he was, and
extorting abject gratitude. And then in the morning he had stolen the money
back before Boris was awake.

This was a blow. I was horribly disappointed, for I had allowed my
belly to expect food, a great mistake when one is hungry. However, rather
to my surprise, Boris was far from despairing. He sat up in bed, lighted
his pipe and reviewed the situation.

'Now listen, _mon ami_, this is a tight comer. We have only twenty-five
centimes between us, and I don't suppose the Jew will ever pay my two
francs again. In any case his behaviour is becoming intolerable. Will you
believe it, the other night he had the indecency to bring a woman in here,
while I was there on the floor. The low animal! And I have a worse thing to
tell you. The Jew intends clearing out of here. He owes a week's rent, and
his idea is to avoid paying that and give me the slip at the same time. If
the Jew shoots the moon I shall be left without a roof, and the _patron_ will
take my suitcase in lieu of rent, curse him! We have got to make a vigorous
move.'

'All right. But what can we do? It seems to me that the only thing is
to pawn our overcoats and get some food.'

'We'll do that, of course, but I must get my possessions out of this
house first. To think of my photographs being seized! Well, my plan is
ready. I'm going to forestall the Jew and shoot the moon myself. _F----
le camp_--retreat, you understand. I think that is the correct move, eh?'

'But, my dear Boris, how can you, in daytime? You're bound to be
caught.'

'Ah well, it will need strategy, of course. Our _patron_ is on the watch
for people slipping out without paying their rent; he's been had that way
before. He and his wife take it in turns all day to sit in the office--
what misers, these Frenchmen! But I have thought of a way to do it, if you
will help.'

I did not feel in a very helpful mood, but I asked Boris what his plan
was. He explained it carefully.

'Now listen. We must start by pawning our overcoats. First go back to
your room and fetch your overcoat, then come back here and fetch mine, and
smuggle it out under cover of yours. Take them to the pawnshop in the rue
des Francs Bourgeois. You ought to get twenty francs for the two, with
luck. Then go down to the Seine bank and fill your pockets with stones, and
bring them back and put them in my suitcase. You see the idea? I shall wrap
as many of my things as I can carry in a newspaper, and go down and ask the
_patron_ the way to the nearest laundry. I shall be very brazen and casual,
you understand, and of course the _patron_ will think the bundle is nothing
but dirty linen. Or, if he does suspect anything, he will do what he always
does, the mean sneak; he will go up to my room and feel the weight of my
suitcase. And when he feels the weight of stones he will think it is still
full. Strategy, eh? Then afterwards I can come back and carry my other
things out in my pockets.'

'But what about the suitcase?'

'Oh, that? We shall have to abandon it. The miserable thing only cost
about twenty francs. Besides, one always abandons something in a retreat.
Look at Napoleon at the Beresina! He abandoned his whole army.'

Boris was so pleased with this scheme (he called it _ruse de guerre_)
that he almost forgot being hungry. Its main weakness--that he would have
nowhere to sleep after shooting the moon--he ignored.

At first the _ruse de guerre_ worked well. I went home and fetched my
overcoat (that made already nine kilometres, on an empty belly) and
smuggled Boris's coat out successfully. Then a hitch occurred. The receiver
at the pawnshop, a nasty, sour-faced, interfering, little man--a typical
French official--refused the coats on the ground that they were not
wrapped up in anything. He said that they must be put either in a valise or
a cardboard box. This spoiled everything, for we had no box of any kind,
and with only twenty-five centimes between us we could not buy one.

I went back and told Boris the bad news. '_Merde!_' he said, 'that makes
it awkward. Well, no matter, there is always a way. We'll put the overcoats
in my suitcase.'

'But how are we to get the suitcase past the _patron_? He's sitting
almost in the door of the office. It's impossible!'

'How easily you despair, _mon ami_! Where is that English obstinacy that
I have read of? Courage! We'll manage it.'

Boris thought for a little while, and then produced another cunning
plan. The essential difficulty was to hold the _patron_'s attention for
perhaps five seconds, while we could slip past with the suitcase. But, as
it happened, the _patron_ had just one weak spot--that he was interested in
_Le Sport_, and was ready to talk if you approached him on this subject.
Boris read an article about bicycle races in an old copy of the _Petit
Parisien_, and then, when he had reconnoitred the stairs, went down and
managed to set the _patron_ talking. Meanwhile, I waited at the foot of the
stairs, with the overcoats under one arm and the suitcase under the other.
Boris was to give a cough when he thought the moment favourable. I waited
trembling, for at any moment the _patron_'s wife might come out of the door
opposite the office, and then the game was up. However, presently Boris
coughed. I sneaked rapidly past the office and out into the street,
rejoicing that my shoes did not creak. The plan might have failed if Boris
had been thinner, for his big shoulders blocked the doorway of the office.
His nerve was splendid, too; he went on laughing and talking in the most
casual way, and so loud that he quite covered any noise I made. When I was
well away he came and joined me round the corner, and we bolted.

And then, after all our trouble, the receiver at the pawnshop again
refused the overcoats. He told me (one could see his French soul revelling
in the pedantry of it) that I had not sufficient papers of identification;
my _carte d'identité_ was not enough, and I must show a passport or addressed
envelopes. Boris had addressed envelopes by the score, but his _carte
d'identité_ was out of order (he never renewed it, so as to avoid the tax),
so we could not pawn the overcoats in his name. All we could do was to
trudge up to my room, get the necessary papers, and take the coats to the
pawnshop in the Boulevard Port Royal.

I left Boris at my room and went down to the pawnshop. When I got
there I found that it was shut and would not open till four in the
afternoon. It was now about half-past one, and I had walked twelve
kilometres and had no food for sixty hours. Fate seemed to be playing a
series of extraordinarily unamusing jokes.

Then the luck changed as though by a miracle. I was walking home
through the Rue Broca when suddenly, glittering on the cobbles, I saw a
five-sou piece. I pounced on it, hurried home, got our other five-sou piece
and bought a pound of potatoes. There was only enough alcohol in the stove
to parboil them, and we had no salt, but we wolfed them, skins and all.
After that we felt like new men, and sat playing chess till the pawnshop
opened.

At four o'clock I went back to the pawnshop. I was not hopeful, for if
I had only got seventy francs before, what could I expect for two shabby
overcoats in a cardboard suitcase? Boris had said twenty francs, but I
thought it would be ten francs, or even five. Worse yet, I might be refused
altogether, like poor _Numéro_ 83 on the previous occasion. I sat on the
front bench, so as not to see people laughing when the clerk said five
francs.

At last the clerk called my number: '_Numéro_ 117!'

'Yes,' I said, standing up.

'Fifty francs?'

It was almost as great a shock as the seventy francs had been the time
before. I believe now that the clerk had mixed my number up with someone
else's, for one could not have sold the coats outright for fifty francs. I
hurried home and walked into my room with my hands behind my back, saying
nothing. Boris was playing with the chessboard. He looked up eagerly.

'What did you get?' he exclaimed. 'What, not twenty francs? Surely you
got ten francs, anyway? _Nom de Dieu_, five francs--that is a bit too
thick. _Mon ami, don't_ say it was five francs. If you say it was five francs
I shall really begin to think of suicide.'

I threw the fifty-franc, note on to the table. Boris turned white as
chalk, and then, springing up, seized my hand and gave it a grip that
almost broke the bones. We ran out, bought bread and wine, a piece of meat
and alcohol for the stove, and gorged.

After eating, Boris became more optimistic than I had ever known him.
'What did I tell you?' he said. 'The fortune of war! This morning with five
sous, and now look at us. I have always said it, there is nothing easier to
get than money. And that reminds me, I have a friend in the rue Fondary
whom we might go and see. He has cheated me of four thousand francs, the
thief. He is the greatest thief alive when he is sober, but it is a curious
thing, he is quite honest when he is drunk. I should think he would be
drunk by six in the evening. Let's go and find him. Very likely he will pay
up a hundred on account. _Merde!_ He might pay two hundred. _Allons-y!_'

We went to the rue Fondary and found the man, and he was drunk, but we
did not get our hundred francs. As soon as he and Boris met there was a
terrible altercation on the pavement. The other man declared that he did
not owe Boris a penny, but that on the contrary Boris owed _him_ four
thousand francs, and both of them kept appealing to me for my opinion. I
never understood the rights of the matter. The two argued and argued, first
in the street, then in a _bistro_, then in a _prix fixe_ restaurant where we
went for dinner, then in another _bistro_. Finally, having called one another
thieves for two hours, they went off together on a drinking bout that
finished up the last sou of Boris's money.

Boris slept the night at the house of a cobbler, another Russian
refugee, in the Commerce quarter. Meanwhile, I had eight francs left, and
plenty of cigarettes, and was stuffed to the eyes with food and drink. It
was a marvellous change for the better after two bad days.




VIII



WE had now twenty-eight francs in hand, and could start looking for
work once more. Boris was still sleeping, on some mysterious terms, at the
house of the cobbler, and he had managed to borrow another twenty francs
from a Russian friend. He had friends, mostly ex-officers like himself,
here and there all over Paris. Some were waiters or dishwashers, some drove
taxis, a few lived on women, some had managed to bring money away from
Russia and owned garages or dancing-halls. In general, the Russian refugees
in Paris are hard-working people, and have put up with/their bad luck far
better than one can imagine Englishmen of the same class doing. There are
exceptions, of course. Boris told me of an exiled Russian duke whom he had
once met, who frequented expensive restaurants. The duke would find out if
there was a Russian officer among the waiters, and, after he had dined,
call him in a friendly way to his table.

'Ah,' the duke would say, 'so you are an old soldier, like myself?
These are bad days, eh? Well, well, the Russian soldier fears nothing. And
what was your regiment?'

'The so-and-so, sir,' the waiter would answer.

'A very gallant regiment! I inspected them in 1912. By the way, I have
unfortunately left my notecase at home. A Russian officer will, I know,
oblige me with three hundred francs.'

If the waiter had three hundred francs he would hand it over, and, of
course, never see it again. The duke made quite a lot in this way. Probably
the waiters did not mind being swindled. A duke is a duke, even in exile.

It was through one of these Russian refugees that Boris heard of
something which seemed to promise money. Two days after we had pawned the
overcoats, Boris said to me rather mysteriously:

'Tell me, _mon ami_, have you any political opinions?'

'No,'I said.

'Neither have I. Of course, one is always a patriot; but still--Did
not Moses say something about spoiling the Egyptians? As an Englishman you
will have read the Bible. What I mean is, would you object to earning money
from Communists?'

'No, of course not.'

'Well, it appears that there is a Russian secret society in Paris who
might do something for us. They are Communists; in fact they are agents for
the Bolsheviks. They act as a friendly society, get in touch with exiled
Russians, and try to get them to turn Bolshevik. My friend has joined their
society, and he thinks they would help us if we went to them.'

'But what can they do for us? In any case they won't help me, as I'm
not a Russian.'

'That is just the point. It seems that they are correspondents for a
Moscow paper, and they want some articles on English politics. If we got to
them at once they may commission you to write the articles.'

'Me? But I don't know anything about politics.'

'_Merde_! Neither do they. Who _does_ know anything about politics? It's
easy. All you have to do is to copy it out of the English papers. Isn't
there a Paris _Daily Mail_? Copy it from that.'

'But the _Daily Mail_ is a Conservative paper. They loathe the
Communists.'

'Well, say the opposite of what the _Daily Mail_ says, then you can't be
wrong. We mustn't throw this chance away, _mon ami_. It might mean hundreds
of francs.'

I did not like the idea, for the Paris police are very hard on
Communists, especially if they are foreigners, and I was already under
suspicion. Some months before, a detective had seen me come out of the
office of a Communist weekly paper, and I had had a great deal of trouble
with the police. If they caught me going to this secret society, it might
mean deportation. However, the chance seemed too good to be missed. That
afternoon Boris's friend, another waiter, came to take us to the
rendezvous. I cannot remember the name of the street--it was a shabby
street running south from the Seine bank, somewhere near the Chamber of
Deputies. Boris's friend insisted on great caution. We loitered casually
down the street, marked the doorway we were to enter--it was a laundry--
and then strolled back again, keeping an eye on all the windows and cafés.
If the place were known as a haunt of Communists it was probably watched,
and we intended to go home if we saw anyone at all like a detective. I was
frightened, but Boris enjoyed these conspiratorial proceedings, and quite
forgot that he was about to trade with the slayers of his parents.

When we were certain that the coast was clear we dived quickly into
the doorway. In the laundry was a Frenchwoman ironing clothes, who told us
that 'the Russian gentlemen' lived up a staircase across the courtyard. We
went up several flights of dark stairs and emerged on to a landing. A
strong, surly-looking young man, with hair growing low on his head, was
standing at the top of the stairs. As I came up he looked at me
suspiciously, barred the way with his arm and said something in Russian.

'_Mot d'ordre!_' he said sharply when I did not answer.

I stopped, startled. I had not expected passwords.

'_Mot d'ordre!_' repeated the Russian.

Boris's friend, who was walking behind, now came forward and said
something in Russian, either the password or an explanation. At this, the
surly young man seemed satisfied, and led us into a small, shabby room with
frosted windows. It was like a very poverty-stricken office, with
propaganda posters in Russian lettering and a huge, crude picture of Lenin
tacked on the walls. At the table sat an unshaven Russian in shirt sleeves,
addressing newspaper wrappers from a pile in front of him. As I came in he
spoke to me in French, with a bad accent.

'This is very careless!' he exclaimed fussily. 'Why have you come here
without a parcel of washing?'

'Washing?'

'Everybody who comes here brings washing. It looks as though they were
going to the laundry downstairs. Bring a good, large bundle next time. We
don't want the police on our tracks.'

This was even more conspiratorial than I had expected. Boris sat down
in the only vacant chair, and there was a great deal of talking in Russian.
Only the unshaven man talked; the surly one leaned against the wall with
his eyes on me, as though he still suspected me. It was queer, standing in
the little secret room with its revolutionary posters, listening to a
conversation of which I did not understand a word. The Russians talked
quickly and eagerly, with smiles and shrugs of the shoulders. I wondered
what it was all about. They would be calling each other 'little father', I
thought, and 'little dove', and 'Ivan Alexandrovitch', like the characters
in Russian novels. And the talk would be of revolutions. The unshaven man
would be saying firmly, 'We never argue. Controversy is a bourgeois
pastime. Deeds are our arguments.' Then I gathered that it was not this
exactly. Twenty francs was being demanded, for an entrance fee apparently,
and Boris was promising to pay it (we had just seventeen francs in the
world). Finally Boris produced our precious store of money and paid five
francs on account.

At this the surly man looked less suspicious, and sat down on the edge
of the table. The unshaven one began to question me in French, making notes
on a slip of paper. Was I a Communist? he asked. By sympathy, I answered; I
had never joined any organization. Did I understand the political situation
in England? Oh, of course, of course. I mentioned the names of various
Ministers, and made some contemptuous remarks about the Labour Party. And
what about _Le Sport_? Could I do articles on _Le Sport_? (Football and
Socialism have some mysterious connexion on the Continent.) Oh, of course,
again. Both men nodded gravely. The unshaven one said:

'_Évidemment_, you have a thorough knowledge of conditions in England.
Could you undertake to write a series of articles for a Moscow weekly
paper? We will give you the particulars.'

'Certainly.'

'Then, comrade, you will hear from us by the first post tomorrow. Or
possibly the second post. Our rate of pay is a hundred and fifty francs an
article. Remember to bring a parcel of washing next time you come.
_Au revoir_, comrade.'

We went downstairs, looked carefully out of the laundry to see if
there was anyone in the street, and slipped out. Boris was wild with joy.
In a sort of sacrificial ecstasy he rushed into the nearest tobacconist's
and spent fifty centimes on a cigar. He came out thumping his stick on the
pavement and beaming.

'At last! At last! Now, _mon ami_, out fortune really is made. You took
them in finely. Did you hear him call you comrade? A hundred and fifty
francs an article--_Nom de Dieu_, what luck!'

Next morning when I heard the postman I rushed down to the _bistro_ for
my letter; to my disappointment, it had not come. I stayed at home for the
second post; still no letter. When three days had gone by and I had not
heard from the secret society, we gave up hope, deciding that they must
have found somebody else to do their articles.

Ten days later we made another visit to the office of the secret
society, taking care to bring a parcel that looked like washing. And the
secret society had vanished! The woman in the laundry knew nothing--she
simply said that '_ces messieurs_' had left some days ago, after trouble
about the rent. What fools we looked, standing there with our parcel! But
it was a consolation that we had paid only five francs instead of twenty.

And that was the last we ever heard of the secret society. Who or what
they really were, nobody knew. Personally I do not think they had anything
to do with the Communist Party; I think they were simply swindlers, who
preyed upon Russian refugees by extracting entrance fees to an imaginary
society. It was quite safe, and no doubt they are still doing it in some
other city. They were clever fellows, and played their part admirably.
Their office looked exactly as a secret Communist office should look, and
as for that touch about bringing a parcel of washing, it was genius.




IX



FOR three more days we continued traipsing about looking for work,
coming home for diminishing meals of soup and bread in my bedroom. There
were now two gleams of hope. In the first place, Boris had heard of a
possible job at the Hôtel X, near the Place de la Concorde, and in the
second, the _patron_ of the new restaurant in the rue du Commerce had at last
come back. We went down in the afternoon and saw him. On the way Boris
talked of the vast fortunes we should make if we got this job, and on the
importance of making a good impression on the _patron_.

'Appearance--appearance is everything, _mon ami_. Give me a new suit
and I will borrow a thousand francs by dinner-time. What a pity I did not
buy a collar when we had money. I turned my collar inside out this morning;
but what is the use, one side is as dirty as the other. Do you think I look
hungry, _mon ami_?'

'You look pale.'

'Curse it, what can one do on bread and potatoes? It is fatal to look
hungry. It makes people want to kick you. Wait.'

He stopped at a jeweller's window and smacked his cheeks sharply to
bring the blood into them. Then, before the flush had faded, we hurried
into the restaurant and introduced ourselves to the _patron_.

The _patron_ was a short, fattish, very dignified man with wavy grey
hair, dressed in a smart, double-breasted flannel suit and smelling of
scent. Boris told me that he too was an ex-colonel of the Russian Army. His
wife was there too, a horrid, fat Frenchwoman with a dead-white face and
scarlet lips, reminding me of cold veal and tomatoes. The _patron_ greeted
Boris genially, and they talked together in Russian for a few minutes. I
stood in the background, preparing to tell some big lies about my
experience as a dish-washer.

Then the _patron_ came over towards me. I shuffled uneasily, trying to
look servile. Boris had rubbed it into me that a _plongeur_ is a slave's
slave, and I expected the _patron_ to treat me like dirt. To my
astonishment, he seized me warmly by the hand.

'So you are an Englishman!' he exclaimed. 'But how charming! I need
not ask, then, whether you are a golfer?'

'_Mais certainement_,' I said, seeing that this was expected of me.

'All my life I have wanted to play golf. Will you, my dear _monsieur_,
be so kind as to show me a few of the principal strokes?'

Apparently this was the Russian way of doing business. The _patron_
listened attentively while I explained the difference between a driver and
an iron, and then suddenly informed me that it was all _entendu_; Boris was
to be __maître d'hôtel_ when the restaurant opened, and I _plongeur_, with a
chance of rising to lavatory attendant if trade was good. When would the
restaurant open? I asked. 'Exactly a fortnight from today,' the _patron_
answered grandly (he had a manner of waving his hand and flicking off his
cigarette ash at the same time, which looked very grand), 'exactly a
fortnight from today, in time for lunch.' Then, with obvious pride, he
showed us over the restaurant.

It was a smallish place, consisting of a bar, a dining-room, and a
kitchen no bigger than the average bathroom. The _patron_ was decorating it
in a trumpery 'picturesque' style (he called it '_le Normand_'; it was a
matter of sham beams stuck on the plaster, and the like) and proposed to
call it the Auberge de Jehan Cottard, to give a medieval effect. He had a
leaflet printed, full of lies about the historical associations of the
quarter, and this leaflet actually claimed, among other things, that there
had once been an inn on the site of the restaurant which was frequented by
Charlemagne. The _patron_ was very pleased with this touch. He was also
having the bar decorated with indecent pictures by an artist from the
Salon. Finally he gave us each an expensive cigarette, and after some more
talk he went home.

I felt strongly that we should never get any good from this
restaurant. The _patron_ had looked to me like a cheat, and, what was worse,
an incompetent cheat, and I had seen two unmistakable duns hanging about
the back door. But Boris, seeing himself a __maître d'hôtel_ once more, would
not be discouraged.

'We've brought it off--only a fortnight to hold out. What is a
fortnight? _Je m'en f----_. To think that in only three weeks I shall have my
mistress! Will she be dark or fair, I wonder? I don't mind, so long as she
is not too thin.'

Two bad days followed. We had only sixty centimes left, and we spent
it on half a pound of bread, with a piece of garlic to rub it with. The
point of rubbing garlic on bread is that the taste lingers and gives one
the illusion of having fed recently. We sat most of that day in the Jardin
des Plantes. Boris had shots with stones at the tame pigeons, but always
missed them, and after that we wrote dinner menus on the backs of
envelopes. We were too hungry even to try and think of anything except
food. I remember the dinner Boris finally selected for himself. It was: a
dozen oysters, bortch soup (the red, sweet, beetroot soup with cream on
top), crayfishes, a young chicken _en casserole_, beef with stewed plums, new
potatoes, a salad, suet pudding and Roquefort cheese, with a litre of
Burgundy and some old brandy. Boris had international tastes in food. Later
on, when we were prosperous, I occasionally saw him eat meals almost as
large without difficulty.

When our money came to an end I stopped looking for work, and was
another day without food. I did not believe that the Auberge de Jehan
Cottard was really going to open, and I could see no other prospect, but I
was too lazy to do anything but lie in bed. Then the luck changed abruptly.
At night, at about ten o'clock, I heard an eager shout from the street. I
got up and went to the window. Boris was there, waving his stick and
beaming. Before speaking he dragged a bent loaf from his pocket and threw
it up to me.

'_Mon ami, mon cher ami_, we're saved! What do you think?'

'Surely you haven't got a job!'

'At the Hôtel X, near the Place de la Concorde--five hundred francs
a month, and food. I have been working there today. Name of Jesus Christ,
how I have eaten!'

After ten or twelve hours' work, and with his game leg, his first
thought had been to walk three kilometres to my hotel and tell me the good
news! What was more, he told me to meet him in the Tuileries the next day
during his afternoon interval, in case he should be able to steal some food
for me. At the appointed time I met Boris on a public bench. He undid his
waistcoat and produced a large, crushed, newspaper packet; in it were some
minced veal, a wedge of Camembert cheese, bread and an éclair, all jumbled
together.

'_Voilà!_' said Boris, 'that's all I could smuggle out for you. The
doorkeeper is a cunning swine.'

It is disagreeable to eat out of a newspaper on a public seat,
especially in the Tuileries, which are generally full of pretty girls, but
I was too hungry to care. While I ate, Boris explained that he was working
in the cafeterie of the hotel--that is, in English, the stillroom. It
appeared that the cafeterie was the very lowest post in the hotel, and a
dreadful come-down for a waiter, but it would do until the Auberge de Jehan
Cottard opened. Meanwhile I was to meet Boris every day in the Tuileries,
and he would smuggle out as much food as he dared. For three days we
continued with this arrangement, and I lived entirely on the stolen food.
Then all our troubles came to an end, for one of the _plongeurs_ left the
Hôtel X, and on Boris's recommendation I was given a job there myself.




X



THE Hôtel X was a vast, grandiose place with a classical facade, and
at one side a little, dark doorway like a rat-hole, which was the service
entrance. I arrived at a quarter to seven in the morning. A stream of men
with greasy trousers were hurrying in and being checked by a doorkeeper who
sat in a tiny office. I waited, and presently the _chef du personnel_, a sort
of assistant manager, arrived and began to question me. He was an Italian,
with a round, pale face, haggard from overwork. He asked whether I was an
experienced dishwasher, and I said that I was; he glanced at my hands and
saw that I was lying, but on hearing that I was an Englishman he changed
his tone and engaged me.

'We have been looking for someone to practise our English on,' he
said. 'Our clients are all Americans, and the only English we know is----'
He repeated something that little boys write on the walls in London. 'You
may be useful. Come downstairs.'

He led me down a winding staircase into a narrow passage, deep
underground, and so low that I had to stoop in places. It was stiflingly
hot and very dark, with only dim, yellow bulbs several yards apart. There
seemed to be miles of dark labyrinthine passages--actually, I suppose, a
few hundred yards in all--that reminded one queerly of the lower decks of
a liner; there were the same heat and cramped space and warm reek of food,
and a humming, whirring noise (it came from the kitchen furnaces) just like
the whir of engines. We passed doorways which let out sometimes a shouting
of oaths, sometimes the red glare of a fire, once a shuddering draught from
an ice chamber. As we went along, something struck me violently in the
back. It was a hundred-pound block of ice, carried by a blue-aproned
porter. After him came a boy with a great slab of veal on his shoulder, his
cheek pressed into the damp, spongy flesh. They shoved me aside with a cry
of '_Sauve-toi, idiot!_' and rushed on. On the wall, under one of the lights,
someone had written in a very neat hand: 'Sooner will you find a cloudless
sky in winter, than a woman at the Hôtel X who has her maidenhead.' It
seemed a queer sort of place.

One of the passages branched off into a laundry, where an old,
skull-faced woman gave me a blue apron and a pile of dishcloths. Then the
_chef du personnel_ took me to a tiny underground den--a cellar below a
cellar, as it were--where there were a sink and some gas-ovens. It was
too low for me to stand quite upright, and the temperature was perhaps 110
degrees Fahrenheit. The _chef du personnel_ explained that my job was to
fetch meals for the higher hotel employees, who fed in a small dining-room
above, clean their room and wash their crockery. When he had gone, a
waiter, another Italian, thrust a fierce, fuzzy head into the doorway and
looked down at me.

'English, eh?' he said. 'Well, I'm in charge here. If you work well'
--he made the motion of up-ending a bottle and sucked noisily. 'If you
don't'--he gave the doorpost several vigorous kicks. 'To me, twisting
your neck would be no more than spitting on the floor. And if there's any
trouble, they'll believe me, not you. So be careful.'

After this I set to work rather hurriedly. Except for about an hour, I
was at work from seven in the morning till a quarter past nine at night;
first at washing crockery, then at scrubbing the tables and floors of the
employees' dining-room, then at polishing glasses and knives, then at
fetching meals, then at washing crockery again, then at fetching more meals
and washing more crockery. It was easy work, and I got on well with it
except when I went to the kitchen to fetch meals. The kitchen was like
nothing I had ever seen or imagined--a stifling, low-ceilinged inferno of
a cellar, red-lit from the fires, and deafening with oaths and the clanging
of pots and pans. It was so hot that all the metal-work except the stoves
had to be covered with cloth. In the middle were furnaces, where twelve
cooks skipped to and fro, their faces dripping sweat in spite of their
white caps. Round that were counters where a mob of waiters and _plongeurs_
clamoured with trays. Scullions, naked to the waist, were stoking the fires
and scouring huge copper saucepans with sand. Everyone seemed to be in a
hurry and a rage. The head cook, a fine, scarlet man with big moustachios,
stood in the middle booming continuously, '_Ça marche deux oeufs brouillés!
Ça marche un Chateaubriand aux pommes sautées!_' except when he broke off to
curse at a _plongeur_. There were three counters, and the first time I went
to the kitchen I took my tray unknowingly to the wrong one. The head cook
walked up to me, twisted his moustaches, and looked me up and down. Then he
beckoned to the breakfast cook and pointed at me.

'Do you see _that_? That is the type of _plongeur_ they send us nowadays.
Where do you come from, idiot? From Charenton, I suppose?' (There is a
large lunatic asylum at Charenton.)

'From England,' I said.

'I might have known it. Well, _mon cher monsieur l'Anglais_, may I
inform you that you are the son of a whore? And now--the camp to the
other counter, where you belong.'

I got this kind of reception every time I went to the kitchen, for I
always made some mistake; I was expected to know the work, and was cursed
accordingly. From curiosity I counted the number of times I was called
_maquereau_ during the day, and it was thirty-nine.

At half past four the Italian told me that I could stop working, but
that it was not worth going out, as we began at five. I went to the
lavatory for a smoke; smoking was strictly forbidden, and Boris had warned
me that the lavatory was the only safe place. After that I worked again
till a quarter past nine, when the waiter put his head into the doorway and
told me to leave the rest of the crockery. To my astonishment, after
calling me pig, mackerel, etc., all day, he had suddenly grown quite
friendly. I realized that the curses I had met with were only a kind of
probation.

'That'll do, _mon p'tit_,' said the waiter. '_Tu n'es pas débrouillard_,
but you work all right. Come up and have your dinner. The hotel allows us
two litres of wine each, and I've stolen another bottle. We'll have a fine
booze.'

We had an excellent dinner from the leavings of the higher employees.
The waiter, grown mellow, told me stories about his love-affairs, and about
two men whom he had stabbed in Italy, and about how he had dodged Us
military service. He was a good fellow when one got to know him; he
reminded me of Benvenuto Cellini, somehow. I was tired and drenched with
sweat, but I felt a new man after a day's solid food. The work did not seem
difficult, and I felt that this job would suit me. It was not certain,
however, that it would continue, for I had been engaged as an 'extra' for
the day only, at twenty-five francs. The sour-faced doorkeeper counted out
the money, less fifty centimes which he said was for insurance (a lie, I
discovered afterwards). Then he stepped out into the passage, made me take
off my coat, and carefully prodded me all over, searching for stolen food.
After this the _chef du personnel_ appeared and spoke to me. Like the waiter,
he had grown more genial on seeing that I was willing to work.

'We will give you a permanent job if you like,' he said. 'The head
waiter says he would enjoy calling an Englishman names. Will you sign on
for a month?'

Here was a job at last, and I was ready to jump at it. Then I
remembered the Russian restaurant, due to open in a fortnight. It seemed
hardly fair to promise working a month, and then leave in the middle. I
said that I had other work in prospect--could I be engaged for a
fortnight? But at that the _chef du personnel_ shrugged his shoulders and
said that the hotel only engaged men by the month. Evidently I had lost my
chance of a job.

Boris, by arrangement, was waiting for me in the Arcade of the Rue de
Rivoli. When I told him what had happened, he was furious. For the first
time since I had known him he forgot his manners and called me a fool.

'Idiot! Species of idiot! What's the good of my finding you a job when
you go and chuck it up the next moment? How could you be such a fool as to
mention the other restaurant? You'd only to promise you would work for a
month.'

'It seemed more honest to say I might have to leave,' I objected.

'Honest! Honest! Who ever heard of a _plongeur_ being honest? _Mon ami_'
--suddenly he seized my lapel and spoke very earnestly--'_mon ami_, you
have worked here all day. You see what hotel work is like. Do you think a
_plongeur_ can afford a sense of honour?'

'No, perhaps not.'

'Well, then, go back quickly and tell the _chef du personnel_ you are
quite ready to work for a month. Say you will throw the other job over.
Then, when our restaurant opens, we have only to walk out.'

'But what about my wages if I break my contract?

'Boris banged his stick on the pavement and cried out at such
stupidity. 'Ask to be paid by the day, then you won't lose a sou. Do you
suppose they would prosecute a _plongeur_ for breaking Us contract? A
_plongeur_ is too low to be prosecuted.'

I hurried back, found the _chef du personnel_, and told him that I would
work for a month, whereat he signed me on. Ibis was my first lesson in
_plongeur_ morality. Later I realized how foolish it had been to have any
scruples, for the big hotels are quite merciless towards their employees.
They engage or discharge men as the work demands, and they all sack ten per
cent or more of their staff when the season is over. Nor have they any
difficulty in replacing a man who leaves at short notice, for Paris is
thronged by hotel employees out of work.




XI



AS it turned out, I did not break my contract, for it was six weeks
before the Auberge de Jehan Cottard even showed signs of opening. In the
meantime I worked at the Hôtel X, four days a week in the cafeterie, one
day helping the waiter on the fourth floor, and one day replacing the woman
who washed up for the dining-room. My day off, luckily, was Sunday, but
sometimes another man was ill and I had to work that day as well. The hours
were from seven in the morning till two in the afternoon, and from five in
the evening till nine--eleven hours; but it was a fourteen-hour day when
I washed up for the dining-room. By the ordinary standards of a Paris
_plongeur_, these are exceptionally short hours. The only hardship of life
was the fearful heat and stuffiness of these labyrinthine cellars. Apart
from this the hotel, which was large and well organized, was considered a
comfortable one.

Our cafeterie was a murky cellar measuring twenty feet by seven by
eight high, and so crowded with coffee-urns, breadcutters and the like that
one could hardly move without banging against something. It was lighted by
one dim electric bulb, and four or five gas-fires that sent out a fierce
red breath. There was a thermometer there, and the temperature never fell
below 110 degrees Fahrenheit--it neared 130 at some times of the day. At
one end were five service lifts, and at the other an ice cupboard where we
stored milk and butter. When you went into the ice cupboard you dropped a
hundred degrees of temperature at a single step; it used to remind me of
the hymn about Greenland's icy mountains and India's coral strand. Two men
worked in the cafeterie besides Boris and myself. One was Mario, a huge,
excitable Italian--he was like a city policeman with operatic gestures--
and the other, a hairy, uncouth animal whom we called the Magyar; I think
he was a Transylvanian, or something even more remote. Except the Magyar we
were all big men, and at the rush hours we collided incessantly.

The work in the cafeterie was spasmodic. We were never idle, but the
real work only came in bursts of two hours at a time--we called each
burst '_un coup de feu_'. The first _coup de feu_ came at eight, when the
guests upstairs began to wake up and demand breakfast. At eight a sudden
banging and yelling would break out all through the basement; bells rang on
all sides, blue-aproned men rushed through the passages, our service lifts
came down with a simultaneous crash, and the waiters on all five floors
began shouting Italian oaths down the shafts. I don't remember all our
duties, but they included making tea, coffee and chocolate, fetching meals
from the kitchen, wines from the cellar and fruit and so forth from the
dining-room, slicing bread, making toast, rolling pats of butter, measuring
jam, opening milk-cans, counting lumps of sugar, boiling eggs, cooking
porridge, pounding ice, grinding coffee--all this for from a hundred to
two hundred customers. The kitchen was thirty yards away, and the
dining-room sixty or seventy yards. Everything we sent up in the service
lifts had to be covered by a voucher, and the vouchers had to be carefully
filed, and there was trouble if even a lump of sugar was lost. Besides
this, we had to supply the staff with bread and coffee, and fetch the meals
for the waiters upstairs. All in all, it was a complicated job.

I calculated that one had to walk and run about fifteen miles during
the day, and yet the strain of the work was more mental than physical.
Nothing could be easier, on the face of it, than this stupid scullion work,
but it is astonishingly hard when one is in a hurry. One has to leap to and
fro between a multitude of jobs--it is like sorting a pack of cards
against the clock. You are, for example, making toast, when bang! down
comes a service lift with an order for tea, rolls and three different kinds
of jam, and simultaneously bang! down comes another demanding scrambled
eggs, coffee and grapefruit; you run to the kitchen for the eggs and to the
dining-room for the fruit, going like lightning so as to be back before
your toast bums, and having to remember about the tea and coffee, besides
half a dozen other orders that are still pending; and at the same time some
waiter is following you and making trouble about a lost bottle of
soda-water, and you are arguing with him. It needs more brains than one
might think. Mario said, no doubt truly, that it took a year to make a
reliable cafetier.

The time between eight and half past ten was a sort of delirium.
Sometimes we were going as though we had only five minutes to live;
sometimes there were sudden lulls when the orders stopped and everything
seemed quiet for a moment. Then we swept up the litter from the floor,
threw down fresh sawdust, and swallowed gallipots of wine or coffee or
water--anything, so long as it was wet. Very often we used to break off
chunks of ice and suck them while we worked. The heat among the gas-fires
was nauseating; we swallowed quarts of drink during the day, and after a
few hours even our aprons were drenched with sweat. At times we were
hopelessly behind with the work, and some of the customers would have gone
without their breakfast, but Mario always pulled us through. He had worked
fourteen years in the cafeterie, and he had the skill that never wastes a
second between jobs. The Magyar was very stupid and I was inexperienced,
and Boris was inclined to shirk, partly because of his lame leg, partly
because he was ashamed of working in the cafeterie after being a waiter;
but Mario was wonderful. The way he would stretch his great arms right
across the cafeterie to fill a coffee-pot with one hand and boil an egg
with the other, at the same time watching toast and shouting directions to
the Magyar, and between whiles singing snatches from _Rigoletto_, was beyond
all praise. The _patron_ knew his value, and he was paid a thousand francs a
month, instead of five hundred like the rest of us.

The breakfast pandemonium stopped at half past ten. Then we scrubbed
the cafeterie tables, swept the floor and polished the brasswork, and, on
good mornings, went one at a time to the lavatory for a smoke. This was our
slack time--only relatively slack, however, for we had only ten minutes
for lunch, and we never got through it uninterrupted. The customers'
luncheon hour, between twelve and two, was another period of turmoil like
the breakfast hour. Most of our work was fetching meals from the kitchen,
which meant constant _engueulades_ from the cooks. By this time the cooks had
sweated in front of their furnaces for four or five hours, and their
tempers were all warmed up.

At two we were suddenly free men. We threw off our aprons and put on
our coats, hurried out of doors, and, when we had money, dived into the
nearest _bistro_. It was strange, coming up into the street from those
firelit cellars. The air seemed blindingly clear and cold, like arctic
summer; and how sweet the petrol did smell, after the stenches of sweat and
food! Sometimes we met some of our cooks and waiters in the _bistros_, and
they were friendly and stood us drinks. Indoors we were their slaves, but
it is an etiquette in hotel life that between hours everyone is equal, and
the _engueulades_ do not count.

At a quarter to five we went back to the hotel. Till half-past six
there were no orders, and we used this time to polish silver, clean out the
coffee-urns, and do other odd jobs. Then the grand turmoil of the day
started--the dinner hour. I wish I could be Zola for a little while, just
to describe that dinner hour. The essence of the situation was that a
hundred or two hundred people were demanding individually different meals
of five or six courses, and that fifty or sixty people had to cook and
serve them and clean up the mess afterwards; anyone with experience of
catering will know what that means. And at this time when the work was
doubled, the whole staff was tired out, and a number of them were drunk. I
could write pages about the scene without giving a true idea of it. The
chargings to and fro in the narrow passages, the collisions, the yells, the
struggling with crates and trays and blocks of ice, the heat, the darkness,
the furious festering quarrels which there was no time to fight out--they
pass description. Anyone coming into the basement for the first time would
have thought himself in a den of maniacs. It was only later, when I
understood the working of a hotel, that I saw order in all this chaos.

At half past eight the work stopped very suddenly. We were not free
till nine, but we used to throw ourselves full length on the floor, and lie
there resting our legs, too lazy even to go to the ice cupboard for a
drink. Sometimes the _chef du personnel_ would come in with bottles of beer,
for the hotel stood us an extra beer when we had had a hard day. The food
we were given was no more than eatable, but the _patron_ was not mean about
drink; he allowed us two litres of wine a day each, knowing that if a
_plongeur_ is not given two litres he will steal three. We had the heeltaps
of bottles as well, so that we often drank too much--a good thing, for
one seemed to work faster when partially drunk.

Four days of the week passed like this; of the other two working days,
one was better and one worse. After a week of this life I felt in need of a
holiday. It was Saturday night, so the people in our _bistro_ were busy
getting drunk, and with a free day ahead of me I was ready to join them. We
all went to bed, drunk, at two in the morning, meaning to sleep till noon.
At half past five I was suddenly awakened. A night-watchman, sent from the
hotel, was standing at my bedside. He stripped the clothes back and shook
me roughly.

'Get up!' he said. '_Tu t'es bien saoulé la gueule, eh?_ Well, never
mind that, the hotel's a man short. You've got to work today.'

'Why should I work?' I protested. 'This is my day off.'

'Day off, nothing! The work's got to be done. Get up!'

I got up and went out, feeling as though my back were broken and my
skull filled with hot cinders. I did not think that I could possibly do a
day's work. And yet, after only an hour in the basement, I found that I was
perfectly well. It seemed that in the heat of those cellars, as in a
turkish bath, one could sweat out almost any quantity of drink. _Plongeurs_
know this, and count on it. The power of swallowing quarts of wine, and
then sweating it out before it can do much damage, is one of the
compensations of their life.




XII



BY far my best time at the hotel was when I went to help the waiter on
the fourth floor. We worked in a small pantry which communicated with the
cafeterie by service lifts. It was delightfully cool after the cellars, and
the work was chiefly polishing silver and glasses, which is a humane job.
Valenti, the waiter, was a decent sort, and treated me almost as an equal
when we were alone, though he had to speak roughly when there was anyone
else present, for it does not do for a waiter to be friendly with
_plongeurs_. He used sometimes to tip me five francs when he had had a good
day. He was a comely youth, aged twenty-four but looking eighteen, and,
like most waiters, he carried himself well and knew how to wear his
clothes. With his black tail-coat and white tie, fresh face and sleek brown
hair, he looked just like an Eton boy; yet he had earned his living since
he was twelve, and worked his way up literally from the gutter. Grossing
the Italian frontier without a passport, and selling chestnuts from a
barrow on the northern boulevards, and being given fifty days' imprisonment
in London for working without a permit, and being made love to by a rich
old woman in a hotel, who gave him a diamond ring and afterwards accused
him of stealing it, were among his experiences. I used to enjoy talking to
him, at slack times when we sat smoking down the lift shaft.

My bad day was when I washed up for the dining-room. I had not to wash
the plates, which were done in the kitchen, but only the other crockery,
silver, knives and glasses; yet, even so, it meant thirteen hours' work,
and I used between thirty and forty dishcloths during the day. The
antiquated methods used in France double the work of washing up.
Plate-racks are unheard-of, and there are no soap-flakes, only the treacly
soft soap, which refuses to lather in the hard, Paris water. I worked in a
dirty, crowded little den, a pantry and scullery combined, which gave
straight on the dining-room. Besides washing up, I had to fetch the
waiters' food and serve them at table; most of them were intolerably
insolent, and I had to use my fists more than once to get common civility.
The person who normally washed up was a woman, and they made her life a
misery.

It was amusing to look round the filthy little scullery and think that
only a double door was between us and the dining-room. There sat the
customers in all their splendour--spotless table-cloths, bowls of
flowers, mirrors and gilt cornices and painted cherubim; and here, just a
few feet away, we in our disgusting filth. For it really was disgusting
filth. There was no time to sweep the floor till evening, and we slithered
about in a compound of soapy water, lettuce-leaves, torn paper and trampled
food. A dozen waiters with their coats off, showing their sweaty armpits,
sat at the table mixing salads and sticking their thumbs into the cream
pots. The room had a dirty, mixed smell of food and sweat. Everywhere in
the cupboards, behind the piles of crockery, were squalid stores of food
that the waiters had stolen. There were only two sinks, and no washing
basin, and it was nothing unusual for a waiter to wash his face in the
water in which clean crockery was rinsing. But the customers saw nothing of
this. There were a coco-nut mat and a mirror outside the dining-room door,
and the waiters used to preen themselves up and go in looking the picture
of cleanliness.

It is an instructive sight to see a waiter going into a hotel
dining-room. As he passes the door a sudden change comes over him. The set
of his shoulders alters; all the dirt and hurry and irritation have dropped
off in an instant. He glides over the carpet, with a solemn priest-like
air. I remember our assistant __maître d'hôtel_, a fiery Italian, pausing at
the dining-room door to address an apprentice who had broken a bottle of
wine. Shaking his fist above his head he yelled (luckily the door was more
or less soundproof):

'Tu me fais--Do you call yourself a waiter, you young bastard? You a
waiter! You're not fit to scrub floors in the brothel your mother came
from. _Maquereau!_'

Words failing him, he turned to the door; and as he opened it he
delivered a final insult in the same manner as Squire Western in _Tom Jones_.

Then he entered the dining-room and sailed across it dish in hand,
graceful as a swan. Ten seconds later he was bowing reverently to a
customer. And you could not help thinking, as you saw him bow and smile,
with that benign smile of the trained waiter, that the customer was put to
shame by having such an aristocrat to serve him.

This washing up was a thoroughly odious job--not hard, but boring
and silly beyond words. It is dreadful to think that some people spend
their whole decades at such occupations. The woman whom I replaced was
quite sixty years old, and she stood at the sink thirteen hours a day, six
days a week, the year round; she was, in addition, horribly bullied by the
waiters. She gave out that she had once been an actress--actually, I
imagine, a prostitute; most prostitutes end as charwomen. It was strange to
see that in spite of her age and her life she still wore a bright blonde
wig, and darkened her eyes and painted her face like a girl of twenty. So
apparently even a seventy-eight-hour week can leave one with some vitality.




XIII



ON my third day at the hotel the _chef du personnel_, who had generally
spoken to me in quite a pleasant tone, called me up and said sharply:

'Here, you, shave that moustache off at once! _Nom de Dieu_, who ever
heard of a _plongeur_ with a moustache?'

I began to protest, but he cut me short. 'A _plongeur_ with a moustache
--nonsense! Take care I don't see you with it tomorrow.'

On the way home I asked Boris what this meant. He shrugged his
shoulders. 'You must do what he says, _mon ami_. No one in the hotel wears a
moustache, except the cooks. I should have thought you would have noticed
it. Reason? There is no reason. It is the custom.'

I saw that it was an etiquette, like not wearing a white tie with a
dinner-jacket, and shaved off my moustache. Afterwards I found out the
explanation of the custom, which is this: waiters in good hotels do not
wear moustaches, and to show their superiority they decree that _plongeurs_
shall not wear them either; and the cooks wear their moustaches to show
their contempt for the waiters.

This gives some idea of the elaborate caste system existing in a
hotel. Our staff, amounting to about a hundred and ten, had their prestige
graded as accurately as that of soldiers, and a cook or waiter was as much
above a _plongeur_ as a captain above a private. Highest of all came the
manager, who could sack anybody, even the cooks. We never saw the _patron_,
and all we knew of him was that his meals had to be prepared more carefully
than that of the customers; all the discipline of the hotel depended on the
manager. He was a conscientious man, and always on the lookout for
slackness, but we were too clever for him. A system of service bells ran
through the hotel, and the whole staff used these for signalling to one
another. A long ring and a short ring, followed by two more long rings,
meant that the manager was coming, and when we heard it we took care to
look busy.

Below the manager came the __maître d'hôtel_. He did not serve at table,
unless to a lord or someone of that kind, but directed the other waiters
and helped with the catering. His tips, and his bonus from the champagne
companies (it was two francs for each cork he returned to them), came to
two hundred francs a day. He was in a position quite apart from the rest of
the staff, and took his meals in a private room, with silver on the table
and two apprentices in clean white jackets to serve him. A little below the
head waiter came the head cook, drawing about five thousand francs a month;
he dined in the kitchen, but at a separate table, and one of the apprentice
cooks waited on him. Then came the _chef du personnel_; he drew only fifteen
hundred francs a month, but he wore a black coat and did no manual work,
and he could sack _plongeurs_ and fine waiters. Then came the other cooks,
drawing anything between three thousand and seven hundred and fifty
francs a month; then the waiters, making about seventy francs a day in
tips, besides a small retaining fee; then the laundresses and sewing women;
then the apprentice waiters, who received no tips, but were paid seven
hundred and fifty francs a month; then the _plongeurs_, also at seven hundred
and fifty francs; then the chambermaids, at five or six hundred francs a
month; and lastly the cafetiers, at five hundred a month. We of the
cafeterie were the very dregs of the hotel, despised and _tutoied_ by
everyone.

There were various others--the office employees, called generally
couriers, the storekeeper, the cellarman, some porters and pages, the ice
man, the bakers, the night-watchman, the doorkeeper. Different jobs were
done by different races. The office employees and the cooks and
sewing-women were French, the waiters Italians and Germans (there is hardly
such a thing as a French waiter in Paris), the _plongeurs_ of every race in
Europe, beside Arabs and Negroes. French was the lingua franca, even the
Italians speaking it to one another.

All the departments had their special perquisites. In all Paris hotels
it is the custom to sell the broken bread to bakers for eight sous a pound,
and the kitchen scraps to pigkeepers for a trifle, and to divide the
proceeds of this among the _plongeurs_. There was much pilfering, too. The
waiters all stole food--in fact, I seldom saw a waiter trouble to eat the
rations provided for him by the hotel--and the cooks did it on a larger
scale in the kitchen, and we in the cafeterie swilled illicit tea and
coffee. The cellarman stole brandy. By a rule of the hotel the waiters were
not allowed to keep stores of spirits, but had to go to the cellarman for
each drink as it was ordered. As the cellarman poured out the drinks he
would set aside perhaps a teaspoonful from each glass, and he amassed
quantities in this way. He would sell you the stolen brandy for five sous a
swig if he thought he could trust you.

There were thieves among the staff, and if you left money in your coat
pockets it was generally taken. The doorkeeper, who paid our wages and
searched us for stolen food, was the greatest thief in the hotel. Out of my
five hundred francs a month, this man actually managed to cheat me of a
hundred and fourteen francs in six weeks. I had asked to be paid daily, so
the doorkeeper paid me sixteen francs each evening, and, by not paying for
Sundays (for which of course payment was due), pocketed sixty-four francs.
Also, I sometimes worked on a Sunday, for which, though I did not know it,
I was entitled to an extra twenty-five francs. The doorkeeper never paid me
this either, and so made away with another seventy-five francs. I only
realized during my last week that I was being cheated, and, as I could
prove nothing, only twenty-five francs were refunded. The doorkeeper played
similar tricks on any employee who was fool enough to be taken in. He
called himself a Greek, but in reality he was an Armenian. After knowing
him I saw the force of the proverb 'Trust a snake before a Jew and a Jew
before a Greek, but don't trust an Armenian.'

There were queer characters among the waiters. One was a gentleman--
a youth who had been educated at a university, and had had a well-paid job
in a business office. He had caught a venereal disease, lost his job,
drifted, and now considered himself lucky to be a waiter. Many of the
waiters had slipped into France without passports, and one or two of them
were spies--it is a common profession for a spy to adopt. One day there
was a fearful row in the waiters' dining-room between Morandi, a
dangerous-looking man with eyes set too far apart, and another Italian. It
appeared that Morandi had taken the other man's mistress. The other man, a
weakling and obviously frightened of Morandi, was threatening vaguely.

Morandi jeered at him. 'Well, what are you going to do about it? I've
slept with your girl, slept with her three times. It was fine. What can you
do, eh?'

'I can denounce you to the secret police. You are an Italian spy.'

Morandi did not deny it. He simply produced a razor from his tail
pocket and made two swift strokes in the air, as though slashing a man's
cheeks open. Whereat the other waiter took it back.

The queerest type I ever saw in the hotel was an 'extra'. He had been
engaged at twenty-five francs for the day to replace the Magyar, who was
ill. He was a Serbian, a thick-set nimble fellow of about twenty-five,
speaking six languages, including English. He seemed to know all about
hotel work, and up till midday he worked like a slave. Then, as soon as it
had struck twelve, he turned sulky, shirked Us work, stole wine, and
finally crowned all by loafing about openly with a pipe in his mouth.
Smoking, of course, was forbidden under severe penalties. The manager
himself heard of it and came down to interview the Serbian, fuming with
rage.

'What the devil do you mean by smoking here?' he cried.

'What the devil do you mean by having a face like that?' answered the
Serbian, calmly.

I cannot convey the blasphemy of such a remark. The head cook, if a
_plongeur_ had spoken to him like that, would have thrown a saucepan of hot
soup in his face. The manager said instantly, 'You're sacked!' and at two
o'clock the Serbian was given his twenty-five francs and duly sacked.
Before he went out Boris asked him in Russian what game he was playing. He
said the Serbian answered:

'Look here, _mon vieux_, they've got to pay me a day's wages if I work
up to midday, haven't they? That's the law. And where's the sense of
working after I get my wages? So I'll tell you what I do. I go to a hotel
and get a job as an extra, and up to midday I work hard. Then, the moment
it's struck twelve, I start raising such hell that they've no choice but to
sack me. Neat, eh? Most days I'm sacked by half past twelve; today it was
two o'clock; but I don't care, I've saved four hours' work. The only
trouble is, one can't do it at the same hotel twice.'

It appeared that he had played this game at half the hotels and
restaurants in Paris. It is probably quite an easy game to play during the
summer, though the hotels protect themselves against it as well as they can
by means of a black list.




XIV



IN a few days I had grasped the main principles on which the hotel was
run. The thing that would astonish anyone coming for the first time into
the service quarters of a hotel would be the fearful noise and disorder
during the rush hours. It is something so different from the steady work in
a shop or a factory that it looks at first sight like mere bad management.
But it is really quite unavoidable, and for this reason. Hotel work is not
particularly hard, but by its nature it comes in rushes and cannot be
economized. You cannot, for instance, grill a steak two hours before it is
wanted; you have to wait till the last moment, by which time a mass of
other work has accumulated, and then do it all together, in frantic haste.
The result is that at mealtimes everyone is doing two men's work, which is
impossible without noise and quarrelling. Indeed the quarrels are a
necessary part of the process, for the pace would never be kept up if
everyone did not accuse everyone else of idling. It was for this reason
that during the rush hours the whole staff raged and cursed like demons. At
those times there was scarcely a verb in the hotel except _foutre_. A girl in
the bakery, aged sixteen, used oaths that would have defeated a cabman.
(Did not Hamlet say 'cursing like a scullion'? No doubt Shakespeare had
watched scullions at work.) But we are not losing our heads and wasting
time; we were just stimulating one another for the effort of packing four
hours' work into two hours.

What keeps a hotel going is the fact that the employees take a genuine
pride in their work, beastly and silly though it is. If a man idles, the
others soon find him out, and conspire against him to get him sacked.
Cooks, waiters and _plongeurs_ differ greatly in outlook, but they are all
alike in being proud of their efficiency.

Undoubtedly the most workmanlike class, and the least servile, are the
cooks. They do not earn quite so much as waiters, but their prestige is
higher and their employment steadier. The cook does not look upon himself
as a servant, but as a skilled workman; he is generally called '_un ouvrier_'
which a waiter never is. He knows his power--knows that he alone makes or
mars a restaurant, and that if he is five minutes late everything is out of
gear. He despises the whole non-cooking staff, and makes it a point of
honour to insult everyone below the head waiter. And he takes a genuine
artistic pride in his work, which demands very great skill. It is not the
cooking that is so difficult, but the doing everything to time. Between
breakfast and luncheon the head cook at the Hôtel X would receive orders
for several hundred dishes, all to be served at different times; he cooked
few of them himself, but he gave instructions about all of them and
inspected them before they were sent up. His memory was wonderful. The
vouchers were pinned on a board, but the head cook seldom looked at them;
everything was stored in his mind, and exactly to the minute, as each dish
fell due, he would call out, '_Faites marcher une côtelette de veau_' (or
whatever it was) unfailingly. He was an insufferable bully, but he was also
an artist. It is for their punctuality, and not for any superiority in
technique, that men cooks are preferred to women.

The waiter's outlook is quite different. He too is proud in a way of
his skill, but his skill is chiefly in being servile. His work gives him
the mentality, not of a workman, but of a snob. He lives perpetually in
sight of rich people, stands at their tables, listens to their
conversation, sucks up to them with smiles and discreet little jokes. He
has the pleasure of spending money by proxy. Moreover, there is always the
chance that he may become rich himself, for, though most waiters die poor,
they have long runs of luck occasionally. At some cafés on the Grand
Boulevard there is so much money to be made that the waiters actually pay
the _patron_ for their employment. The result is that between constantly
seeing money, and hoping to get it, the waiter comes to identify himself to
some extent with his employers. He will take pains to serve a meal in
style, because he feels that he is participating in the meal himself.

I remember Valenti telling me of some banquet at Nice at which he had
once served, and of how it cost two hundred thousand francs and was talked
of for months afterwards. 'It was splendid, _mon p'tit, mais magnifique!_
Jesus Christ! The champagne, the silver, the orchids--I have never seen
anything like them, and I have seen some things. Ah, it was glorious!'

'But,' I said, 'you were only there to wait?'

'Oh, of course. But still, it was splendid.'

The moral is, never be sorry for a waiter. Sometimes when you sit in a
restaurant, still stuffing yourself half an hour after closing time, you
feel that the tired waiter at your side must surely be despising you. But
he is not. He is not thinking as he looks at you, 'What an overfed lout';
he is thinking, 'One day, when I have saved enough money, I shall be able
to imitate that man.' He is ministering to a kind of pleasure he thoroughly
understands and admires. And that is why waiters are seldom Socialists,
have no effective trade union, and will work twelve hours a day--they
work fifteen hours, seven days a week, in many cafés. They are snobs, and
they find the servile nature of their work rather congenial.

The _plongeurs_, again, have a different outlook. Theirs is a job which
offers no prospects, is intensely exhausting, and at the same time has not
a trace of skill or interest; the sort of job that would always be done by
women if women were strong enough. All that is required of them is to be
constantly on the run, and to put up with long hours and a stuffy
atmosphere. They have no way of escaping from this life, for they cannot
save a penny from their wages, and working from sixty to a hundred hours a
week leaves them no time to train for anything else. The best they can hope
for is to find a slightly softer job as night-watchman or lavatory
attendant.

And yet the _plongeurs_, low as they are, also have a kind of pride. It
is the pride of the drudge--the man who is equal to no matter what
quantity of work. At that level, the mere power to go on working like an ox
is about the only virtue attainable. _Débrouillard_ is what every _plongeur_
wants to be called. A _débrouillard_ is a man who, even when he is told to do
the impossible, will _se débrouiller_--get it done somehow. One of the
kitchen _plongeurs_ at the Hôtel X, a German, was well known as a
_débrouillard_. One night an English lord came to the hotel, and the waiters
were in despair, for the lord had asked for peaches, and there were none in
stock; it was late at night, and the shops would be shut. 'Leave it to me,'
said the German. He went out, and in ten minutes he was back with four
peaches. He had gone into a neighbouring restaurant and stolen them. That
is what is meant by a _débrouillard_. The English lord paid for the peaches
at twenty francs each.

Mario, who was in charge of the cafeterie, had the typical drudge
mentality. All he thought of was getting through the '_boulot_', and he
defied you to give him too much of it. Fourteen years underground had left
him with about as much natural laziness as a piston rod. '_Faut être dur_,'
he used to say when anyone complained. You will often hear _plongeurs_ boast,
'_Je suis dur_'--as though they were soldiers, not male charwomen.

Thus everyone in the hotel had his sense of honour, and when the press
of work came we were all ready for a grand concerted effort to get through
it. The constant war between the different departments also made for
efficiency, for everyone clung to his own privileges and tried to stop the
others idling and pilfering.

This is the good side of hotel work. In a hotel a huge and complicated
machine is kept running by an inadequate staff, because every man has a
well-defined job and does it scrupulously. But there is a weak point, and
it is this--that the job the staff are doing is not necessarily what the
customer pays for. The customer pays, as he sees it, for good service; the
employee is paid, as he sees it, for the _boulot_--meaning, as a rule, an
imitation of good service. The result is that, though hotels are miracles
of punctuality, they are worse than the worst private houses in the things
that matter.

Take cleanliness, for example. The dirt in the Hôtel X, as soon as one
penetrated into the service quarters, was revolting. Our cafeterie had
year-old filth in all the dark corners, and the bread-bin was infested with
cockroaches. Once I suggested killing these beasts to Mario. 'Why kill the
poor animals?' he said reproachfully. The others laughed when I wanted to
wash my hands before touching the butter. Yet we were clean where we
recognized cleanliness as part of the _boulot_. We scrubbed the tables and
polished the brasswork regularly, because we had orders to do that; but we
had no orders to be genuinely clean, and in any case we had no time for it.
We were simply carrying out our duties; and as our first duty was
punctuality, we saved time by being dirty.

In the kitchen the dirt was worse. It is not a figure of speech, it is
a mere statement of fact to say that a French cook will spit in the soup--
that is, if he is not going to drink it himself. He is an artist, but his
art is not cleanliness. To a certain extent he is even dirty because he is
an artist, for food, to look smart, needs dirty treatment. When a steak,
for instance, is brought up for the head cook's inspection, he does not
handle it with a fork. He picks it up in his fingers and slaps it down,
runs his thumb round the dish and licks it to taste the gravy, runs it
round and licks again, then steps back and contemplates the piece of meat
like an artist judging a picture, then presses it lovingly into place with
his fat, pink fingers, every one of which he has licked a hundred times
that morning. When he is satisfied, he takes a cloth and wipes his
fingerprints from the dish, and hands it to the waiter. And the waiter, of
course, dips _his_ fingers into the gravy--his nasty, greasy fingers which
he is for ever running through his brilliantined hair. Whenever one pays
more than, say, ten francs for a dish of meat in Paris, one may be certain
that it has been fingered in this manner. In very cheap restaurants it is
different; there, the same trouble is not taken over the food, and it is
just forked out of the pan and flung on to a plate, without handling.
Roughly speaking, the more one pays for food, the more sweat and spittle
one is obliged to eat with it.

Dirtiness is inherent in hotels and restaurants, because sound food is
sacrificed to punctuality and smartness. The hotel employee is too busy
getting food ready to remember that it is meant to be eaten. A meal is
simply '_une commande_' to him, just as a man dying of cancer is simply '_a
case_' to the doctor. A customer orders, for example, a piece of toast.
Somebody, pressed with work in a cellar deep underground, has to prepare
it. How can he stop and say to himself, 'This toast is to be eaten--I
must make it eatable'? All he knows is that it must look right and must be
ready in three minutes. Some large drops of sweat fall from his forehead on
to the toast. Why should he worry? Presently the toast falls among the
filthy sawdust on the floor. Why trouble to make a new piece? It is much
quicker to wipe the sawdust off. On the way upstairs the toast falls again,
butter side down. Another wipe is all it needs. And so with everything. The
only food at the Hôtel X which was ever prepared cleanly was the staff's,
and the _patron_'s. The maxim, repeated by everyone, was: 'Look out for the
_patron_, and as for the clients, _s'en f--pas mal_!' Everywhere in the
service quarters dirt festered--a secret vein of dirt, running through
the great garish hotel like the intestines through a man's body.

Apart from the dirt, the _patron_ swindled the customers wholeheartedly.
For the most part the materials of the food were very bad, though the cooks
knew how to serve it up in style. The meat was at best ordinary, and as to
the vegetables, no good housekeeper would have looked at them in the
market. The cream, by a standing order, was diluted with milk. The tea and
coffee were of inferior sorts, and the jam was synthetic stuff out of vast,
unlabelled tins. All the cheaper wines, according to Boris, were corked _vin
ordinaire_. There was a rule that employees must pay for anything they
spoiled, and in consequence damaged things were seldom thrown away. Once
the waiter on the third floor dropped a roast chicken down the shaft of our
service lift, where it fell into a litter of broken bread, torn paper and
so forth at the bottom. We simply wiped it with a cloth and sent it up
again. Upstairs there were dirty tales of once-used sheets not being
washed, but simply damped, ironed and put back on the beds. The _patron_ was
as mean to us as to the customers. Throughout the vast hotel there was not,
for instance, such a thing as a brush and pan; one had to manage with a
broom and a piece of cardboard. And the staff lavatory was worthy of
Central Asia, and there was no place to wash one's hands, except the sinks
used for washing crockery.

In spite of all this the Hôtel X was one of the dozen most expensive
hotels in Paris, and the customers paid startling prices. The ordinary
charge for a night's lodging, not including breakfast, was two hundred
francs. All wine and tobacco were sold at exactly double shop prices,
though of course the _patron_ bought at the wholesale price. If a customer
had a title, or was reputed to be a millionaire, all his charges went up
automatically. One morning on the fourth floor an American who was on diet
wanted only salt and hot water for his breakfast. Valenti was furious.
'Jesus Christ!' he said, 'what about my ten per cent? Ten per cent of salt
and water!' And he charged twenty-five francs for the breakfast. The
customer paid without a murmur.

According to Boris, the same kind of thing went on in all Paris
hotels, or at least in all the big, expensive ones. But I imagine that the
customers at the Hôtel X were especially easy to swindle, for they were
mostly Americans, with a sprinkling of English--no French--and seemed
to know nothing whatever about good food. They would stuff themselves with
disgusting American 'cereals', and eat marmalade at tea, and drink vermouth
after dinner, and order a _poulet à la reine_ at a hundred francs and then
souse it in Worcester sauce. One customer, from Pittsburg, dined every
night in his bedroom on grape-nuts, scrambled eggs and cocoa. Perhaps it
hardly matters whether such people are swindled or not.




XV



I HEARD queer tales in the hotel. There were tales of dope fiends, of
old debauchees who frequented hotels in search of pretty page boys, of
thefts and blackmail. Mario told me of a hotel in which he had been, where
a chambermaid stole a priceless diamond ring from an American lady. For
days the staff were searched as they left work, and two detectives searched
the hotel from top to bottom, but the ring was never found. The chambermaid
had a lover in the bakery, and he had baked the ring into a roll, where it
lay unsuspected until the search was over.

Once Valenti, at a slack time, told me a story about himself.

'You know, _mon p'tit_, this hotel life is all very well, but it's the
devil when you're out of work. I expect you know what it is to go without
eating, eh? _Forcément_, otherwise you wouldn't be scrubbing dishes. Well,
I'm not a poor devil of a _plongeur_; I'm a waiter, and I went five days
without eating, once. Five days without even a crust of bread--Jesus
Christ!

'I tell you, those five days were the devil. The only good thing was,
I had my rent paid in advance. I was living in a dirty, cheap little hotel
in the Rue Sainte Éloise up in the Latin quarter. It was called the Hotel
Suzanne May, after some famous prostitute of the time of the Empire. I was
starving, and there was nothing I could do; I couldn't even go to the cafés
where the hotel proprietors come to engage waiters, because I hadn't the
price of a drink. All I could do was to lie in bed getting weaker and
weaker, and watching the bugs running about the ceiling. I don't want to go
through that again, I can tell you.

'In the afternoon of the fifth day I went half mad; at least, that's
how it seems to me now. There was an old faded print of a woman's head
hanging on the wall of my room, and I took to wondering who it could be;
and after about an hour I realized that it must be Sainte Éloise, who was
the patron saint of the quarter. I had never taken any notice of the thing
before, but now, as I lay staring at it, a most extraordinary idea came
into my head.

'"_Écoute, mon cher_," I said to myself, "you'll be starving to death if
this goes on much longer. You've got to do something. Why not try a prayer
to Sainte Éloise? Go down on your knees and ask her to send you some money.
After all, it can't do any harm. Try it!"

'Mad, eh? Still, a man will do anything when he's hungry. Besides, as
I said, it couldn't do any harm. I got out of bed and began praying. I
said:

'"Dear Sainte Éloise, if you exist, please send me some money. I don't
ask for much--just enough to buy some bread and a bottle of wine and get
my strength back. Three or four francs would do. You don't know how
grateful I'll be, Sainte Éloise, if you help me this once. And be sure, if
you send me anything, the first thing I'll do will be to go and bum a
candle for you, at your church down the street. Amen."

'I put in that about the candle, because I had heard that saints like
having candles burnt in their honour. I meant to keep my promise, of
course. But I am an atheist and I didn't really believe that anything would
come of it.

'Well, I got into bed again, and five minutes later there came a bang
at the door. It was a girl called Maria, a big fat peasant girl who lived
at our hotel. She was a very stupid girl, but a good sort, and I didn't
much care for her to see me in the state I was in.

'She cried out at the sight of me. "_Nom de Dieu!_" she said, "what's
the matter with you? What are you doing in bed at this time of day? _Quelle
mine que tu as!_ You look more like a corpse than a man."

'Probably I did look a sight. I had been five days without food, most
of the time in bed, and it was three days since I had had a wash or a
shave. The room was a regular pigsty, too.

'"What's the matter?" said Maria again.

'"The matter!" I said; "Jesus Christ! I'm starving. I haven't eaten
for five days. That's what's the matter."

'Maria was horrified. "Not eaten for five days?" she said. "But why?
Haven't you any money, then?"

'"Money!" I said. "Do you suppose I should be starving if I had money?
I've got just five sous in the world, and I've pawned everything. Look
round the room and see if there's anything more I can sell or pawn. If you
can find anything that will fetch fifty centimes, you're cleverer than I
am."

'Maria began looking round the room. She poked here and there among a
lot of rubbish that was lying about, and then suddenly she got quite
excited. Her great thick mouth fell open with astonishment.

'"You idiot!" she cried out. "Imbecile! What's _this_, then?"

'I saw that she had picked up an empty oil _bidon_ that had been lying
in the comer. I had bought it weeks before, for an oil lamp I had before I
sold my things.

"That?" I said. "That's an oil _bidon_. What about it?"

'"Imbecile! Didn't you pay three francs fifty deposit on it?"

'Now, of course I had paid the three francs fifty. They always make
you pay a deposit on the _bidon_, and you get it back when the _bidon_ is
returned. But I'd forgotten all about it.

'"Yes--" I began.

'"Idiot!" shouted Maria again. She got so excited that she began to
dance about until I thought her sabots would go through the floor, "Idiot!
_T'es fou! T'es fou!_ What have you got to do but take it back to the shop
and get your deposit back? Starving, with three francs fifty staring you in
the face! Imbecile!"

'I can hardly believe now that in all those five days I had never once
thought of taking the _bidon_ back to the shop. As good as three francs fifty
in hard cash, and it had never occurred to me! I sat up in bed. "Quick!" I
shouted to Maria, "you take it for me. Take it to the grocer's at the
corner--run like the devil. And bring back food!"

'Maria didn't need to be told. She grabbed the _bidon_ and went
clattering down the stairs like a herd of elephants and in three minutes
she was back with two pounds of bread under one arm and a half-litre bottle
of wine under the other. I didn't stop to thank her; I just seized the
bread and sank my teeth in it. Have you noticed how bread tastes when you
have been hungry for a long time? Cold, wet, doughy--like putty almost.
But, Jesus Christ, how good it was! As for the wine, I sucked it all down
in one draught, and it seemed to go straight into my veins and flow round
my body like new blood. Ah, that made a difference!

'I wolfed the whole two pounds of bread without stopping to take
breath. Maria stood with her hands on her hips, watching me eat. "Well, you
feel better, eh?" she said when I had finished.

'"Better!" I said. "I feel perfect! I'm not the same man as I was five
minutes ago. There's only one thing in the world I need now--a
cigarette."

'Maria put her hand in her apron pocket. "You can't have it," she
said. "I've no money. This is all I had left out of your three francs fifty
--seven sous. It's no good; the cheapest cigarettes are twelve sous a
packet."

'"Then I can have them!" I said. "Jesus Christ, what a piece of luck!
I've got five sous--it's just enough."

'Maria took the twelve sous and was starting out to the tobacconist's.
And then something I had forgotten all this time came into my head. There
was that cursed Sainte Éloise! I had promised her a candle if she sent me
money; and really, who could say that the prayer hadn't come true? "Three
or four francs," I had said; and the next moment along came three francs
fifty. There was no getting away from it. I should have to spend my twelve
sous on a candle.

'I called Maria back. "It's no use," I said; "there is Sainte Éloise
--I have promised her a candle. The twelve sous will have to go on that.
Silly, isn't it? I can't have my cigarettes after all."

'"Sainte Éloise?" said Maria. "What about Sainte Éloise?"

'"I prayed to her for money and promised her a candle," I said. "She
answered the prayer--at any rate, the money turned up. I shall have to
buy that candle. It's a nuisance, but it seems to me I must keep my
promise."

'"But what put Sainte Éloise into your head?" said Maria.

'"It was her picture," I said, and I explained the whole thing. "There
she is, you see," I said, and I pointed to the picture on the wall.

'Maria looked at the picture, and then to my surprise she burst into
shouts of laughter. She laughed more and more, stamping about the room and
holding her fat sides as though they would burst. I thought she had gone
mad. It was two minutes before she could speak.

'"Idiot!" she cried at last. "_T'es fou! T'es fou!_ Do you mean to tell
me you really knelt down and prayed to that picture? Who told you it was
Sainte Éloise?"

'"But I made sure it was Sainte Éloise!" I said.

'"Imbecile! It isn't Sainte Éloise at all. Who do you think it is?"

'"Who?" I said.

'"It is Suzanne May, the woman this hotel is called after."

'I had been praying to Suzanne May, the famous prostitute of the
Empire...

'But, after all, I wasn't sorry. Maria and I had a good laugh, and
then we talked it over, and we made out that I didn't owe Sainte Éloise
anything. Clearly it wasn't she who had answered the prayer, and there was
no need to buy her a candle. So I had my packet of cigarettes after all.'




XVI



TIME went on and the Auberge de Jehan Cottard showed no signs of
opening. Boris and I went down there one day during our afternoon interval
and found that none of the alterations had been done, except the indecent
pictures, and there were three duns instead of two. The _patron_ greeted us
with his usual blandness, and the next instant turned to me (his
prospective dishwasher) and borrowed five francs. After that I felt certain
that the restaurant would never get beyond talk. The _patron_, however, again
named the opening for 'exactly a fortnight from today', and introduced us
to the woman who was to do the cooking, a Baltic Russian five feet tall and
a yard across the hips. She told us that she had been a singer before she
came down to cooking, and that she was very artistic and adored English
literature, especially _La Case de l'Oncle Tom_.

In a fortnight I had got so used to the routine of a _plongeur's_ life
that I could hardly imagine anything different. It was a life without much
variation. At a quarter to six one woke with a sudden start, tumbled into
grease-stiffened clothes, and hurried out with dirty face and protesting
muscles. It was dawn, and the windows were dark except for the workmen's
cafés. The sky was like a vast flat wall of cobalt, with roofs and spires
of black paper pasted upon it. Drowsy men were sweeping the pavements with
ten-foot besoms, and ragged families picking over the dustbins. Workmen,
and girls with a piece of chocolate in one hand and a _croissant_ in the
other, were pouring into the Métro stations. Trams, filled with more
workmen, boomed gloomily past. One hastened down to the station, fought for
a place--one does literally have to fight on the Paris Métro at six in
the morning--and stood jammed in the swaying mass of passengers, nose to
nose with some hideous French face, breathing sour wine and garlic. And
then one descended into the labyrinth of the hotel basement, and forgot
daylight till two o'clock, when the sun was hot and the town black with
people and cars.

After my first week at the hotel I always spent the afternoon interval
in sleeping, or, when I had money, in a _bistro_. Except for a few ambitious
waiters who went to English classes, the whole staff wasted their leisure
in this way; one seemed too lazy after the morning's work to do anything
better. Sometimes half a dozen _plongeurs_ would make up a party and go to an
abominable brothel in the Rue de Sieyes, where the charge was only five
francs twenty-five centimes--tenpence half-penny. It was nicknamed '_le
prix fixe_', and they used to describe their experiences there as a great
joke. It was a favourite rendezvous of hotel workers. The _plongeurs_' wages
did not allow them to marry, and no doubt work in the basement does not
encourage fastidious feelings.

For another four hours one was in the cellars, and then one emerged,
sweating, into the cool street. It was lamplight--that strange purplish
gleam of the Paris lamps--and beyond the river the Eiffel Tower flashed
from top to bottom with zigzag skysigns, like enormous snakes of fire.
Streams of cars glided silently to and fro, and women, exquisite-looking in
the dim light, strolled up and down the arcade. Sometimes a woman would
glance at Boris or me, and then, noticing our greasy clothes, look hastily
away again. One fought another battle in the Métro and was home by ten.
Generally from ten to midnight I went to a little _bistro_ in our street, an
underground place frequented by Arab navvies. It was a bad place for
fights, and I sometimes saw bottles thrown, once with fearful effect, but
as a rule the Arabs fought among themselves and let Christians alone. Raki,
the Arab drink, was very cheap, and the _bistro_ was open at all hours, for
the Arabs--lucky men--had the power of working all day and drinking all
night.

It was the typical life of a _plongeur_, and it did not seem a bad life
at the time. I had no sensation of poverty, for even after paying my rent
and setting aside enough for tobacco and journeys and my food on Sundays, I
still had four francs a day for drinks, and four francs was wealth. There
was--it is hard to express it--a sort of heavy contentment, the
contentment a well-fed beast might feel, in a life which had become so
simple. For nothing could be simpler than the life of a _plongeur_. He lives
in a rhythm between work and sleep, without time to think, hardly conscious
of the exterior world; his Paris has shrunk to the hotel, the Métro, a few
_bistros_ and his bed. If he goes afield, it is only a few streets away, on a
trip with some servant-girl who sits on his knee swallowing oysters and
beer. On his free day he lies in bed till noon, puts on a clean shirt,
throws dice for drinks, and after lunch goes back to bed again. Nothing is
quite real to him but the _boulot_, drinks and sleep; and of these sleep is
the most important.

One night, in the small hours, there was a murder just beneath my
window. I was woken by a fearful uproar, and, going to the window, saw a
man lying flat on the stones below; I could see the murderers, three of
them, flitting away at the end of the street. Some of us went down and
found that the man was quite dead, his skull cracked with a piece of lead
piping. I remember the colour of his blood, curiously purple, like wine; it
was still on the cobbles when I came home that evening, and they said the
school-children had come from miles round to see it. But the thing that
strikes me in looking back is that I was in bed and asleep within three
minutes of the murder. So were most of the people in the street; we just
made sure that the man was done for, and went straight back to bed. We were
working people, and where was the sense of wasting sleep over a murder?

Work in the hotel taught me the true value of sleep, just as being
hungry had taught me the true value of food. Sleep had ceased to be a mere
physical necessity; it was something voluptuous, a debauch more than a
relief. I had no more trouble with the bugs. Mario had told me of a sure
remedy for them, namely pepper, strewed thick over the bedclothes. It made
me sneeze, but the bugs all hated it, and emigrated to other rooms.




XVII



WITH thirty francs a week to spend on drinks I could take part in the
social life of the quarter. We had some jolly evenings, on Saturdays, in
the little _bistro_ at the foot of the Hôtel des Trois Moineaux.

The brick-floored room, fifteen feet square, was packed with twenty
people, and the air dim with smoke. The noise was deafening, for everyone
was either talking at the top of his voice or singing. Sometimes it was
just a confused din of voices; sometimes everyone would burst out together
in the same song--the 'Marseillaise', or the 'Internationale', or
'Madelon', or 'Les Fraises et les Framboises'. Azaya, a great clumping
peasant girl who worked fourteen hours a day in a glass factory, sang a
song about, '_Il a perdu ses pantalons, tout en dansant le Charleston._' Her
friend Marinette, a thin, dark Corsican girl of obstinate virtue, tied her
knees together and danced the _danse du ventre_. The old Rougiers wandered in
and out, cadging drinks and trying to tell a long, involved story about
someone who had once cheated them over a bedstead. R., cadaverous and
silent, sat in his comer quietly boozing. Charlie, drunk, half danced, half
staggered to and fro with a glass of sham absinthe balanced in one fat
hand, pinching the women's breasts and declaiming poetry. People played
darts and diced for drinks. Manuel, a Spaniard, dragged the girls to the
bar and shook the dice-box against their bellies, for luck. Madame F. stood
at the bar rapidly pouring _chopines_ of wine through the pewter funnel, with
a wet dishcloth always handy, because every man in the room tried to make
love to her. Two children, bastards of big Louis the bricklayer, sat in a
comer sharing a glass of _sirop_. Everyone was very happy, overwhelmingly
certain that the world was a good place and we a notable set of people.

For an hour the noise scarcely slackened. Then about midnight there
was a piercing shout of '_Citoyens!_' and the sound of a chair falling over.
A blond, red-faced workman had risen to his feet and was banging a bottle
on the table. Everyone stopped singing; the word went round, 'Sh! Furex is
starting!' Furex was a strange creature, a Limousin stonemason who worked
steadily all the week and drank himself into a kind of paroxysm on
Saturdays. He had lost his memory and could not remember anything before
the war, and he would have gone to pieces through drink if Madame F. had
not taken care of him. On Saturday evenings at about five o'clock she would
say to someone, 'Catch Furex before he spends his wages,' and when he had
been caught she would take away his money, leaving him enough for one good
drink. One week he escaped, and, rolling blind drunk in the Place Monge,
was run over by a car and badly hurt.

The queer thing about Furex was that, though he was a Communist when
sober, he turned violently patriotic when drunk. He started the evening
with good Communist principles, but after four or five litres he was a
rampant Chauvinist, denouncing spies, challenging all foreigners to fight,
and, if he was not prevented, throwing bottles. It was at this stage that
he made his speech--for he made a patriotic speech every Saturday night.
The speech was always the same, word for word. It ran:

'Citizens of the Republic, are there any Frenchmen here? If there are
any Frenchmen here, I rise to remind them--to remind them in effect, of
the glorious days of the war. When one looks back upon that time of
comradeship and heroism--one looks back, in effect, upon that time of
comradeship and heroism. When one remembers the heroes who are dead--one
remembers, in effect, the heroes who are dead. Citizens of the Republic, I
was wounded at Verdun--'

Here he partially undressed and showed the wound he had received at
Verdun. There were shouts of applause. We thought nothing in the world
could be funnier than this speech of Furex's. He was a well-known spectacle
in the quarter; people used to come in from other _bistros_ to watch him when
his fit started.

The word was passed round to bait Furex. With a wink to the others
someone called for silence, and asked him to sing the 'Marseillaise'. He
sang it well, in a fine bass voice, with patriotic gurgling noises deep
down in his chest when he came to '_Aux arrmes, citoyens! Forrmez vos
bataillons!_' Veritable tears rolled down his cheeks; he was too drunk to
see that everyone was laughing at him. Then, before he had finished, two
strong workmen seized him by either arm and held him down, while Azaya
shouted, '_Vive l'Allemagne!_' just out of his reach. Furex's face went
purple at such infamy. Everyone in the _bistro_ began shouting together,
'_Vive l'Allemagne! À bas la France!_' while Furex struggled to get at them.
But suddenly he spoiled the fun. His face turned pale and doleful, his
limbs went limp, and before anyone could stop him he was sick on the table.
Then Madame F. hoisted him like a sack and carried him up to bed. In the
morning he reappeared quiet and civil, and bought a copy of _L'Humanité_.

The table was wiped with a cloth, Madame F. brought more litre bottles
and loaves of bread, and we Settled down to serious drinking. There were
more songs. An itinerant singer came in with his banjo and performed for
five-sou pieces. An Arab and a girl from the _bistro_ down the street did a
dance, the man wielding a painted wooden phallus the size of a rolling-pin.
There were gaps in the noise now. People had begun to talk about their
love-affairs, and the war, and the barbel fishing in the Seine, and the
best way to _faire la révolution_, and to tell stories. Charlie, grown sober
again, captured the conversation and talked about his soul for five
minutes. The doors and windows were opened to cool the room. The street was
emptying, and in the distance one could hear the lonely milk train
thundering down the Boulevard St Michel. The air blew cold on our
foreheads, and the coarse African wine still tasted good: we were still
happy, but meditatively, with the shouting and hilarious mood finished.

By one o'clock we were not happy any longer. We felt the joy of the
evening wearing thin, and called hastily for more bottles, but Madame F.
was watering the wine now, and it did not taste the same. Men grew
quarrelsome. The girls were violently kissed and hands thrust into their
bosoms and they made off lest worse should happen. Big Louis, the
bricklayer, was drunk, and crawled about the floor barking and pretending
to be a dog. The others grew tired of him and kicked at him as he went
past. People seized each other by the arm and began long rambling
confessions, and were angry when these were not listened to. The crowd
thinned. Manuel and another man, both gamblers, went across to the Arab
_bistro_, where card-playing went on till daylight. Charlie suddenly borrowed
thirty francs from Madame F. and disappeared, probably to a brothel. Men
began to empty their glasses, call briefly, ''_Sieurs, Dames!_' and go off to
bed.

By half past one the last drop of pleasure had evaporated, leaving
nothing but headaches. We perceived that we were not splendid inhabitants
of a splendid world, but a crew of underpaid workmen grown squalidly and
dismally drunk. We went on swallowing the wine, but it was only from habit,
and the stuff seemed suddenly nauseating. One's head had swollen up like a
balloon, the floor rocked, one's tongue and lips were stained purple. At
last it was no use keeping it up any longer. Several men went out into the
yard behind the _bistro_ and were sick. We crawled up to bed, tumbled down
half dressed, and stayed there ten hours.

Most of my Saturday nights went in this way. On the whole, the two
hours when one was perfectly and wildly happy seemed worth the subsequent
headache. For many men in the quarter, unmarried and with no future to
think of, the weekly drinking-bout was the one thing that made life worth
living.




XVIII



CHARLIE told us a good story one Saturday night in the _bistro_. Try and
picture him--drunk, but sober enough to talk consecutively. He bangs on
the zinc bar and yells for silence:

'Silence, _messieurs et dames_--silence, I implore you! Listen to this
story, that I am about to tell you. A memorable story, an instructive
story, one of the souvenirs of a refined and civilized life. Silence,
_messieurs et dames!_

'It happened at a time when I was hard up. You know what that is like
--how damnable, that a man of refinement should ever be in such a
condition. My money had not come from home; I had pawned everything, and
there was nothing open to me except to work, which is a thing I will not
do. I was living with a girl at the time--Yvonne her name was--a great
half-witted peasant girl like Azaya there, with yellow hair and fat legs.
The two of us had eaten nothing in three days. _Mon Dieu_, what sufferings!
The girl used to walk up and down the room with her hands on her belly,
howling like a dog that she was dying of starvation. It was terrible.

'But to a man of intelligence nothing is impossible. I propounded to
myself the question, "What is the easiest way to get money without
working?" And immediately the answer came: "To get money easily one must be
a woman. Has not every woman something to sell?" And then, as I lay
reflecting upon the things I should do if I were a woman, an idea came into
my head. I remembered the Government maternity hospitals--you know the
Government maternity hospitals? They are places where women who are
_enceinte_ are given meals free and no questions are asked. It is done to
encourage childbearing. Any woman can go there and demand a meal, and she
is given it immediately.

'"_Mon Dieu!_" I thought, "if only I were a woman! I would eat at one of
those places every day. Who can tell whether a woman is _enceinte_ or not,
without an examination?"

'I turned to Yvonne. "Stop that insufferable bawling." I said, "I have
thought of a way to get food."

'"How?" she said.

'"It is simple," I said. "Go to the Government maternity hospital.
Tell them you are _enceinte_ and ask for food. They will give you a good meal
and ask no questions."

'Yvonne was appalled. "_Mais mon Dieu_," she cried, "I am not
_enceinte!_"

'"Who cares?" I said. "That is easily remedied. What do you need
except a cushion--two cushions if necessary? It is an inspiration from
heaven, _ma chère_. Don't waste it."

'Well, in the end I persuaded her, and then we borrowed a cushion and
I got her ready and took her to the maternity hospital. They received her
with open arms. They gave her cabbage soup, a ragout of beef, a puree of
potatoes, bread and cheese and beer, and all kinds of advice about her
baby. Yvonne gorged till she almost burst her skin, and managed to slip
some of the bread and cheese into her pocket for me. I took her there every
day until I had money again. My intelligence had saved us.

'Everything went well until a year later. I was with Yvonne again, and
one day we were walking down the Boulevard Port Royal, near the barracks.
Suddenly Yvonne's mouth fell open, and she began turning red and white, and
red again.

'"_Mon Dieu!_" she cried, "look at that who is coming! It is the nurse
who was in charge at the maternity hospital. I am ruined!"

'"Quick!" I said, "run!" But it was too late. The nurse had recognized
Yvonne, and she came straight up to us, smiling. She was a big fat woman
with a gold pince-nez and red cheeks like the cheeks of an apple. A
motherly, interfering kind of woman.

'"I hope you are well, _ma petite_?" she said kindly. "And your baby, is
he well too? Was it a boy, as you were hoping?"

'Yvonne had begun trembling so hard that I had to grip her arm. "No,"
she said at last.

'"Ah, then, _évidemment_, it was a girl?"

'Thereupon Yvonne, the idiot, lost her head completely. "No," she
actually said again!

'The nurse was taken aback. "_Comment!_" she exclaimed, "neither a boy
nor a girl! But how can that be?"

'Figure to yourselves, _messieurs et dames_, it was a dangerous moment.
Yvonne had turned the colour of a beetroot and she looked ready to burst
into tears; another second and she would have confessed everything. Heaven
knows what might have happened. But as for me, I had kept my head; I
stepped in and saved the situation.

'"It was twins," I said calmly.

'"Twins!" exclaimed the nurse. And she was so pleased that she took
Yvonne by the shoulders and embraced her on both cheeks, publicly.

'Yes, twins...'




XIX



ONE day, when we had been at the Hôtel X five or six weeks, Boris
disappeared without notice. In the evening I found him waiting for me in
the Rue de Rivoli. He slapped me gaily on the shoulder.

'Free at last, _mon ami_! You can give notice in the morning. The
Auberge opens tomorrow.'

'Tomorrow?'

'Well, possibly we shall need a day or two to arrange things. But, at
any rate, no more cafeteria! _Nous sommes lancés, mon ami!_ My tail coat is
out of pawn already.'

His manner was so hearty that I felt sure there was something wrong,
and I did not at all want to leave my safe and comfortable job at the
hotel. However, I had promised Boris, so I gave notice, and the next
morning at seven went down to the Auberge de Jehan Cottard. It was locked,
and I went in search of Boris, who had once more bolted from his lodgings
and taken a room in the rue de la Croix Nivert. I found him asleep,
together with a girl whom he had picked up the night before, and who he
told me was 'of a very sympathetic temperament.' As to the restaurant, he
said that it was all arranged; there were only a few little things to be
seen to before we opened.

At ten I managed to get Boris out of bed, and we unlocked the
restaurant. At a glance I saw what the 'few little things' amounted to. It
was briefly this: that the alterations had not been touched since our last
visit. The stoves for the kitchen had not arrived, the water and
electricity had not been laid on, and there was all manner of painting,
polishing and carpentering to be done. Nothing short of a miracle could
open the restaurant within ten days, and by the look of things it might
collapse without even opening. It was obvious what had happened. The _patron_
was short of money, and he had engaged the staff (there were four of us) in
order to use us instead of workmen. He would be getting our services almost
free, for waiters are paid no wages, and though he would have to pay me, he
would not be feeding me till the restaurant opened. In effect, he had
swindled us of several hundred francs by sending for us before the
restaurant was open. We had thrown up a good job for nothing.

Boris, however, was full of hope. He had only one idea in his head,
namely, that here at last was a chance of being a waiter and wearing a tail
coat once more. For this he was quite willing to do ten days' work unpaid,
with the chance of being left jobless in the end. 'Patience!' he kept
saying. 'That will arrange itself. Wait till the restaurant opens, and
we'll get it all back. Patience, _mon ami_!'

We needed patience, for days passed and the restaurant did not even
progress towards opening. We cleaned out the cellars, fixed the shelves,
distempered the walls, polished the woodwork, whitewashed the ceiling,
stained the floor; but the main work, the plumbing and gas-fitting and
electricity, was still not done, because the _patron_ could not pay the
bills. Evidently he was almost penniless, for he refused the smallest
charges, and he had a trick of swiftly disappearing when asked for money.
His blend of shiftiness and aristocratic manners made him very hard to deal
with. Melancholy duns came looking for him at all hours, and by instruction
we always told them that he was at Fontainebleau, or Saint Cloud, or some
other place that was safely distant. Meanwhile, I was getting hungrier and
hungrier. I had left the hotel with thirty francs, and I had to go back
immediately to a diet of dry bread. Boris had managed in the beginning to
extract an advance of sixty francs from the _patron_, but he had spent half
of it, in redeeming his waiter's clothes, and half on the girl of
sympathetic temperament. He borrowed three francs a day from Jules, the
second waiter, and spent it on bread. Some days we had not even money for
tobacco.

Sometimes the cook came to see how things were getting on, and when
she saw that the kitchen was still bare of pots and pans she usually wept.
Jules, the second waiter, refused steadily to help with the work. He was a
Magyar, a little dark, sharp-featured fellow in spectacles, and very
talkative; he had been a medical student, but had abandoned his training
for lack of money. He had a taste for talking while other people were
working, and he told me all about himself and his ideas. It appeared that
he was a Communist, and had various strange theories (he could prove to you
by figures that it was wrong to work), and he was also, like most Magyars,
passionately proud. Proud and lazy men do not make good waiters. It was
Jules's dearest boast that once when a customer in a restaurant had
insulted him, he had poured a plate of hot soup down the customer's neck,
and then walked straight out without even waiting to be sacked.

As each day went by Jules grew more and more enraged at the trick the
_patron_ had played on us. He had a spluttering, oratorical way of talking.
He used to walk up and down shaking his fist, and trying to incite me not
to work:

'Put that brush down, you fool! You and I belong to proud races; we
don't work for nothing, like these damned Russian serfs. I tell you, to be
cheated like this is torture to me. There have been times in my life, when
someone has cheated me even of five sous, when I have vomited--yes,
vomited with rage.

'Besides, _mon vieux_, don't forget that I'm a Communist. _À bas la
bourgeoisie!_ Did any man alive ever see me working when I could avoid it?
No. And not only I don't wear myself out working, like you other fools, but
I steal, just to show my independence. Once I was in a restaurant where the
_patron_ thought he could treat me like a dog. Well, in revenge I found out a
way to steal milk from the milk-cans and seal them up again so that no one
should know. I tell you I just swilled that milk down night and morning.
Every day I drank four litres of milk, besides half a litre of cream. The
_patron_ was at his wits' end to know where the milk was going. It wasn't
that I wanted milk, you understand, because I hate the stuff; it was
principle, just principle.

'Well, after three days I began to get dreadful pains in my belly, and
I went to the doctor. "What have you been eating?" he said. I said: "I
drink four litres of milk a day, and half a litre of cream." "Four litres!"
he said. "Then stop it at once. You'll burst if you go on." "What do I
care?" I said. "With me principle is everything. I shall go on drinking
that milk, even if I do burst."

'Well, the next day the _patron_ caught me stealing milk. "You're
sacked," he said; "you leave at the end of the week." "_Pardon, monsieur_," I
said, "I shall leave this morning." "No, you won't," he said, "I can't
spare you till Saturday." "Very well, _mon patron_," I thought to myself,
"we'll see who gets tired of it first." And then I set to work to smash the
crockery. I broke nine plates the first day and thirteen the second; after
that the _patron_ was glad to see the last of me.

'Ah, I'm not one of your Russian _moujiks_...'

Ten days passed. It was a bad time. I was absolutely at the end of my
money, and my rent was several days overdue. We loafed about the dismal
empty restaurant, too hungry even to get on with the work that remained.
Only Boris now believed that the restaurant would open. He had set his
heart on being __maître d'hôtel_, and he invented a theory that the _patron_'s
money was tied up in shares and he was waiting a favourable moment for
selling. On the tenth day I had nothing to eat or smoke, and I told the
_patron_ that I could not continue working without an advance on my wages. As
blandly as usual, the _patron_ promised the advance, and then, according to
his custom, vanished. I walked part of the way home, but I did not feel
equal to a scene with Madame F. over the rent, so I passed the night on a
bench on the boulevard. It was very uncomfortable--the arm of the seat
cuts into your back--and much colder than I had expected. There was
plenty of time, in the long boring hours between dawn and work, to think
what a fool I had been to deliver myself into the hands of these Russians.

Then, in the morning, the luck changed. Evidently the _patron_ had come
to an understanding with his creditors, for he arrived with money in his
pockets, set the alterations going, and gave me my advance. Boris and I
bought macaroni and a piece of horse's liver, and had our first hot meal in
ten days.

The workmen were brought in and the alterations made, hastily and with
incredible shoddiness. The tables, for instance, were to be covered with
baize, but when the _patron_ found that baize was expensive he bought instead
disused army blankets, smelling incorrigibly of sweat. The table cloths
(they were check, to go with the 'Norman' decorations) would cover them, of
course. On the last night we were at work till two in the morning, getting
things ready. The crockery did not arrive till eight, and, being new, had
all to be washed. The cutlery did not arrive till the next morning, nor the
linen either, so that we had to dry the crockery with a shirt of the
_patron_'s and an old pillowslip belonging to the concierge. Boris and I did
all the work. Jules was skulking, and the _patron_ and his wife sat in the
bar with a dun and some Russian friends, drinking success to the
restaurant. The cook was in the kitchen with her head on the table, crying,
because she was expected to cook for fifty people, and there were not pots
and pans enough for ten. About midnight there was a fearful interview with
some duns, who came intending to seize eight copper saucepans which the
_patron_ had obtained on credit. They were bought off with half a bottle of
brandy.

Jules and I missed the last Métro home and had to sleep on the floor
of the restaurant. The first thing we saw in the morning were two large
rats sitting on the kitchen table, eating from a ham that stood there. It
seemed a bad omen, and I was surer than ever that the Auberge de Jehan
Cottard would turn out a failure.




XX



THE _patron_ had engaged me as kitchen _plongeur_; that is, my job was to
wash up, keep the kitchen clean, prepare vegetables, make tea, coffee and
sandwiches, do the simpler cooking, and run errands. The terms were, as
usual, five hundred francs a month and food, but I had no free day and no
fixed working hours. At the Hôtel X I had seen catering at its best, with
unlimited money and good organization. Now, at the Auberge, I learned how
things are done in a thoroughly bad restaurant. It is worth describing, for
there are hundreds of similar restaurants in Paris, and every visitor feeds
in one of them occasionally.

I should add, by the way, that the Auberge was not the ordinary cheap
eating-house frequented by students and workmen. We did not provide an
adequate meal at less than twenty-five francs, and we were picturesque and
artistic, which sent up our social standing. There were the indecent
pictures in the bar, and the Norman decorations--sham beams on the walls,
electric lights done up as candlesticks, 'peasant' pottery, even a
mounting-block at the door--and the _patron_ and the head waiter were
Russian officers, and many of the customers tided Russian refugees. In
short, we were decidedly chic.

Nevertheless, the conditions behind the kitchen door were suitable for
a pigsty. For this is what our service arrangements were like.

The kitchen measured fifteen feet long by eight broad, and half this
space was taken up by the stoves and tables. All the pots had to be kept on
shelves out of reach, and there was only room for one dustbin. This dustbin
used to be crammed full by midday, and the floor was normally an inch deep
in a compost of trampled food.

For firing we had nothing but three gas-stoves, without ovens, and all
joints had to be sent out to the bakery.

There was no larder. Our substitute for one was a half-roofed shed in
the yard, with a tree growing in the middle of it. The meat, vegetables and
so forth lay there on the bare earth, raided by rats and cats.

There was no hot water laid on. Water for washing up had to be heated
in pans, and, as there was no room for these on the stoves when meals were
cooking, most of the plates had to be washed in cold water. This, with soft
soap and the hard Paris water, meant scraping the grease off with bits of
newspaper.

We were so short of saucepans that I had to wash each one as soon as
it was done with, instead of leaving them till the evening. This alone
wasted probably an hour a day.

Owing to some scamping of expense in the installation, the electric
light usually fused at eight in the evening. The _patron_ would only allow us
three candles in the kitchen, and the cook said three were unlucky, so we
had only two.

Our coffee-grinder was borrowed from a _bistro_ near by, and our dustbin
and brooms from the concierge. After the first week a quantity of linen did
not come back from the wash, as the bill was not paid. We were in trouble
with the inspector of labour, who had discovered that the staff included no
Frenchmen; he had several private interviews with the _patron_, who, I
believe, was obliged to bribe him. The electric company was still dunning
us, and when the duns found that we would buy them off with _apéritifs_, they
came every morning. We were in debt at the grocery, and credit would have
been stopped, only the grocer's wife (a moustachio'd woman of sixty) had
taken a fancy to Jules, who was sent every morning to cajole her. Similarly
I had to waste an hour every day haggling over vegetables in the rue du
Commerce, to save a few centimes.

These are the results of starting a restaurant on insufficient
capital. And in these conditions the cook and I were expected to serve
thirty or forty meals a day, and would later on be serving a hundred. From
the first day it was too much for us. The cook's working hours were from
eight in the morning till midnight, and mine from seven in the morning till
half past twelve the next morning--seventeen and a half hours, almost
without a break. We never had time to sit down till five in the afternoon,
and even then there was no seat except the top of the dustbin. Boris, who
lived near by and had not to catch the last Métro home, worked from eight
in the morning till two the next morning--eighteen hours a day, seven
days a week. Such hours, though not usual, are nothing extraordinary in
Paris.

Life settled at once into a routine that made the Hôtel X seem like a
holiday. Every morning at six I drove myself out of bed, did not shave,
sometimes washed, hurried up to the Place d'ltalie and fought for a place
on the Métro. By seven I was in the desolation of the cold, filthy kitchen,
with the potato skins and bones and fishtails littered on the floor, and a
pile of plates, stuck together in their grease, waiting from overnight. I
could not start on the plates yet, because the water was cold, and I had to
fetch milk and make coffee, for the others arrived at eight and expected to
find coffee ready. Also, there were always several copper saucepans to
clean. Those copper saucepans are the bane of a _plongeur's_ life. They have
to be scoured with sand and bunches of chain, ten minutes to each one, and
then polished on the outside with Brasso. Fortunately, the art of making
them has been lost and they are gradually vanishing from French kitchens,
though one can still buy them second-hand.

When I had begun on the plates the cook would take me away from the
plates to begin skinning onions, and when I had begun on the onions the
_patron_ would arrive and send me out to buy cabbages. When I came back with
the cabbages the _patron_'s wife would tell me to go to some shop half a mile
away and buy a pot of rouge; by the time I came back there would be more
vegetables waiting, and the plates were still not done. In this way our
incompetence piled one job on another throughout the day, everything in
arrears.

Till ten, things went comparatively easily, though we were working
fast, and no one lost his temper. The cook would find time to talk about
her artistic nature, and say did I not think Tolstoy was _épatant_, and sing
in a fine soprano voice as she minced beef on the board. But at ten the
waiters began clamouring for their lunch, which they had early, and at
eleven the first customers would be arriving. Suddenly everything became
hurry and bad temper. There was not the same furious rushing and yelling as
at the Hôtel X, but an atmosphere of muddle, petty spite and exasperation.
Discomfort was at the bottom of it. It was unbearably cramped in the
kitchen, and dishes had to be put on the floor, and one had to be thinking
constantly about not stepping on them. The cook's vast buttocks banged
against me as she moved to and fro. A ceaseless, nagging chorus of orders
streamed from her:

'Unspeakable idiot! How many times have I told you not to bleed the
beetroots? Quick, let me get to the sink! Put those knives away; get on
with the potatoes. What have you done with my strainer? Oh, leave those
potatoes alone. Didn't I tell you to skim the _bouillon_? Take that can of
water off the stove. Never mind the washing up, chop this celery. No, not
like that, you fool, like this. There! Look at you letting those peas boil
over! Now get to work and scale these herrings. Look, do you call this
plate clean? Wipe it on your apron. Put that salad on the floor. That's
right, put it where I'm bound to step in it! Look out, that pot's boiling
over! Get me down that saucepan. No, the other one. Put this on the grill.
Throw those potatoes away. Don't waste time, throw them on the floor. Tread
them in. Now throw down some sawdust; this floor's like a skating-rink.
Look, you fool, that steak's burning! _Mon Dieu_, why did they send me an
idiot for a _plongeur_? Who are you talking to? Do you realize that my aunt
was a Russian countess?' etc. etc. etc.

This went on till three o'clock without much variation, except that
about eleven the cook usually had a _crise de nerfs_ and a flood of tears.
From three to five was a fairly slack time for the waiters, but the cook
was still busy, and I was working my fastest, for there was a pile of dirty
plates waiting, and it was a race to get them done, or partly done, before
dinner began. The washing up was doubled by the primitive conditions--a
cramped draining-board, tepid water, sodden cloths, and a sink that got
blocked once in an hour. By five the cook and I were feeling unsteady on
our feet, not having eaten or sat down since seven. We used to collapse,
she on the dustbin and I on the floor, drink a bottle of beer, and
apologize for some of the things we had said in the morning. Tea was what
kept us going. We took care to have a pot always stewing, and drank pints
during the day.

At half-past five the hurry and quarrelling began again, and now worse
than before, because everyone was tired out. The cook had a _crise de nerfs_
at six and another at nine; they came on so regularly that one could have
told the time by them. She would flop down on the dustbin, begin weeping
hysterically, and cry out that never, no, never had she thought to come to
such a life as this; her nerves would not stand it; she had studied music
at Vienna; she had a bedridden husband to support, etc. etc. At another
time one would have been sorry for her, but, tired as we all were, her
whimpering voice merely infuriated us. Jules used to stand in the doorway
and mimic her weeping. The _patron_'s wife nagged, and Boris and Jules
quarrelled all day, because Jules shirked his work, and Boris, as head
waiter, claimed the larger share of the tips. Only the second day after the
restaurant opened, they came to blows in the kitchen over a two-franc tip,
and the cook and I had to separate them. The only person who never forgot
Us manners was the _patron_. He kept the same hours as the rest of us, but he
had no work to do, for it was his wife who really managed things. His sole
job, besides ordering the supplies, was to stand in the bar smoking
cigarettes and looking gentlemanly, and he did that to perfection.

The cook and I generally found time to eat our dinner between ten and
eleven o'clock. At midnight the cook would steal a packet of food for her
husband, stow it under her clothes, and make off, whimpering that these
hours would kill her and she would give notice in the morning. Jules also
left at midnight, usually after a dispute with Boris, who had to look after
the bar till two. Between twelve and half past I did what I could to finish
the washing up. There was no time to attempt doing the work properly, and I
used simply to rub the grease off the plates with table-napkins. As for the
dirt on the floor, I let it lie, or swept the worst of it out of sight
under the stoves.

At half past twelve I would put on my coat and hurry out. The _patron_,
bland as ever, would stop me as I went down the alley-way past the bar.
'_Mais, mon cher monsieur_, how tired you look! Please do me the favour of
accepting this glass of brandy.'

He would hand me the glass of brandy as courteously as though I had
been a Russian duke instead of a _plongeur_. He treated all of us like this.
It was our compensation for working seventeen hours a day.

As a rule the last Métro was almost empty--a great advantage, for
one could sit down and sleep for a quarter of an hour. Generally I was in
bed by half past one. Sometimes I missed the train and had to sleep on the
floor of the restaurant, but it hardly mattered, for I could have slept on
cobblestones at that time.




XXI



THIS life went on for about a fortnight, with a slight increase of
work as more customers came to the restaurant. I could have saved an hour a
day by taking a room near the restaurant, but it seemed impossible to find
time to change lodgings--or, for that matter, to get my hair cut, look at
a newspaper, or even undress completely. After ten days I managed to find a
free quarter of an hour, and wrote to my friend B. in London asking him if
he could get me a job of some sort--anything, so long as it allowed more
than five hours sleep. I was simply not equal to going on with a
seventeen-hour day, though there are plenty of people who think nothing of
it. When one is overworked, it is a good cure for self-pity to think of the
thousands of people in Paris restaurants who work such hours, and will go
on doing it, not for a few weeks, but for years. There was a girl in a
_bistro_ near my hotel who worked from seven in the morning till midnight for
a whole year, only sitting down to her meals. I remember once asking her to
come to a dance, and she laughed and said that she had not been farther
than the street comer for several months. She was consumptive, and died
about the time I left Paris.

After only a week we were all neurasthenic with fatigue, except Jules,
who skulked persistently. The quarrels, intermittent at first, had now
become continuous. For hours' one would keep up a drizzle of useless
nagging, rising into storms of abuse every few minutes. 'Get me down that
saucepan, idiot!' the cook would cry (she was not tall enough to reach the
shelves where the saucepans were kept). 'Get it down yourself, you old
whore,' I would answer. Such remarks seemed to be generated spontaneously
from the air of the kitchen.

We quarrelled over things of inconceivable pettiness. The dustbin, for
instance, was an unending source of quarrels--whether it should be put
where I wanted it, which was in the cook's way, or where she wanted it,
which was between me and the sink. Once she nagged and nagged until at
last, in pure spite, I lifted the dustbin up and put it out in the middle
of the floor, where she was bound to trip over it.

'Now, you cow,' I said, 'move it yourself.'

Poor old woman, it was too heavy for her to lift, and she sat down,
put her head on the table and burst out crying. And I jeered at her. This
is the kind of effect that fatigue has upon one's manners.

After a few days the cook had ceased talking about Tolstoy and her
artistic nature, and she and I were not on speaking terms, except for the
purposes of work, and Boris and Jules were not on speaking terms, and
neither of them was on speaking terms with the cook. Even Boris and I were
barely on speaking terms. We had agreed beforehand that the _engueulades_ of
working hours did not count between times; but we had called each other
things too bad to be forgotten--and besides, there were no between times.
Jules grew lazier and lazier, and he stole food constantly--from a sense
of duty, he said. He called the rest of us _jaune_--blackleg--when we
would not join with him in stealing. He had a curious, malignant spirit. He
told me, as a matter of pride, that he had sometimes wrung a dirty
dishcloth into a customer's soup before taking it in, just to be revenged
upon a member of the bourgeoisie.

The kitchen grew dirtier and the rats bolder, though we trapped a few
of them. Looking round that filthy room, with raw meat lying among refuse
on the floor, and cold, clotted saucepans sprawling everywhere, and the
sink blocked and coated with grease, I used to wonder whether there could
be a restaurant in the world as bad as ours. But the other three all said
that they had been in dirtier places. Jules took a positive pleasure in
seeing things dirty. In the afternoon, when he had not much to do, he used
to stand in the kitchen doorway jeering at us for working too hard:

'Fool! Why do you wash that plate? Wipe it on your trousers. Who cares
about the customers? _They_ don't know what's going on. What is restaurant
work? You are carving a chicken and it falls on the floor. You apologize,
you bow, you go out; and in five minutes you come back by another door--
with the same chicken. That is restaurant work,' etc.

And, strange to say, in spite of all this filth and incompetence, the
Auberge de Jehan Cottard was actually a success. For the first few days all
our customers were Russians, friends of the _patron_, and these were followed
by Americans and other foreigners--no Frenchmen. Then one night there was
tremendous excitement, because our first Frenchman had arrived. For a
moment our quarrels were forgotten and we all united in the effort to serve
a good dinner. Boris tiptoed into the kitchen, jerked his thumb over his
shoulder and whispered conspiratorially:

'_Sh! Attention, un Français!_'

A moment later the _patron_'s wife came and whispered:

'_Attention, un Français!_ See that he gets a double portion of all
vegetables.'

While the Frenchman ate, the _patron_'s wife stood behind the grille of
the kitchen door and watched the expression of his face. Next night the
Frenchman came back with two other Frenchmen. This meant that we were
earning a good name; the surest sign of a bad restaurant is to be
frequented only by foreigners. Probably part of the reason for our success
was that the _patron_, with the sole gleam of sense he had shown in fitting
out the restaurant, had bought very sharp table-knives. Sharp knives, of
course, are _the_ secret of a successful restaurant. I am glad that this
happened, for it destroyed one of my illusions, namely, the idea that
Frenchmen know good food when they see it. Or perhaps we _were_ a fairly good
restaurant by Paris standards; in which case the bad ones must be past
imagining.

In a very few days after I had written to B he replied to say that
there was a job he could get for me. It was to look after a congenital
imbecile, which sounded a splendid rest cure after the Auberge de Jehan
Cottard. I pictured myself loafing in the country lanes, knocking
thistle-heads off with my stick, feeding on roast lamb and treacle tart,
and sleeping ten hours a night in sheets smelling of lavender. B sent me a
fiver to pay my passage and get my clothes out of the pawn, and as soon as
the money arrived I gave one day's notice and left the restaurant. My
leaving so suddenly embarrassed the _patron_, for as usual he was penniless,
and he had to pay my wages thirty francs short. However he stood me a glass
of Courvoisier '48 brandy, and I think he felt that this made up the
difference. They engaged a Czech, a thoroughly competent _plongeur_, in my
place, and the poor old cook was sacked a few weeks later. Afterwards I
heard that, with two first-rate people in the kitchen, the _plongeur's_ work
had been cut down to fifteen hours a day. Below that no one could have cut
it, short of modernizing the kitchen.




XXII



FOR what they are worth I want to give my opinions about the life of a
Paris _plongeur_. When one comes to think of it, it is strange that thousands
of people in a great modern city should spend their waking hours swabbing
dishes in hot dens underground. The question I am raising is why this life
goes on--what purpose it serves, and who wants it to continue, and why I
am not taking the merely rebellious, _fainéant_ attitude. I am trying to
consider the social significance of a _plongeur's_ life.

I think one should start by saying that a _plongeur_ is one of the
slaves of the modern world. Not that there is any need to whine over him,
for he is better off than many manual workers, but still, he is no freer
than if he were bought and sold. His work is servile and without art; he is
paid just enough to keep him alive; his only holiday is the sack. He is cut
off from marriage, or, if he marries, his wife must work too. Except by a
lucky chance, he has no escape from this life, save into prison. At this
moment there are men with university degrees scrubbing dishes in Paris for
ten or fifteen hours a day. One cannot say that it is mere idleness on
their part, for an idle man cannot be a _plongeur_; they have simply been
trapped by a routine which makes thought impossible. If _plongeurs_ thought
at all, they would long ago have formed a union and gone on strike for
better treatment. But they do not think, because they have no leisure for
it; their life has made slaves of them.

The question is, why does this slavery continue? People have a way of
taking it for granted that all work is done for a sound purpose. They see
somebody else doing a disagreeable job, and think that they have solved
things by saying that the job is necessary. Coal-mining, for example, is
hard work, but it is necessary--we must have coal. Working in the sewers
is unpleasant, but somebody must work in the sewers. And similarly with a
_plongeur's_ work. Some people must feed in restaurants, and so other people
must swab dishes for eighty hours a week. It is the work of civilization,
therefore unquestionable. This point is worth considering.

Is a _plongeur's_ work really necessary to civilization? We have a
feeling that it must be 'honest' work, because it is hard and disagreeable,
and we have made a sort of fetish of manual work. We see a man cutting down
a tree, and we make sure that he is filling a social need, just because he
uses his muscles; it does not occur to us that he may only be cutting down
a beautiful tree to make room for a hideous statue. I believe it is the
same with a _plongeur_. He earns his bread in the sweat of his brow, but it
does not follow that he is doing anything useful; he may be only supplying
a luxury which, very often, is not a luxury.

As an example of what I mean by luxuries which are not luxuries, take
an extreme case, such as one hardly sees in Europe. Take an Indian rickshaw
puller, or a gharry pony. In any Far Eastern town there are rickshaw
pullers by the hundred, black wretches weighing eight stone, clad in
loin-cloths. Some of them are diseased; some of them are fifty years old.
For miles on end they trot in the sun or rain, head down, dragging at the
shafts, with the sweat dripping from their grey moustaches. When they go
too slowly the passenger calls them _bahinchut_. They earn thirty or forty
rupees a month, and cough their lungs out after a few years. The gharry
ponies are gaunt, vicious things that have been sold cheap as having a few
years' work left in them. Their master looks on the whip as a substitute
for food. Their work expresses itself in a sort of equation--whip plus
food equals energy; generally it is about sixty per cent whip and forty per
cent food. Sometimes their necks are encircled by one vast sore, so that
they drag all day on raw flesh. It is still possible to make them work,
however; it is just a question of thrashing them so hard that the pain
behind outweighs the pain in front. After a few years even the whip loses
its virtue, and the pony goes to the knacker. These are instances of
unnecessary work, for there is no real need for gharries and rickshaws;
they only exist because Orientals consider it vulgar to walk. They are
luxuries, and, as anyone who has ridden in them knows, very poor luxuries.
They afford a small amount of convenience, which cannot possibly balance
the suffering of the men and animals.

Similarly with the _plongeur_. He is a king compared with a rickshaw
puller or a gharry pony, but his case is analogous. He is the slave of a
hotel or a restaurant, and his slavery is more or less useless. For, after
all, where is the _real_ need of big hotels and smart restaurants? They are
supposed to provide luxury, but in reality they provide only a cheap,
shoddy imitation of it. Nearly everyone hates hotels. Some restaurants are
better than others, but it is impossible to get as good a meal in a
restaurant as one can get, for the same expense, in a private house. No
doubt hotels and restaurants must exist, but there is no need that they
should enslave hundreds of people. What makes the work in them is not the
essentials; it is the shams that are supposed to represent luxury.
Smartness, as it is called, means, in effect, merely that the staff work
more and the customers pay more; no one benefits except the proprietor, who
will presently buy himself a striped villa at Deauville. Essentially, a
'smart' hotel is a place where a hundred people toil like devils in order
that two hundred may pay through the nose for things they do not really
want. If the nonsense were cut out of hotels and restaurants, and the work
done with simple efficiency, _plongeurs_ might work six or eight hours a day
instead often or fifteen.

Suppose it is granted that a _plongeur's_ work is more or less useless.
Then the question follows, Why does anyone want him to go on working? I am
trying to go beyond the immediate economic cause, and to consider what
pleasure it can give anyone to think of men swabbing dishes for life. For
there is no doubt that people--comfortably situated people--do find a
pleasure in such thoughts. A slave, Marcus Cato said, should be working
when he is not sleeping. It does not matter whether his work is needed or
not, he must work, because work in itself is good--for slaves, at least.
This sentiment still survives, and it has piled up mountains of useless
drudgery.

I believe that this instinct to perpetuate useless work is, at bottom,
simply fear of the mob. The mob (the thought runs) are such low animals
that they would be dangerous if they had leisure; it is safer to keep them
too busy to think. A rich man who happens to be intellectually honest, if
he is questioned about the improvement of working conditions, usually says
something like this:

'We know that poverty is unpleasant; in fact, since it is so remote,
we rather enjoy harrowing ourselves with the thought of its unpleasantness.
But don't expect us to do anything about it. We are sorry for you lower
classes, just as we are sorry for a, cat with the mange, but we will fight
like devils against any improvement of your condition. We feel that you are
much safer as you are. The present state of affairs suits us, and we are
not going to take the risk of setting you free, even by an extra hour a
day. So, dear brothers, since evidently you must sweat to pay for our trips
to Italy, sweat and be damned to you.'

This is particularly the attitude of intelligent, cultivated people;
one can read the substance of it in a hundred essays. Very few cultivated
people have less than (say) four hundred pounds a year, and naturally they
side with the rich, because they imagine that any liberty conceded to the
poor is a threat to their own liberty. Foreseeing some dismal Marxian
Utopia as the alternative, the educated man prefers to keep things as they
are. Possibly he does not like his fellow-rich very much, but he supposes
that even the vulgarest of them are less inimical to his pleasures, more
his kind of people, than the poor, and that he had better stand by them. It
is this fear of a supposedly dangerous mob that makes nearly all
intelligent people conservative in their opinions.

Fear of the mob is a superstitious fear. It is based on the idea that
there is some mysterious, fundamental difference between rich and poor, as
though they were two different races, like Negroes and white men. But in
reality there is no such difference. The mass of the rich and the poor are
differentiated by their incomes and nothing else, and the average
millionaire is only the average dishwasher dressed in a new suit. Change
places, and handy dandy, which is the justice, which is the thief? Everyone
who has mixed on equal terms with the poor knows this quite well. But the
trouble is that intelligent, cultivated people, the very people who might
be expected to have liberal opinions, never do mix with the poor. For what
do the majority of educated people know about poverty? In my copy of
Villon's poems the editor has actually thought it necessary to explain the
line '_Ne pain ne voyent qu'aux fenestres_' by a footnote; so remote is even
hunger from the educated man's experience.

From this ignorance a superstitious fear of the mob results quite
naturally. The educated man pictures a horde of submen, wanting only a
day's liberty to loot his house, burn his books, and set him to work
minding a machine or sweeping out a lavatory. 'Anything,' he thinks, 'any
injustice, sooner than let that mob loose.' He does not see that since
there is no difference between the mass of rich and poor, there is no
question of setting the mob loose. The mob is in fact loose now, and--in
the shape of rich men--is using its power to set up enormous treadmills
of boredom, such as 'smart' hotels.

To sum up. A _plongeur_ is a slave, and a wasted slave, doing stupid and
largely unnecessary work. He is kept at work, ultimately, because of a
vague feeling that he would be dangerous if he had leisure. And educated
people, who should be on his side, acquiesce in the process, because they
know nothing about him and consequently are afraid of him. I say this of
the _plongeur_ because it is his case I have been considering; it would apply
equally to numberless other types of worker. These are only my own ideas
about the basic facts of a _plongeur's_ life, made without reference to
immediate economic questions, and no doubt largely platitudes. I present
them as a sample of the thoughts that are put into one's head by working in
an hotel.




XXIII



AS soon as I left the Auberge de Jehan Cottard I went to bed and slept
the clock round, all but one hour. Then I washed my teeth for the first
time in a fortnight, bathed and had my hair cut, and got my clothes out of
pawn. I had two glorious days of loafing. I even went in my best suit to
the Auberge, leant against the bar and spent five francs on a bottle of
English beer. It is a curious sensation, being a customer where you have
been a slave's slave. Boris was sorry that I had left the restaurant just
at the moment when we were _lancés_ and there was a chance of making money. I
have heard from him since, and he tells me that he is making a hundred
francs a day and has set up a girl who is _très serieuse_ and never smells of
garlic.

I spent a day wandering about our quarter, saying good-bye to
everyone. It was on this day that Charlie told me about the death of old
Roucolle the miser, who had once lived in the quarter. Very likely Charlie
was lying as usual, but it was a good story.

Roucolle died, aged seventy-four, a year or two before I went to
Paris, but the people in the quarter still talked of him while I was there.
He never equalled Daniel Dancer or anyone of that kind, but he was an
interesting character. He went to Les Halles every morning to pick up
damaged vegetables, and ate cat's meat, and wore newspaper instead of
underclothes, and used the wainscoting of his room for firewood, and made
himself a pair of trousers out of a sack--all this with half a million
francs invested. I should like very much to have known him.

Like many misers, Roucolle came to a bad end through putting his money
into a wildcat scheme. One day a Jew appeared in the quarter, an alert,
business-like young chap who had a first-rate plan for smuggling cocaine
into England. It is easy enough, of course, to buy cocaine in Paris, and
the smuggling would be quite simple in itself, only there is always some
spy who betrays the plan to the customs or the police. It is said that this
is often done by the very people who sell the cocaine, because the
smuggling trade is in the hands of a large combine, who do not want
competition. The Jew, however, swore that there was no danger. He knew a
way of getting cocaine direct from Vienna, not through the usual channels,
and there would be no blackmail to pay. He had got into touch with Roucolle
through a young Pole, a student at the Sorbonne, who was going to put four
thousand francs into the scheme if Roucolle would put six thousand. For
this they could buy ten pounds of cocaine, which would be worth a small
fortune in England.

The Pole and the Jew had a tremendous struggle to get the money from
between old Roucolle's claws. Six thousand francs was not much--he had
more than that sewn into the mattress in his room--but it was agony for
him to part with a sou. The Pole and the Jew were at him for weeks on end,
explaining, bullying, coaxing, arguing, going down on their knees and
imploring him to produce the money. The old man was half frantic between
greed and fear. His bowels yearned at the thought of getting, perhaps,
fifty thousand francs' profit, and yet he could not bring himself to risk
the money. He used to sit in a comer with his head in his hands, groaning
and sometimes yelling out in agony, and often he would kneel down (he was
very pious) and pray for strength, but still he couldn't do it. But at
last, more from exhaustion than anything else, he gave in quite suddenly;
he slit open the mattress where his money was concealed and handed over six
thousand francs to the Jew.

The Jew delivered the cocaine the same day, and promptly vanished. And
meanwhile, as was not surprising after the fuss Roucolle had made, the
affair had been noised all over the quarter. The very next morning the
hotel was raided and searched by the police.

Roucolle and the Pole were in agonies. The police were downstairs,
working their way up and searching every room in turn, and there was the
great packet of cocaine on the table, with no place to hide it and no
chance of escaping down the stairs. The Pole was for throwing the stuff out
of the window, but Roucolle would not hear of it. Charlie told me that he
had been present at the scene. He said that when they tried to take the
packet from Roucolle he clasped it to his breast and struggled like a
madman, although he was seventy-four years old. He was wild with fright,
but he would go to prison rather than throw his money away.

At last, when the police were searching only one floor below, somebody
had an idea. A man on Roucolle's floor had a dozen tins of face-powder
which he was selling on commission; it was suggested that the cocaine could
be put into the tins and passed off as face-powder. The powder was hastily
thrown out of the window and the cocaine substituted, and the tins were put
openly on Roucolle's table, as though there there were nothing to conceal.
A few minutes later the police came to search Roucolle's room. They tapped
the walls and looked up the chimney and turned out the drawers and examined
the floorboards, and then, just as they were about to give it up, having
found nothing, the inspector noticed the tins on the table.

'_Tiens_,' he said, 'have a look at those tins. I hadn't noticed them.
What's in them, eh?'

'Face-powder,' said the Pole as calmly as he could manage. But at the
same instant Roucolle let out a loud groaning noise, from alarm, and the
police became suspicious immediately. They opened one of the tins and
tipped out the contents, and after smelling it, the inspector said that he
believed it was cocaine. Roucolle and the Pole began swearing on the names
of the saints that it was only face-powder; but it was no use, the more
they protested the more suspicious the police became. The two men were
arrested and led off to the police station, followed by half the quarter.

At the station, Roucolle and the Pole were interrogated by the
Commissaire while a tin of the cocaine was sent away to be analysed.
Charlie said that the scene Roucolle made was beyond description. He wept,
prayed, made contradictory statements and denounced the Pole all at once,
so loud that he could be heard half a street away. The policemen almost
burst with laughing at him.

After an hour a policeman came back with the tin of cocaine and a note
from the analyst. He was laughing.

'This is not cocaine, _monsieur_,' he said.

'What, not cocaine?' said the Commissaire. '_Mais, alors_--what is it,
then?'

'It is face-powder.'

Roucolle and the Pole were released at once, entirely exonerated but
very angry. The Jew had double-crossed them. Afterwards, when the
excitement was over, it turned out that he had played the same trick on two
other people in the quarter.

The Pole was glad enough to escape, even though he had lost his four
thousand francs, but poor old Roucolle was utterly broken down. He took to
his bed at once, and all that day and half the night they could hear him
thrashing about, mumbling, and sometimes yelling out at the top of his
voice:

'Six thousand francs! _Nom de Jésus-Christ_! Six thousand francs!'

Three days later he had some kind of stroke, and in a fortnight he was
dead--of a broken heart, Charlie said.




XXIV



I TRAVELLED to England third class via Dunkirk and Tilbury, which is
the cheapest and not the worst way of crossing the Channel. You had to pay
extra for a cabin, so I slept in the saloon, together with most of the
third-class passengers. I find this entry in my diary for that day:

'Sleeping in the saloon, twenty-seven men, sixteen women. Of the
women, not a single one has washed her face this morning. The men mostly
went to the bathroom; the women merely produced vanity cases and covered
the dirt with powder. _Q_. A secondary sexual difference?'

On the journey I fell in with a couple of Roumanians, mere children,
who were going to England on their honeymoon trip. They asked innumerable
questions about England, and I told them some startling lies. I was so
pleased to be getting home, after being hard up for months in a foreign
city, that England seemed to me a sort of Paradise. There are, indeed, many
things in England that make you glad to get home; bathrooms, armchairs,
mint sauce, new potatoes properly cooked, brown bread, marmalade, beer made
with veritable hops--they are all splendid, if you can pay for them.
England is a very good country when you are not poor; and, of course, with
a tame imbecile to look after, I was not going to be poor. The thought of
not being poor made me very patriotic. The more questions the Roumanians
asked, the more I praised England; the climate, the scenery, the art, the
literature, the laws--everything in England was perfect.

Was the architecture in England good? the Roumanians asked.
'Splendid!' I said. 'And you should just see the London statues! Paris is
vulgar--half grandiosity and half slums. But London--'

Then the boat drew alongside Tilbury pier. The first building we saw
on the waterside was one of those huge hotels, all stucco and pinnacles,
which stare from the English coast like idiots staring over an asylum wall.
I saw the Roumanians, too polite to say anything, cocking their eyes at the
hotel. 'Built by French architects,' I assured them; and even later, when
the train was crawling into London through the eastern slums, I still kept
it up about the beauties of English architecture. Nothing seemed too good
to say about England, now that I was coming home and was not hard up any
more.

I went to B.'s office, and his first words knocked everything to
ruins. 'I'm sorry,' he said; 'your employers have gone abroad, patient and
all. However, they'll be back in a month. I suppose you can hang on till
then?'

I was outside in the street before it even occurred to me to borrow
some more money. There was a month to wait, and I had exactly nineteen and
sixpence in hand. The news had taken my breath away. For a long time I
could not make up my mind what to do. I loafed the day in the streets, and
at night, not having the slightest notion of how to get a cheap bed in
London, I went to a 'family' hotel, where the charge was seven and
sixpence. After paying the bill I had ten and twopence in hand.

By the morning I had made my plans. Sooner or later I should have to
go to B. for more money, but it seemed hardly decent to do so yet, and in
the meantime I must exist in some hole-and-corner way. Past experience set
me against pawning my best suit. I would leave all my things at the station
cloakroom, except my second-best suit, which I could exchange for some
cheap clothes and perhaps a pound. If I was going to live a month on thirty
shillings I must have bad clothes--indeed, the worse the better. Whether
thirty shillings could be made to last a month I had no idea, not knowing
London as I knew Paris. Perhaps I could beg, or sell bootlaces, and I
remembered articles I had read in the Sunday papers about beggars who have
two thousand pounds sewn into their trousers. It was, at any rate,
notoriously impossible to starve in London, so there was nothing to be
anxious about.

To sell my clothes I went down into Lambeth, where the people are poor
and there are a lot of rag shops. At the first shop I tried the proprietor
was polite but unhelpful; at the second he was rude; at the third he was
stone deaf, or pretended to be so. The fourth shopman was a large blond
young man, very pink all over, like a slice of ham. He looked at the
clothes I was wearing and felt them disparagingly between thumb and finger.

'Poor stuff,' he said, 'very poor stuff, that is.' (It was quite a
good suit.) 'What yer want for 'em?'

I explained that I wanted some older clothes and as much money as he
could spare. He thought for a moment, then collected some dirty-looking
rags and threw them on to the counter. 'What about the money?' I said,
hoping for a pound. He pursed Us lips, then produced _a shilling_ and laid it
beside the clothes. I did not argue--I was going to argue, but as I
opened my mouth he reached out as though to take up the shilling again; I
saw that I was helpless. He let me change in a small room behind the shop.

The clothes were a coat, once dark brown, a pair of black dungaree
trousers, a scarf and a cloth cap; I had kept my own shirt, socks and
boots, and I had a comb and razor in my pocket. It gives one a very strange
feeling to be wearing such clothes. I had worn bad enough things before,
but nothing at all like these; they were not merely dirty and shapeless,
they had--how is one to express it?--a gracelessness, a patina of
antique filth, quite different from mere shabbiness. They were the sort of
clothes you see on a bootlace seller, or a tramp. An hour later, in
Lambeth, I saw a hang-dog man, obviously a tramp, coming towards me, and
when I looked again it was myself, reflected in a shop window. The dirt was
plastering my face already. Dirt is a great respecter of persons; it lets
you alone when you are well dressed, but as soon as your collar is gone it
flies towards you from all directions.

I stayed in the streets till late at night, keeping on the move all
the time. Dressed as I was, I was half afraid that the police might arrest
me as a vagabond, and I dared not speak to anyone, imagining that they must
notice a disparity between my accent and my clothes. (Later I discovered
that this never happened.) My new clothes had put me instantly into a new
world. Everyone's demeanour seemed to have changed abruptly. I helped a
hawker pick up a barrow that he had upset. 'Thanks, mate,' he said with a
grin. No one had called me mate before in my life--it was the clothes
that had done it. For the first time I noticed, too, how the attitude of
women varies with a man's clothes. When a badly dressed man passes them
they shudder away from him with a quite frank movement of disgust, as
though he were a dead cat. Clothes are powerful things. Dressed in a
tramp's clothes it is very difficult, at any rate for the first day, not to
feel that you are genuinely degraded. You might feel the same shame,
irrational but very real, your first night in prison.

At about eleven I began looking for a bed. I had read about
doss-houses (they are never called doss-houses, by the way), and I supposed
that one could get a bed for fourpence or thereabouts. Seeing a man, a
navvy or something of the kind, standing on the kerb in the Waterloo Road,
I stopped and questioned him. I said that I was stony broke and wanted the
cheapest bed I could get.

'Oh,' said he, 'you go to that 'ouse across the street there, with the
sign "Good Beds for Single Men". That's a good kip [sleeping place], that
is. I bin there myself on and off. You'll find it cheap _and_ clean.'

It was a tall, battered-looking house, with dim lights in all the
windows, some of which were patched with brown paper. I entered a stone
passage-way, and a little etiolated boy with sleepy eyes appeared from a
door leading to a cellar. Murmurous sounds came from the cellar, and a wave
of hot air and cheese. The boy yawned and held out his hand.

'Want a kip? That'll be a 'og, guv'nor.'

I paid the shilling, and the boy led me up a rickety unlighted
staircase to a bedroom. It had a sweetish reek of paregoric and foul linen;
the windows seemed to be tight shut, and the air was almost suffocating at
first. There was a candle burning, and I saw that the room measured fifteen
feet square by eight high, and had eight beds in it. Already six lodgers
were in bed, queer lumpy shapes with all their own clothes, even their
boots, piled on top of them. Someone was coughing in a loathsome manner in
one corner.

When I got into the bed I found that it was as hard as a board, and as
for the pillow, it was a mere hard cylinder like a block of wood. It was
rather worse than sleeping on a table, because the bed was not six feet
long, and very narrow, and the mattress was convex, so that one had to hold
on to avoid falling out. The sheets stank so horribly of sweat that I could
not bear them near my nose. Also, the bedclothes only consisted of the
sheets and a cotton counterpane, so that though stuffy it was none too
warm. Several noises recurred throughout the night. About once in an hour
the man on my left--a sailor, I think--woke up, swore vilely, and
lighted a cigarette. Another man, victim of a bladder disease, got up and
noisily used his chamber-pot half a dozen times during the night. The man
in the corner had a coughing fit once in every twenty minutes, so regularly
that one came to listen for it as one listens for the next yap when a dog
is baying the moon. It was an unspeakably repellent sound; a foul bubbling
and retching, as though the man's bowels were being churned up within him.
Once when he struck a match I saw that he was a very old man, with a grey,
sunken face like that of a corpse, and he was wearing his trousers wrapped
round his head as a nightcap, a thing which for some reason disgusted me
very much. Every time he coughed or the other man swore, a sleepy voice
from one of the other beds cried out:

'Shut up! Oh, for Christ's--_sake_ shut up!'

I had about an hour's sleep in all. In the morning I was woken by a dim
impression of some large brown thing coming towards me. I opened my eyes
and saw that it was one of the sailor's feet, sticking out of bed close
to my face. It was dark brown, quite dark brown like an Indian's,
with dirt. The walls were leprous, and the sheets, three weeks from
the wash, were almost raw umber colour. I got up, dressed and went
downstairs. In the cellar were a row of basins and two slippery
roller towels. I had a piece of soap in my pocket, and I was going
to wash, when I noticed that every basin was streaked with grime--solid,
sticky filth as black as boot-blacking. I went out unwashed. Altogether,
the lodging-house had not come up to its description as cheap and clean. It
was however, as I found later, a fairly representative lodging-house.

I crossed the river and walked a long way eastward, finally going into
a coffee-shop on Tower Hill. An ordinary London coffee-shop, like a
thousand others, it seemed queer and foreign after Paris. It was a little
stuffy room with the high-backed pews that were fashionable in the
'forties, the day's menu written on a mirror with a piece of soap, and a
girl of fourteen handling the dishes. Navvies were eating out of newspaper
parcels, and drinking tea in vast saucerless mugs like china tumblers. In a
corner by himself a Jew, muzzle down in the plate, was guiltily wolfing
bacon.

'Could I have some tea and bread and butter?' I said to the girl.

She stared. 'No butter, only marg,' she said, surprised. And she
repeated the order in the phrase that is to London what the eternal _coup de
rouge_ is to Paris: 'Large tea and two slices!'

On the wall beside my pew there was a notice saying 'Pocketing the
sugar not allowed,' and beneath it some poetic customer had written:


    He that takes away the sugar,
    Shall be called a dirty----


but someone else had been at pains to scratch out the last word. This was
England. The tea-and-two-slices cost threepence halfpenny, leaving me with
eight and twopence.




XXV



THE eight shillings lasted three days and four nights. After my bad
experience in the Waterloo Road* I moved eastward, and spent the next
night in a lodging-house in Pennyfields. This was a typical lodging-house,
like scores of others in London. It had accommodation for between fifty and
a hundred men, and was managed by a 'deputy'--a deputy for the owner,
that is, for these lodging-houses are profitable concerns and are owned by
rich men. We slept fifteen or twenty in a dormitory; the beds were again
cold and hard, but the sheets were not more than a week from the wash,
which was an improvement. The charge was ninepence or a shilling (in the
shilling dormitory the beds were six feet apart instead of four) and the
terms were cash down by seven in the evening or out you went.

[*It is a curious but well-known fact that bugs are much commoner
in south than north London. For some reason they have not yet crossed
the river in any great numbers.]

Downstairs there was a kitchen common to all lodgers, with free firing
and a supply of cooking-pots, tea-basins, and toasting-forks. There were
two great clinker fires, which were kept burning day and night the year
through. The work of tending the fires, sweeping the kitchen and making the
beds was done by the lodgers in rotation. One senior lodger, a fine
Norman-looking stevedore named Steve, was known as 'head of the house', and
was arbiter of disputes and unpaid chucker-out.

I liked the kitchen. It was a low-ceiled cellar deep underground, very
hot and drowsy with coke fumes, and lighted only by the fires, which cast
black velvet shadows in the comers. Ragged washing hung on strings from the
ceiling. Red-lit men, stevedores mostly, moved about the fires with
cooking-pots; some of them were quite naked, for they had been laundering
and were waiting for their clothes to dry. At night there were games of nap
and draughts, and songs--' I'm a chap what's done wrong by my parents,'
was a favourite, and so was another popular song about a shipwreck.
Sometimes late at night men would come in with a pail of winkles they had
bought cheap, and share them out. There was a general sharing of food, and
it was taken for granted to feed men who were out of work. A little pale,
wizened creature, obviously dying, referred to as 'pore Brown, bin under
the doctor and cut open three times,' was regularly fed by the others.

Two or three of the lodgers were old-age pensioners. Till meeting them
I had never realized that there are people in England who live on nothing
but the old-age pension often shillings a week. None of these old men had
any other resource whatever. One of them was talkative, and I asked him how
he managed to exist. He said:

'Well, there's ninepence a night for yer kip--that's five an'
threepence a week. Then there's threepence on Saturday for a shave--
that's five an' six. Then say you 'as a 'aircut once a month for sixpence
--that's another three'apence a week. So you 'as about four an' four-pence
for food an' bacca.'

He could imagine no other expenses. His food was bread and margarine
and tea--towards the end of the week dry bread and tea without milk--
and perhaps he got his clothes from charity. He seemed contented, valuing
his bed and fire more than food. But, with an income of ten shillings a
week, to spend money on a shave--it is awe-inspiring.

All day I loafed in the streets, east as far as Wapping, west as far
as Whitechapel. It was queer after Paris; everything was so much cleaner
and quieter and drearier. One missed the scream of the trams, and the
noisy, festering life of the back streets, and the armed men clattering
through the squares. The crowds were better dressed and the faces comelier
and milder and more alike, without that fierce individuality and malice of
the French. There was less drunkenness, and less dirt, and less
quarrelling, and more idling. Knots of men stood at all the corners,
slightly underfed, but kept going by the tea-and-two-slices which the
Londoner swallows every two hours. One seemed to breathe a less feverish
air than in Paris. It was the land of the tea urn and the Labour Exchange,
as Paris is the land of the _bistro_ and the sweatshop.

It was interesting to watch the crowds. The East London women are
pretty (it is the mixture of blood, perhaps), and Limehouse was sprinkled
with Orientals--Chinamen, Chittagonian lascars, Dravidians selling silk
scarves, even a few Sikhs, come goodness knows how. Here and there were
street meetings. In Whitechapel somebody called The Singing Evangel
undertook to save you from hell for the charge of sixpence. In the East
India Dock Road the Salvation Army were holding a service. They were
singing 'Anybody here like sneaking Judas?' to the tune of 'What's to be
done with a drunken sailor?' On Tower Hill two Mormons were trying to
address a meeting. Round their platform struggled a mob of men, shouting
and interrupting. Someone was denouncing them for polygamists. A lame,
bearded man, evidently an atheist, had heard the word God and was heckling
angrily. There was a confused uproar of voices.

'My dear friends, if you would only let us finish what we were saying
--!--That's right, give 'em a say. Don't get on the argue!--No, no,
you answer me. Can you _show_ me God? You _show_ 'im me, then I'll believe in
'im.--Oh, shut up, don't keep interrupting of 'em!--Interrupt yourself!
--polygamists!--Well, there's a lot to be said for polygamy. Take the--
women out of industry, anyway.--My dear friends, if you would just--No,
no, don't you slip out of it. 'Ave you _seen_ God? 'Ave you _touched_ 'im? 'Ave
you shook '_ands_ with 'im?--Oh, don't get on the argue, for Christ's sake
don't get on the _argue_!' etc. etc. I listened for twenty minutes, anxious
to learn something about Mormonism, but the meeting never got beyond
shouts. It is the general fate of street meetings.

In Middlesex Street, among the crowds at the market, a draggled,
down-at-heel woman was hauling a brat of five by the arm. She brandished a
tin trumpet in its face. The brat was squalling.

'Enjoy yourself!' yelled the mother. 'What yer think I brought yer out
'ere for an' bought y' a trumpet an' all? D'ya want to go across my knee?
You little bastard, you _shall_ enjoy yerself!'

Some drops of spittle fell from the trumpet. The mother and the child
disappeared, both bawling. It was all very queer after Paris.

The last night that I was in the Pennyfields lodging-house there was a
quarrel between two of the lodgers, a vile scene. One of the old-age
pensioners, a man of about seventy, naked to the waist (he had been
laundering), was violently abusing a short, thickset stevedore, who stood
with his back to the fire. I could see the old man's face in the light of
the fire, and he was almost crying with grief and rage. Evidently something
very serious had happened.

_The old-age pensioner_: 'You--!'

_The stevedore_: 'Shut yer mouth, you ole--, afore I set about yer!'

_The old-age pensioner_: 'Jest you try it on, you--! I'm thirty year
older'n you, but it wouldn't take much to make me give you one as'd knock
you into a bucketful of piss!'

_The stevedore_: 'Ah, an' then p'raps I wouldn't smash you up after, you
ole--!'

Thus for five minutes. The lodgers sat round, unhappy, trying to
disregard the quarrel. The stevedore looked, sullen, but the old man was
growing more and more furious. He kept making little rushes at the other,
sticking out his face and screaming from a few inches distant like a cat on
a wall, and spitting. He was trying to nerve himself to strike a blow, and
not quite succeeding. Finally he burst out:

'A--, that's what you are, a----! Take that in your dirty gob and
suck it, you--! By--, I'll smash you afore I've done with you. A--,
that's what you are, a son of a--whore. Lick that, you--! That's what I
think of you, you--, you--, you--you BLACK BASTARD!'

Whereat he suddenly collapsed on a bench, took his face in his hands,
and began crying. The other man seeing that public feeling was against him,
went out.

Afterwards I heard Steve explaining the cause of the quarrel. It
appeared that it was all about a shilling's worth of food. In some way the
old man had lost his store of bread and margarine, and so would have
nothing to eat for the next three days, except what the others gave him in
charity. The stevedore, who was in work and well fed, had taunted him;
hence the quarrel.

When my money was down to one and fourpence I went for a night to a
lodging-house in Bow, where the charge was only eightpence. One went down
an area and through an alley-way into a deep, stifling cellar, ten feet
square. Ten men, navvies mostly, were sitting in the fierce glare of the
fire. It was midnight, but the deputy's son, a pale, sticky child of five,
was there playing on the navvies' knees. An old Irishman was whistling to a
blind bullfinch in a tiny cage. There were other songbirds there--tiny,
faded things, that had lived all their lives underground. The lodgers
habitually made water in the fire, to save going across a yard to the
lavatory. As I sat at the table I felt something stir near my feet, and,
looking down, saw a wave of black things moving slowly across the floor;
they were black-beetles.

There were six beds in the dormitory, and the sheets, marked in huge
letters 'Stolen from No.--Road', smelt loathsome. In the next bed to me
lay a very old man, a pavement artist, with some extraordinary curvature of
the spine that made him stick right out of bed, with his back a foot or two
from my face. It was bare, and marked with curious swirls of dirt, like a
marble table-top. During the night a man came in drunk and was sick on the
floor, close to my bed. There were bugs too--not so bad as in Paris, but
enough to keep one awake. It was a filthy place. Yet the deputy and his
wife were friendly people, and ready to make one a cup of tea at any hour
of the day or night.




XXVI



IN the morning after paying for the usual tea-and-two-slices and
buying half an ounce of tobacco, I had a halfpenny left. I did not care to
ask B. for more money yet, so there was nothing for it but to go to a
casual ward. I had very little idea how to set about this, but I knew that
there was a casual ward at Romton, so I walked out there, arriving at three
or four in the afternoon. Leaning against the pigpens in Romton
market-place was a wizened old Irishman, obviously a tramp. I went and
leaned beside him, and presently offered him my tobacco-box. He opened the
box and looked at the tobacco in astonishment:

'By God,' he said, 'dere's sixpennorth o' good baccy here! Where de
hell d'you get hold o' dat? _You_ ain't been on de road long.'

'What, don't you have tobacco on the road?' I said.

'Oh, we _has_ it. Look.'

He produced a rusty tin which had once held Oxo Cubes. In it were
twenty or thirty cigarette ends, picked up from the pavement. The Irishman
said that he rarely got any other tobacco; he added that, with care, one
could collect two ounces of tobacco a day on the London pavements.

'D'you come out o' one o' de London spikes [casual wards], eh?' he
asked me.

I said yes, thinking this would make him accept me as a fellow tramp,
and asked him what the spike at Romton was like. He said:

'Well, 'tis a cocoa spike. Dere's tay spikes, and cocoa spikes, and
skilly spikes. Dey don't give you skilly in Romton, t'ank God--leastways,
dey didn't de last time I was here. I been up to York and round Wales
since.'

'What is skilly?' I said.

'Skilly? A can o' hot water wid some bloody oatmeal at de bottom;
dat's skilly. De skilly spikes is always de worst.'

We stayed talking for an hour or two. The Irishman was a friendly old
man, but he smelt very unpleasant, which was not surprising when one
learned how many diseases he suffered from. It appeared (he described his
symptoms fully) that taking him from top to bottom he had the following
things wrong with him: on his crown, which was bald, he had eczema; he was
shortsighted, and had no glasses; he had chronic bronchitis; he had some
undiagnosed pain in the back; he had dyspepsia; he had urethritis; he had
varicose veins, bunions and flat feet. With this assemblage of diseases he
had tramped the roads for fifteen years.

At about five the Irishman said, 'Could you do wid a cup o' tay? De
spike don't open till six.'

'I should think I could.'

'Well, dere's a place here where dey gives you a free cup o' tay and a
bun. _Good_ tay it is. Dey makes you say a lot o' bloody prayers after; but
hell! It all passes de time away. You come wid me.'

He led the way to a small tin-roofed shed in a side-street, rather
like a village cricket pavilion. About twenty-five other tramps were
waiting. A few of them were dirty old habitual vagabonds, the majority
decent-looking lads from the north, probably miners or cotton operatives
out of work. Presently the door opened and a lady in a blue silk dress,
wearing gold spectacles and a crucifix, welcomed us in. Inside were thirty
or forty hard chairs, a harmonium, and a very gory lithograph of the
Crucifixion.

Uncomfortably we took off our caps and sat down. The lady handed out
the tea, and while we ate and drank she moved to and fro, talking benignly.
She talked upon religious subjects--about Jesus Christ always having a
soft spot for poor rough men like us, and about how quickly the time passed
when you were in church, and what a difference it made to a man on the road
if he said his prayers regularly. We hated it. We sat against the wall
fingering our caps (a tramp feels indecently exposed with his cap off), and
turning pink and trying to mumble something when the lady addressed us.
There was no doubt that she meant it all kindly. As she came up to one of
the north country lads with the plate of buns, she said to him:

'And you, my boy, how long is it since you knelt down and spoke with
your Father in Heaven?'

Poor lad, not a word could he utter; but his belly answered for him,
with a disgraceful rumbling which it set up at sight of the food.
Thereafter he was so overcome with shame that he could scarcely swallow his
bun. Only one man managed to answer the lady in her own style, and he was a
spry, red-nosed fellow looking like a corporal who had lost his stripe for
drunkenness. He could pronounce the words 'the dear Lord Jesus' with less
shame than anyone I ever saw. No doubt he had learned the knack in prison.

Tea ended, and I saw the tramps looking furtively at one another. An
unspoken thought was running from man to man--could we possibly make off
before the prayers started? Someone stirred in his chair--not getting up
actually, but with just a glance at the door, as though half suggesting the
idea of departure. The lady quelled him with one look. She said in a more
benign tone than ever:

'I don't think you need go _quite_ yet. The casual ward doesn't open
till six, and we have time to kneel down and say a few words to our Father
first. I think we should all feel better after that, shouldn't we?'

The red-nosed man was very helpful, pulling the harmonium into place
and handing out the prayerbooks. His back was to the lady as he did this,
and it was his idea of a joke to deal the books like a pack of cards,
whispering to each man as he did so, 'There y'are, mate, there's a--nap
'and for yer! Four aces and a king!' etc.

Bareheaded, we knelt down among the dirty teacups and began to mumble
that we had left undone those things that we ought to have done, and done
those things that we ought not to have done, and there was no health in us.
The lady prayed very fervently, but her eyes roved over us all the time,
making sure that we were attending. When she was not looking we grinned and
winked at one another, and whispered bawdy jokes, just to show that we did
not care; but it stuck in our throats a little. No one except the red-nosed
man was self-possessed enough to speak the responses above a whisper. We
got on better with the singing, except that one old tramp knew no tune but
'Onward, Christian soldiers', and reverted to it sometimes, spoiling the
harmony.

The prayers lasted half an hour, and then, after a handshake at the
door, we made off. 'Well,' said somebody as soon as we were out of hearing,
'the trouble's over. I thought them--prayers was never goin' to end.'

'You 'ad your bun,' said another; 'you got to pay for it.'

'Pray for it, you mean. Ah, you don't get much for nothing. They can't
even give you a twopenny cup of tea without you go down on you--knees for
it.'

There were murmurs of agreement. Evidently the tramps were not
grateful for their tea. And yet it was excellent tea, as different from
coffee-shop tea as good Bordeaux is from the muck called colonial claret,
and we were all glad of it. I am sure too that it was given in a good
spirit, without any intention of humiliating us; so in fairness we ought to
have been grateful--still, we were not.




XXVII



AT about a quarter to six the Irishman led me to the spike. It was a
grim, smoky yellow cube of brick, standing in a corner of the workhouse
grounds. With its rows of tiny, barred windows, and a high wall and iron
gates separating it from the road, it looked much like a prison. Already a
long queue of ragged men had formed up, waiting for the gates to open. They
were of all kinds and ages, the youngest a fresh-faced boy of sixteen, the
oldest a doubled-up, toothless mummy of seventy-five. Some were hardened
tramps, recognizable by their sticks and billies and dust-darkened faces;
some were factory hands out of work, some agricultural labourers, one a
clerk in collar and tie, two certainly imbeciles. Seen in the mass,
lounging there, they were a disgusting sight; nothing villainous or
dangerous, but a graceless, mangy crew, nearly all ragged and palpably
underfed. They were friendly, however, and asked no questions. Many offered
me tobacco--cigarette ends, that is.

We leaned against the wall, smoking, and the tramps began to talk
about the spikes they had been in recently. It appeared from what they said
that all spikes are different, each with its peculiar merits and demerits,
and it is important to know these when you are on the road. An old hand
will tell you the peculiarities of every spike in England, as: at A you are
allowed to smoke but there are bugs in the cells; at B the beds are
comfortable but the porter is a bully; at C they let you out early in the
morning but the tea is undrinkable; at D the officials steal your money if
you have any--and so on interminably. There are regular beaten tracks
where the spikes are within a day's march of one another. I was told that
the Barnet-St Albans route is the best, and they warned me to steer clear
of Billericay and Chelmsford, also Ide Hill in Kent. Chelsea was said to be
the most luxurious spike in England; someone, praising it, said that the
blankets there were more like prison than the spike. Tramps go far afield
in summer, and in winter they circle as much as possible round the large
towns, where it is warmer and there is more charity. But they have to keep
moving, for you may not enter any one spike, or any two London spikes, more
than once in a month, on pain of being confined for a week.

Some time after six the gates opened and we began to file in one at a
time. In the yard was an office where an official entered in a ledger our
names and trades and ages, also the places we were coming from and going to
--this last is intended to keep a check on the movements of tramps. I gave
my trade as 'painter'; I had painted water-colours--who has not? The
official also asked us whether we had any money, and every man said no. It
is against the law to enter the spike with more than eightpence, and any
sum less than this one is supposed to hand over at the gate. But as a rule
the tramps prefer to smuggle their money in, tying it tight in a piece of
cloth so that it will not chink. Generally they put it in the bag of tea
and sugar that every tramp carries, or among their 'papers'. The 'papers'
are considered sacred and are never searched.

After registering at the office we were led into the spike by an
official known as the Tramp Major (his job is to supervise casuals, and he
is generally a workhouse pauper) and a great bawling ruffian of a porter in
a blue uniform, who treated us like cattle. The spike consisted simply of a
bathroom and lavatory, and, for the rest, long double rows of stone cells,
perhaps a hundred cells in all. It was a bare, gloomy place of stone and
whitewash, unwillingly clean, with a smell which, somehow, I had foreseen
from its appearance; a smell of soft soap, Jeyes' fluid and latrines--a
cold, discouraging, prisonish smell.

The porter herded us all into the passage, and then told us to come
into the bathroom six at a time, to be searched before bathing. The search
was for money and tobacco, Romton being one of those spikes where you can
smoke once you have smuggled your tobacco in, but it will be confiscated if
it is found on you. The old hands had told us that the porter never
searched below the knee, so before going in we had all hidden our tobacco
in the ankles of our boots. Afterwards, while undressing, we slipped it
into our coats, which we were allowed to keep, to serve as pillows.

The scene in the bathroom was extraordinarily repulsive. Fifty dirty,
stark-naked men elbowing each other in a room twenty feet square, with only
two bathtubs and two slimy roller towels between them all. I shall never
forget the reek of dirty feet. Less than half the tramps actually bathed (I
heard them saying that hot water is 'weakening' to the system), but they
all washed their faces and feet, and the horrid greasy little clouts known
as toe-rags which they bind round their toes. Fresh water was only allowed
for men who were having a complete bath, so many men had to bathe in water
where others had washed their feet. The porter shoved us to and fro, giving
the rough side of his tongue when anyone wasted time. When my turn came for
the bath, I asked if I might swill out the tub, which was streaked with
dirt, before using it. He answered simply, 'Shut yer--mouth and get on
with yer bath!' That set the social tone of the place, and I did not speak
again.

When we had finished bathing, the porter tied our clothes in bundles
and gave us workhouse shirts--grey cotton things of doubtful cleanliness,
like abbreviated nightgowns. We were sent along to the cells at once, and
presently the porter and the Tramp Major brought our supper across from the
workhouse. Each man's ration was a half-pound wedge of bread smeared with
margarine, and a pint of bitter sugarless cocoa in a tin billy. Sitting on
the floor we wolfed this in five minutes, and at about seven o'clock the
cell doors were locked on the outside, to remain locked till eight in the
morning.

Each man was allowed to sleep with his mate, the cells being intended
to hold two men apiece. I had no mate, and was put in with another solitary
man, a thin scrubby-faced fellow with a slight squint. The cell measured
eight feet by five by eight high, was made of stone, and had a tiny barred
window high up in the wall and a spyhole in the door, just like a cell in a
prison. In it were six blankets, a chamber-pot, a hot water pipe, and
nothing else whatever. I looked round the cell with a vague feeling that
there was something missing. Then, with a shock of surprise, I realized
what it was, and exclaimed:

'But I say, damn it, where are the beds?'

'_Beds_?' said the other man, surprised. 'There aren't no beds! What yer
expect? This is one of them spikes where you sleeps on the floor. Christ!
Ain't you got used to that yet?'

It appeared that no beds was quite a normal condition in the spike. We
rolled up our coats and put them against the hot-water pipe, and made
ourselves as comfortable as we could. It grew foully stuffy, but it was not
warm enough to allow of our putting all the blankets underneath, so that we
could only use one to soften the floor. We lay a foot apart, breathing into
one another's face, with our naked limbs constantly touching, and rolling
against one another whenever we fell asleep. One fidgeted from side to
side, but it did not do much good; whichever way one turned there would be
first a dull numb feeling, then a sharp ache as the hardness of the floor
wore through the blanket. One could sleep, but not for more than ten
minutes on end.

About midnight the other man began making homosexual attempts upon me
--a nasty experience in a locked, pitch-dark cell. He was a feeble
creature and I could manage him easily, but of course it was impossible to
go to sleep again. For the rest of the night we stayed awake, smoking and
talking. The man told me the story of his life--he was a fitter, out of
work for three years. He said that his wife had promptly deserted him when
he lost his job, and he had been so long away from women that he had almost
forgotten what they were like. Homosexuality is general among tramps of
long standing, he said.

At eight the porter came along the passage unlocking the doors and
shouting 'All out!' The doors opened, letting out a stale, fetid stink. At
once the passage was full of squalid, grey-shirted figures, each
chamber-pot in hand, scrambling for the bathroom. It appeared that in the
morning only one tub of water was allowed for the lot of us, and when I
arrived twenty tramps had already washed their faces; I took one glance at
the black scum floating on the water, and went unwashed. After this we were
given a breakfast identical with the previous night's supper, our clothes
were returned to us, and we were ordered out into the yard to work. The
work was peeling potatoes for the pauper's dinner, but it was a mere
formality, to keep us occupied until the doctor came to inspect us. Most of
the tramps frankly idled. The doctor turned up at about ten o'clock and we
were told to go back to our cells, strip and wait in the passage for the
inspection.

Naked, and shivering, we lined up in the passage. You cannot conceive
what ruinous, degenerate curs we looked, standing there in the merciless
morning light. A tramp's clothes are bad, but they conceal far worse
things; to see him as he really is, unmitigated, you must see him naked.
Flat feet, pot bellies, hollow chests, sagging muscles--every kind of
physical rottenness was there. Nearly everyone was under-nourished, and
some clearly diseased; two men were wearing trusses, and as for the old
mummy-like creature of seventy-five, one wondered how he could possibly
make his daily march. Looking at our faces, unshaven and creased from the
sleepless night, you would have thought that all of us were recovering from
a week on the drink.

The inspection was designed merely to detect smallpox, and took no
notice of our general condition. A young medical student, smoking a
cigarette, walked rapidly along the line glancing us up and down, and not
inquiring whether any man was well or ill. When my cell companion stripped
I saw that his chest was covered with a red rash, and, having spent the
night a few inches away from him, I fell into a panic about smallpox. The
doctor, however, examined the rash and said that it was due merely to
under-nourishment.

After the inspection we dressed and were sent into the yard, where the
porter called our names over, gave us back any possessions we had left at
the office, and distributed meal tickets. These were worth sixpence each,
and were directed to coffee-shops on the route we had named the night
before. It was interesting to see that quite a number of the tramps could
not read, and had to apply to myself and other 'scholards' to decipher
their tickets.

The gates were opened, and we dispersed immediately. How sweet the air
does smell--even the air of a back street in the suburbs--after the
shut-in, subfaecal stench of the spike! I had a mate now, for while we were
peeling potatoes I had made friends with an Irish tramp named Paddy Jaques,
a melancholy pale man who seemed clean and decent. He was going to Edbury
spike, and suggested that we should go together. We set out, getting there
at three in the afternoon. It was a twelve-mile walk, but we made it
fourteen by getting lost among the desolate north London slums. Our meal
tickets were directed to a coffee-shop in Ilford. When we got there, the
little chit of a serving-maid, having seen our tickets and grasped that we
were tramps, tossed her head in contempt and for a long time would not
serve us. Finally she slapped on the table two 'large teas' and four slices
of bread and dripping--that is, eightpenny-worth of food. It appeared
that the shop habitually cheated the tramps of twopence or so on each
ticket; having tickets instead of money, the tramps could not protest or go
elsewhere.




XXVIII



PADDY was my mate for about the next fortnight, and, as he was the
first tramp I had known at all well, I want to give an account of him. I
believe that he was a typical tramp and there are tens of thousands in
England like him.

He was a tallish man, aged about thirty-five, with fair hair going
grizzled and watery blue eyes. His features were good, but his cheeks had
lanked and had that greyish, dirty in the grain look that comes of a bread
and margarine diet. He was dressed, rather better than most tramps, in a
tweed shooting-jacket and a pair of old evening trousers with the braid
still on them. Evidently the braid figured in his mind as a lingering scrap
of respectability, and he took care to sew it on again when it came loose.
He was careful of his appearance altogether, and carried a razor and
bootbrush that he would not sell, though he had sold his 'papers' and even
his pocket-knife long since. Nevertheless, one would have known him for a
tramp a hundred yards away. There was something in his drifting style of
walk, and the way he had of hunching his shoulders forward, essentially
abject. Seeing him walk, you felt instinctively that he would sooner take a
blow than give one.

He had been brought up in Ireland, served two years in the war, and
then worked in a metal polish factory, where he had lost his job two years
earlier. He was horribly ashamed of being a tramp, but he had picked up all
a tramp's ways. He browsed the pavements unceasingly, never missing a
cigarette end, or even an empty cigarette packet, as he used the tissue
paper for rolling cigarettes. On our way into Edbury he saw a newspaper
parcel on the pavement, pounced on it, and found that it contained two
mutton sandwiches/rather frayed at the edges; these he insisted on my
sharing. He never passed an automatic machine without giving a tug at the
handle, for he said that sometimes they are out of order and will eject
pennies if you tug at them. He had no stomach for crime, however. When we
were in the outskirts of Romton, Paddy noticed a bottle of milk on a
doorstep, evidently left there by mistake. He stopped, eyeing the bottle
hungrily.

'Christ!' he said, 'dere's good food goin' to waste. Somebody could
knock dat bottle off, eh? Knock it off easy.'

I saw that he was thinking of 'knocking it off' himself. He looked up
and down the street; it was a quiet residential street and there was nobody
in sight. Paddy's sickly, chap-fallen face yearned over the milk. Then he
turned away, saying gloomily:

'Best leave it. It don't do a man no good to steal. T'ank God, I ain't
never stolen nothin' yet.'

It was funk, bred of hunger, that kept him virtuous. With only two or
three sound meals in his belly, he would have found courage to steal the
milk.

He had two subjects of conversation, the shame and come-down of being
a tramp, and the best way of getting a free meal. As we drifted through the
streets he would keep up a monologue in this style, in a whimpering,
self-pitying Irish voice:

'It's hell bein' on de road, eh? It breaks yer heart goin' into dem
bloody spikes. But what's a man to do else, eh? I ain't had a good meat
meal for about two months, an' me boots is getting bad, an'--Christ!
How'd it be if we was to try for a cup o' tay at one o' dem convents on de
way to Edbury? Most times dey're good for a cup o' tay. Ah, what'd a man do
widout religion, eh? I've took cups o' tay from de convents, an' de
Baptists, an' de Church of England, an' all sorts. I'm a Catholic meself.
Dat's to say, I ain't been to confession for about seventeen year, but
still I got me religious feelin's, y'understand. An' dem convents is always
good for a cup o' tay ...' etc. etc. He would keep this up all day, almost
without stopping.

His ignorance was limitless and appalling. He once asked me, for
instance, whether Napoleon lived before Jesus Christ or after. Another
time, when I was looking into a bookshop window, he grew very perturbed
because one of the books was called _Of the Imitation of Christ_. He took
this for blasphemy. 'What de hell do dey want to go imitatin' of _Him_ for?'
he demanded angrily. He could read, but he had a kind of loathing for
books. On our way from Romton to Edbury I went into a public library, and,
though Paddy did not want to read, I suggested that he should come in and
rest his legs. But he preferred to wait on the pavement. 'No,' he said, 'de
sight of all dat bloody print makes me sick.'

Like most tramps, he was passionately mean about matches. He had a box
of matches when I met him, but I never saw him strike one, and he used to
lecture me for extravagance when I struck mine. His method was to cadge a
light from strangers, sometimes going without a smoke for half an hour
rather than strike a match.

Self-pity was the clue to his character. The thought of his bad luck
never seemed to leave him for an instant. He would break long silences to
exclaim, apropos of nothing, 'It's hell when yer clo'es begin to go up de
spout, eh?' or 'Dat tay in de spike ain't tay, it's piss,' as though there
was nothing else in the world to think about. And he had a low, worm-like
envy of anyone who was better off--not of the rich, for they were beyond
his social horizon, but of men in work. He pined for work as an artist
pines to be famous. If he saw an old man working he would say bitterly,
'Look at dat old--keepin' able-bodied men out o' work'; or if it was a
boy, 'It's dem young devils what's takin' de bread out of our mouths.' And
all foreigners to him were 'dem bloody dagoes'--for, according to his
theory, foreigners were responsible for unemployment.

He looked at women with a mixture of longing and hatred. Young, pretty
women were too much above him to enter into his ideas, but his mouth
watered at prostitutes. A couple of scarlet-lipped old creatures would go
past; Paddy's face would flush pale pink, and he would turn and stare
hungrily after the women. 'Tarts!' he would murmur, like a boy at a
sweetshop window. He told me once that he had not had to do with a woman
for two years--since he had lost his job, that is--and he had forgotten
that one could aim higher than prostitutes. He had the regular character of
a tramp--abject, envious, a jackal's character.

Nevertheless, he was a good fellow, generous by nature and capable of
sharing his last crust with a friend; indeed he did literally share his
last crust with me more than once. He was probably capable of work too, if
he had been well fed for a few months. But two years of bread and margarine
had lowered his standards hopelessly. He had lived on this filthy imitation
of food till his own mind and body were compounded of inferior stuff. It
was malnutrition and not any native vice that had destroyed his manhood.




XXIX



ON the way to Edbury I told Paddy that I had a friend from whom I
could be sure of getting money, and suggested going straight into London
rather than face another night in the spike. But Paddy had not been in
Edbury spike recently, and, tramp-like, he would not waste a night's free
lodging. We arranged to go into London the next morning. I had only a
halfpenny, but Paddy had two shillings, which would get us a bed each and a
few cups of tea.

The Edbury spike did not differ much from the one at Romton. The worst
feature was that all tobacco was confiscated at the gate, and we were
warned that any man caught smoking would be turned out at once. Under the
Vagrancy Act tramps can be prosecuted for smoking in the spike--in fact,
they can be prosecuted for almost anything; but the authorities generally
save the trouble of a prosecution by turning disobedient men out of doors.
There was no work to do, and the cells were fairly comfortable. We slept
two in a cell, 'one up, one down'--that is, one on a wooden shelf and one
on the floor, with straw palliasses and plenty of blankets, dirty but not
verminous. The food was the same as at Romton, except that we had tea
instead of cocoa. One could get extra tea in the morning, as the Tramp
Major was selling it at a halfpenny a mug, illicitly no doubt. We were each
given a hunk of bread and cheese to take away for our midday meal.

When we got into London we had eight hours to kill before the
lodging-houses opened. It is curious how one does not notice things. I had
been in London innumerable times, and yet till that day I had never noticed
one of the worst things about London--the fact that it costs money even
to sit down. In Paris, if you had no money and could not find a public
bench, you would sit on the pavement. Heaven knows what sitting on the
pavement would lead to in London--prison, probably. By four we had stood
five hours, and our feet seemed red-hot from the hardness of the stones. We
were hungry, having eaten our ration as soon as we left the spike, and I
was out of tobacco--it mattered less to Paddy, who picked up cigarette
ends. We tried two churches and found them locked. Then we tried a public
library, but there were no seats in it. As a last hope Paddy suggested
trying a Rowton House; by the rules they would not let us in before seven,
but we might slip in unnoticed. We walked up to the magnificent doorway
(the Rowton Houses really are magnificent) and very casually, trying to
look like regular lodgers, began to stroll in. Instantly a man lounging in
the doorway, a sharp-faced fellow, evidently in some position of authority,
barred the way.

'You men sleep 'ere last night?'

'No.'

'Then--off.'

We obeyed, and stood two more hours on the street corner. It was
unpleasant, but it taught me not to use the expression 'street corner
loafer', so I gained something from it.

At six we went to a Salvation Army shelter. We could not book beds
till eight and it was not certain that there would be any vacant, but an
official, who called us 'Brother', let us in on the condition that we paid
for two cups of tea. The main hall of the shelter was a great white-washed
barn of a place, oppressively clean and bare, with no fires. Two hundred
decentish, rather subdued-looking people were sitting packed on long wooden
benches. One or two officers in uniform prowled up and down. On the wall
were pictures of General Booth, and notices prohibiting cooking, drinking,
spitting, swearing, quarrelling, and gambling. As a specimen of these
notices, here is one that I copied word for word:


Any man found gambling or playing cards will be expelled and
will not be admitted under any circumstances.

A reward will be given for information leading to the discovery
of such persons.

The officers in charge appeal to all lodgers to assist them in
keeping this hostel free from the DETESTABLE EVIL OF GAMBLING.


'Gambling or playing cards' is a delightful phrase. To my eye these
Salvation Army shelters, though clean, are far drearier than the worst of
the common lodging-houses. There is such a hopelessness about some of the
people there--decent, broken-down types who have pawned their collars but
are still trying for office jobs. Coming to a Salvation Army shelter, where
it is at least clean, is their last clutch at respectability. At the next
table to me were two foreigners, dressed in rags but manifestly gentlemen.
They were playing chess verbally, not even writing down the moves. One of
them was blind, and I heard them say that they had been saving up for a
long time to buy a board, price half a crown, but could never manage it.
Here and there were clerks out of work, pallid and moody. Among a group of
them a tall, thin, deadly pale young man was talking excitedly. He thumped
his fist on the table and boasted in a strange, feverish style. When the
officers were out of hearing he broke out into startling blasphemies:

'I tell you what, boys, I'm going to get that job tomorrow. I'm not
one of your bloody down-on-the-knee brigade; I can look after myself. Look
at that--notice there! "The Lord will provide!" A bloody lot He's ever
provided me with. You don't catch me trusting to the--Lord. You leave it
to me, boys. _I'm going to get that job_,' etc. etc.

I watched him, struck by the wild, agitated way in which he talked; he
seemed hysterical, or perhaps a little drunk. An hour later I went into a
small room, apart from the main hall, which was intended for reading. It
had no books or papers in it, so few of the lodgers went there. As I opened
the door I saw the young clerk in there all alone; he was on his knees,
_praying_. Before I shut the door again I had time to see his face, and it
looked agonized. Quite suddenly I realized, from the expression of his
face, that he was starving.

The charge for beds was eightpence. Paddy and I had fivepence left,
and we spent it at the 'bar', where food was cheap, though not so cheap as
in some common lodging-houses. The tea appeared to be made with tea _dust_,
which I fancy had been given to the Salvation Army in charity, though they
sold it at threehalfpence a cup. It was foul stuff. At ten o'clock an
officer marched round the hall blowing a whistle. Immediately everyone
stood up.

'What's this for?' I said to Paddy, astonished.

'Dat means you has to go off to bed. An' you has to look sharp about
it, too.'

Obediently as sheep, the whole two hundred men trooped off to bed,
under the command of the officers.

The dormitory was a great attic like a barrack room, with sixty or
seventy beds in it. They were clean and tolerably comfortable, but very
narrow and very close together, so that one breathed straight into one's
neighbour's face. Two officers slept in the room, to see that there was no
smoking and no talking after lights-out. Paddy and I had scarcely a wink of
sleep, for there was a man near us who had some nervous trouble, shellshock
perhaps, which made him cry out 'Pip!' at irregular intervals. It was a
loud, startling noise, something like the toot of a small motor-horn. You
never knew when it was coming, and it was a sure preventer of sleep. It
appeared that Pip, as the others called him, slept regularly in the
shelter, and he must have kept ten or twenty people awake every night. He
was an example of the kind of thing that prevents one from ever getting
enough sleep when men are herded as they are in these lodging-houses.

At seven another whistle blew, and the officers went round shaking
those who did not get up at once. Since then I have slept in a number of
Salvation Army shelters, and found that, though the different houses vary a
little, this semi-military discipline is the same in all of them. They are
certainly cheap, but they are too like workhouses for my taste. In some of
them there is even a compulsory religious service once or twice a week,
which the lodgers must attend or leave the house. The fact is that the
Salvation Army are so in the habit of thinking themselves a charitable body
that they cannot even run a lodging-house without making it stink of
charity.

At ten I went to B.'s office and asked him to lend me a pound. He gave
me two pounds and told me to come again when necessary, so that Paddy and I
were free of money troubles for a week at least. We loitered the day in
Trafalgar Square, looking for a friend of Paddy's who never turned up, and
at night went to a lodging-house in a back alley near the Strand. The
charge was elevenpence, but it was a dark, evil-smelling place, and a
notorious haunt of the 'nancy boys'. Downstairs, in the murky kitchen,
three ambiguous-looking youths in smartish blue suits were sitting on a
bench apart, ignored by the other lodgers. I suppose they were 'nancy
boys'. They looked the same type as the apache boys one sees in Paris,
except that they wore no side-whiskers. In front of the fire a fully
dressed man and a stark-naked man were bargaining. They were newspaper
sellers. The dressed man was selling his clothes to the naked man. He said:

''Ere y'are, the best rig-out you ever 'ad. A tosheroon [half a crown]
for the coat, two 'ogs for the trousers, one and a tanner for the boots,
and a 'og for the cap and scarf. That's seven bob.'

'You got a 'ope! I'll give yer one and a tanner for the coat, a 'og
for the trousers, and two 'ogs for the rest. That's four and a tanner.'

'Take the 'ole lot for five and a tanner, chum.'

'Right y'are, off with 'em. I got to get out to sell my late edition.'

The clothed man stripped, and in three minutes their positions were
reversed; the naked man dressed, and the other kilted with a sheet of the
_Daily Mail_.

The dormitory was dark and close, with fifteen beds in it. There was a
horrible hot reek of urine, so beastly that at first one tried to breathe
in small, shallow puffs, not filling one's lungs to the bottom. As I lay
down in bed a man loomed out of the darkness, leant over me and began
babbling in an educated, half-drunken voice:

'An old public schoolboy, what? [He had heard me say something to
Paddy.] Don't meet many of the old school here. I am an old Etonian. You
know--twenty years hence this weather and all that.' He began to quaver
out the Eton boating-song, not untunefully:


    Jolly boating weather,
    And a hay harvest--


'Stop that--noise!' shouted several lodgers.

'Low types,' said the old Etonian, 'very low types. Funny sort of
place for you and me, eh? Do you know what my friends say to me? They say,
"M--, you are past redemption." Quite true, I _am_ past redemption. I've come
down in the world; not like these ----s here, who couldn't come down if they
tried. We chaps who have come down ought to hang together a bit. Youth will
be still in our faces--you know. May I offer you a drink?'

He produced a bottle of cherry brandy, and at the same moment lost his
balance and fell heavily across my legs. Paddy, who was undressing, pulled
him upright.

'Get back to yer bed, you silly ole--!'

The old Etonian walked unsteadily to his bed and crawled under the
sheets with all his clothes on, even his boots. Several times in the night
I heard him murmuring, 'M--, you are past redemption,' as though the phrase
appealed to him. In the morning he was lying asleep fully dressed, with the
bottle clasped in his arms. He was a man of about fifty, with a refined,
worn face, and, curiously enough, quite fashionably dressed. It was queer
to see his good patent-leather shoes sticking out of that filthy bed. It
occurred to me, too, that the cherry brandy must have cost the equivalent
of a fortnight's lodging, so he could not have been seriously hard up.
Perhaps he frequented common lodging-houses in search of the 'nancy boys'.

The beds were not more than two feet apart. About midnight I woke up
to find that the man next to me was trying to steal the money from beneath
my pillow. He was pretending to be asleep while he did it, sliding his hand
under the pillow as gently as a rat. In the morning I saw that he was a
hunchback, with long, apelike arms. I told Paddy about the attempted theft.
He laughed and said:

'Christ! You got to get used to dat. Desc lodgin' houses is full o'
thieves. In some houses dere's nothin' safe but to sleep wid all yer clo'es
on. I seen 'em steal a wooden leg off a cripple before now. Once I see a
man--fourteen-stone man he was--come into a lodgin'-house wid four
pound ten. He puts it under his mattress. "Now," he says, "any--dat
touches dat money does it over my body," he says. But dey done him all de
same. In de mornin' he woke up on de floor. Four fellers had took his
mattress by de corners an' lifted him off as light as a feather. He never
saw his four pound ten again.'




XXX



THE next morning we began looking once more for Paddy's friend, who
was called Bozo, and was a screever--that is, a pavement artist.
Addresses did not exist in Paddy's world, but he had a vague idea that Bozo
might be found in Lambeth, and in the end we ran across him on the
Embankment, where he had established himself not far from Waterloo Bridge.
He was kneeling on the pavement with a box of chalks, copying a sketch of
Winston Churchill from a penny note-book. The likeness was not at all bad.
Bozo was a small, dark, hook-nosed man, with curly hair growing low on his
head. His right leg was dreadfully deformed, the foot being twisted heel
forward in a way horrible to see. From his appearance one could have taken
him for a Jew, but he used to deny this vigorously. He spoke of his
hooknose as 'Roman', and was proud of his resemblance to some Roman Emperor
--it was Vespasian, I think.

Bozo had a strange way of talking, Cockneyfied and yet very lucid and
expressive. It was as though he had read good books but had never troubled
to correct Us grammar. For a while Paddy and I stayed on the Embankment,
talking, and Bozo gave us an account of the screeving trade. I repeat what
he said more or less in his own words.

'I'm what they call a serious screever. I don't draw in blackboard
chalks like these others, I use proper colours the same as what painters
use; bloody expensive they are, especially the reds. I use five bobs' worth
of colours in a long day, and never less than two bobs' worth*. Cartoons
is my line--you know, politics and cricket and that. Look here'--he
showed me his notebook--'here's likenesses of all the political blokes,
what I've copied from the papers. I have a different cartoon every day. For
instance, when the Budget was on I had one of Winston trying to push an
elephant marked "Debt", and underneath I wrote, "Will he budge it?" See?
You can have cartoons about any of the parties, but you mustn't put
anything in favour of Socialism, because the police won't stand it. Once I
did a cartoon of a boa constrictor marked Capital swallowing a rabbit
marked Labour. The copper came along and saw it, and he says, "You rub that
out, and look sharp about it," he says. I had to rub it out. The copper's
got the right to move you on for loitering, and it's no good giving them a
back answer.'

[* Pavement artists buy their colours in the form of powder,
and work them into cakes in condensed milk]

I asked Bozo what one could earn at screeving. He said:

'This time of year, when it don't rain, I take about three quid
between Friday and Sunday--people get their wages Fridays, you see. I
can't work when it rains; the colours get washed off straight away. Take
the year round, I make about a pound a week, because you can't do much in
the winter. Boat Race day, and Cup Final day, I've took as much as four
pounds. But you have to _cut_ it out of them, you know; you don't take a bob
if you just sit and look at them. A halfpenny's the usual drop [gift], and
you don't get even that unless you give them a bit of backchat. Once
they've answered you they feel ashamed not to give you a drop. The best
thing's to keep changing your picture, because when they see you drawing
they'll stop and watch you. The trouble is, the beggars scatter as soon as
you turn round with the hat. You really want a nobber [assistant] at this
game. You keep at work and get a crowd watching you, and the nobber comes
casual-like round the back of them. They don't know he's the nobber. Then
suddenly he pulls his cap off, and you got them between two fires like.
You'll never get a drop off real toffs. It's shabby sort of blokes you get
most off, and foreigners. I've had even sixpences off Japs, and blackies,
and that. They're not so bloody mean as what an Englishman is. Another
thing to remember is to keep your money covered up, except perhaps a penny
in the hat. People won't give you anything if they see you got a bob or two
already.'

Bozo had the deepest contempt for the other screevers on the
Embankment. He called them 'the salmon platers'. At that time there was a
screever almost every twenty-five yards along the Embankment--twenty-five
yards being the recognized minimum between pitches. Bozo contemptuously
pointed out an old white-bearded screever fifty yards away.

'You see that silly old fool? He's bin doing the same picture every
day for ten years. "A faithful friend" he calls it. It's of a dog pulling a
child out of the water. The silly old bastard can't draw any better than a
child of ten. He's learned just that one picture by rule of thumb, like you
learn to put a puzzle together. There's a lot of that sort about here. They
come pinching my ideas sometimes; but I don't care; the silly ----s can't
think of anything for themselves, so I'm always ahead of them. The whole
thing with cartoons is being up to date. Once a child got its head stuck in
the railings of Chelsea Bridge. Well, I heard about it, and my cartoon was
on the pavement before they'd got the child's head out of the railings.
Prompt, I am.'

Bozo seemed an interesting man, and I was anxious to see more of him.
That evening I went down to the Embankment to meet him, as he had arranged
to take Paddy and myself to a lodging-house south of the river. Bozo washed
his pictures off the pavement and counted his takings--it was about
sixteen shillings, of which he said twelve or thirteen would be profit. We
walked down into Lambeth. Bozo limped slowly, with a queer crablike gait,
half sideways, dragging his smashed foot behind him. He carried a stick in
each hand and slung his box of colours over his shoulder. As we were
crossing the bridge he stopped in one of the alcoves to rest. He fell
silent for a minute or two, and to my surprise I saw that he was looking at
the stars. He touched my arm and pointed to the sky with his stick.

'Say, will you look at Aldebaran! Look at the colour. Like a--great
blood orange!'

From the way he spoke he might have been an art critic in a picture
gallery. I was astonished. I confessed that I did not know which Aldebaran
was--indeed, I had never even noticed that the stars were of different
colours. Bozo began to give me some elementary hints on astronomy, pointing
out-the chief constellations. He seemed concerned at my ignorance. I said
to him, surprised:

'You seem to know a lot about stars.'

'Not a great lot. I know a bit, though. I got two letters from the
Astronomer Royal thanking me for writing about meteors. Now and again I go
out at night and watch for meteors. The stars are a free show; it don't
cost anything to use your eyes.'

'What a good idea! I should never have thought of it.'

'Well, you got to take an interest in something. It don't follow that
because a man's on the road he can't think of anything but
tea-and-two-slices.'

'But isn't it very hard to take an interest in things--things like
stars--living this life?'

'Screeving, you mean? Not necessarily. It don't need turn you into a
bloody rabbit--that is, not if you set your mind to it.'

'It seems to have that effect on most people.'

'Of course. Look at Paddy--a tea-swilling old moocher, only fit to
scrounge for fag-ends. That's the way most of them go. I despise them. But
you don't _need_ to get like that. If you've got any education, it don't
matter to you if you're on the road for the rest of your life.'

'Well, I've found just the contrary,' I said. 'It seems to me that
when you take a man's money away he's fit for nothing from that moment.'

'No, not necessarily. If you set yourself to it, you can live the same
life, rich or poor. You can still keep on with your books and your ideas.
You just got to say to yourself, "I'm a free man in _here_"'--he tapped his
forehead--'and you're all right.'

Bozo talked further in the same strain, and I listened with attention.
He seemed a very unusual screever, and he was, moreover, the first person I
had heard maintain that poverty did not matter. I saw a good deal of him
during the next few days, for several times it rained and he could not
work. He told me the history of his life, and it was a curious one.

The son of a bankrupt bookseller, he had gone to work as a
house-painter at eighteen, and then served three years in France and India
during the war. After the war he had found a house-painting job in Paris,
and had stayed there several years. France suited him better than England
(he despised the English), and he had been doing well in Paris, saving
money, and engaged to a French girl. One day the girl was crushed to death
under the wheels of an omnibus. Bozo went on the drink for a week, and then
returned to work, rather shaky; the same morning he fell from a stage on
which he was working, forty feet on to the pavement, and smashed his right
foot to pulp. For some reason he received only sixty pounds compensation.
He returned to England, spent his money in looking for jobs, tried hawking
books in Middlesex Street market, then tried selling toys from a tray, and
finally settled down as a screever. He had lived hand to mouth ever since,
half starved throughout the winter, and often sleeping in the spike or on
the Embankment.

When I knew him he owned nothing but the clothes he stood up in, and
his drawing materials and a few books. The clothes were the usual beggar's
rags, but he wore a collar and tie, of which he was rather proud. The
collar, a year or more old, was constantly 'going' round the neck, and Bozo
used to patch it with bits cut from the tail of his shirt so that the shirt
had scarcely any tail left. His damaged leg was getting worse and would
probably have to be amputated, and his knees, from kneeling on the stones,
had pads of skin on them as thick as boot-soles. There was, clearly, no
future for him but beggary and a death in the workhouse.

With all this, he had neither fear, nor regret, nor shame, nor
self-pity. He had faced his position, and made a philosophy for himself.
Being a beggar, he said, was not his fault, and he refused either to have
any compunction about it or to let it trouble him. He was the enemy of
society, and quite ready to take to crime if he saw a good opportunity. He
refused on principle to be thrifty. In the summer he saved nothing,
spending his surplus earnings on drink, as he did not care about women. If
he was penniless when winter came on, then society must look after him. He
was ready to extract every penny he could from charity, provided that he
was not expected to say thank you for it. He avoided religious charities,
however, for he said it stuck in his throat to sing hymns for buns. He had
various other points of honour; for instance, it was his boast that never
in his life, even when starving, had he picked up a cigarette end. He
considered himself in a class above the ordinary run of beggars, who, he
said, were an abject lot, without even the decency to be ungrateful.

He spoke French passably, and had read some of Zola's novels, all
Shakespeare's plays, _Gulliver's Travels_, and a number of essays. He could
describe his adventures in words that one remembered. For instance,
speaking of funerals, he said to me:

'Have you-ever seen a corpse burned? I have, in India. They put the
old chap on the fire, and the next moment I almost jumped out of my skin,
because he'd started kicking. It was only his muscles contracting in the
heat--still, it give me a turn. Well, he wriggled about for a bit like a
kipper on hot coals, and then his belly blew up and went off with a bang
you could have heard fifty yards away. It fair put me against cremation.'

Or, again, apropos of his accident:

'The doctor says to me, "You fell on one foot, my man. And bloody
lucky for you you didn't fall on both feet," he says. "Because if you had
of fallen on both feet you'd have shut up like a bloody concertina, and
your thigh bones'd be sticking out of your ears!"'

Clearly the phrase was not the doctor's but Bozo's own. He had a gift
for phrases. He had managed to keep his brain intact and alert, and so
nothing could make him succumb to poverty. He might be ragged and cold, or
even starving, but so long as he could read, think, and watch for meteors,
he was, as he said, free in his own mind.

He was an embittered atheist (the sort of atheist who does not so much
disbelieve in God as personally dislike Him), and took a sort of pleasure
in thinking that human affairs would never improve. Sometimes, he said,
when sleeping on the Embankment, it had consoled him to look up at Mars or
Jupiter and think that there were probably Embankment sleepers there. He
had a curious theory about this. Life on earth, he said, is harsh because
the planet is poor in the necessities of existence. Mars, with its cold
climate and scanty water, must be far poorer, and life correspondingly
harsher. Whereas on earth you are merely imprisoned for stealing sixpence,
on Mars you are probably boiled alive. This thought cheered Bozo, I do not
know why. He was a very exceptional man.




XXXI



THE charge at Bozo's lodging-house was ninepence a night. It was a
large, crowded place, with accommodation for five hundred men, and a
well-known rendezvous of tramps, beggars, and petty criminals. All races,
even black and white, mixed in it on terms of equality. There were Indians
there, and when I spoke to one of them in bad Urdu he addressed me as
'turn'--a thing to make one shudder, if it had been in India. We had got
below the range of colour prejudice. One had glimpses of curious lives. Old
'Grandpa', a tramp of seventy who made his living, or a great part of it,
by collecting cigarette ends and selling the tobacco at threepence an
ounce. 'The Doctor'--he was a real doctor, who had been struck off the
register for some offence, and besides selling newspapers gave medical
advice at a few pence a time. A little Chittagonian lascar, barefoot and
starving, who had deserted his ship and wandered for days through London,
so vague and helpless that he did not even know the name of the city he was
in--he thought it was Liverpool, until I told him. A begging-letter
writer, a friend of Bozo's, who wrote pathetic appeals for aid to pay for
his wife's funeral, and, when a letter had taken effect, blew himself out
with huge solitary gorges of bread and margarine. He was a nasty,
hyena-like creature. I talked to him and found that, like most swindlers,
he believed a great part of his own lies. The lodging-house was an Alsatia
for types like these.

While I was with Bozo he taught me something about the technique of
London begging. There is more in it than one might suppose. Beggars vary
greatly, and there is a sharp social line between those who merely cadge
and those who attempt to give some value for money. The amounts that one
can earn by the different 'gags' also vary. The stories in the Sunday
papers about beggars who die with two thousand pounds sewn into their
trousers are, of course, lies; but the better-class beggars do have runs of
luck, when they earn a living wage for weeks at a time. The most prosperous
beggars are street acrobats and street photographers. On a good pitch--a
theatre queue, for instance--a street acrobat will often earn five pounds
a week. Street photographers can earn about the same, but they are
dependent on fine weather. They have a cunning dodge to stimulate trade.
When they see a likely victim approaching one of them runs behind the
camera and pretends to take a photograph. Then as the victim reaches them,
they exclaim:

'There y'are, sir, took yer photo lovely. That'll be a bob.'

'But I never asked you to take it,' protests the victim.

'What, you didn't want it took? Why, we thought you signalled with
your 'and. Well, there's a plate wasted! That's cost us sixpence, that
'as.'

At this the victim usually takes pity and says he will have the photo
after all. The photographers examine the plate and say that it is spoiled,
and that they will take a fresh one free of charge. Of course, they have
not really taken the first photo; and so, if the victim refuses, they waste
nothing.

Organ-grinders, like acrobats, are considered artists rather than
beggars. An organ-grinder named Shorty, a friend of Bozo's, told me all
about his trade. He and his mate 'worked' the coffee-shops and
public-houses round Whitechapel and the Commercial Road. It is a mistake to
think that organ-grinders earn their living in the street; nine-tenths of
their money is taken in coffee-shops and pubs--only the cheap pubs, for
they are not allowed into the good-class ones. Shorty's procedure was to
stop outside a pub and play one tune, after which his mate, who had a
wooden leg and could excite compassion, went in and passed round the hat.
It was a point of honour with Shorty always to play another tune after
receiving the 'drop'--an encore, as it were; the idea being that he was a
genuine entertainer and not merely paid to go away. He and his mate took
two or three pounds a week between them, but, as they had to pay fifteen
shillings a week for the hire of the organ, they only averaged a pound a
week each. They were on the streets from eight in the morning till ten at
night, and later on Saturdays.

Screevers can sometimes be called artists, sometimes not. Bozo
introduced me to one who was a 'real' artist--that is, he had studied art
in Paris and submitted pictures to the Salon in his day. His line was
copies of Old Masters, which he did marvellously, considering that he was
drawing on stone. He told me how he began as a screever:

'My wife and kids Were starving. I was walking home late at night,
with a lot of drawings I'd been taking round the dealers, and wondering how
the devil to raise a bob or two. Then, in the Strand, I saw a fellow
kneeling on the pavement drawing, and people giving him pennies. As I came
past he got up and went into a pub. "Damn it," I thought, "if he can make
money at that, so can I." So on the impulse I knelt down and began drawing
with his chalks. Heaven knows how I came to do it; I must have been
lightheaded with hunger. The curious thing was that I'd never used pastels
before; I had to learn the technique as I went along. Well, people began to
stop and say that my drawing wasn't bad, arid they gave me ninepence
between them. At this moment the other fellow came out of the pub. "What in
--are you doing on my pitch?" he said. I explained that I was hungry and
had to earn something. "Oh," said he, "come and have a pint with me." So I
had a pint, and since that day I've been a screever. I make a pound a week.
You can't keep six kids on a pound a week, but luckily my wife earns a bit
taking in sewing.

'The worst thing in this life is the cold, and the next worst is the
interference you have to put up with. At first, not knowing any better, I
used sometimes to copy a nude on the pavement. The first I did was outside
St Martin's-in-the-Fields church. A fellow in black--I suppose he was a
churchwarden or something--came out in a tearing rage. "Do you think we
can have that obscenity outside God's holy house?" he cried. So I had to
wash it out. It was a copy of Botticelli's Venus. Another time I copied the
same picture on the Embankment. A policeman passing looked at it, and then,
without a word, walked on to it and rubbed it out with his great flat
feet.'

Bozo told the same tale of police interference. At the time when I was
with him there had been a case of 'immoral conduct' in Hyde Park, in which
the police had behaved rather badly. Bozo produced a cartoon of Hyde Park
with policemen concealed in the trees, and the legend, 'Puzzle, find the
policemen.' I pointed out to him how much more telling it would be to put,
'Puzzle, find the immoral conduct,' but Bozo would not hear of it. He said
that any policeman who saw it would move him on, and he would lose his
pitch for good.

Below screevers come the people who sing hymns, or sell matches, or
bootlaces, or envelopes containing a few grains of lavender--called,
euphemistically, perfume. All these people are frankly beggars, exploiting
an appearance of misery, and none of them takes on an average more than
half a crown a day. The reason why they have to pretend to sell matches and
so forth instead of begging outright is that this is demanded by the absurd
English laws about begging. As the law now stands, if you approach a
stranger and ask him for twopence, he can call a policeman and get you
seven days for begging. But if you make the air hideous by droning 'Nearer,
my God, to Thee,' or scrawl some chalk daubs on the pavement, or stand
about with a tray of matches--in short, if you make a nuisance of
yourself--you are held to be following a legitimate trade and not
begging. Match-selling and street-singing are simply legalized crimes. Not
profitable crimes, however; there is not a singer or match-seller in London
who can be sure of 50 pounds a year--a poor return for standing eighty-four
hours a week on the kerb, with the cars grazing your backside.

It is worth saying something about the social position of beggars, for
when one has consorted with them, and found that they are ordinary human
beings, one cannot help being struck by the curious attitude that society
takes towards them. People seem to feel that there is some essential
difference between beggars and ordinary 'working' men. They are a race
apart--outcasts, like criminals and prostitutes. Working men 'work',
beggars do not 'work'; they are parasites, worthless in their very nature.
It is taken for granted that a beggar does not 'earn' his living, as a
bricklayer or a literary critic 'earns' his. He is a mere social
excrescence, tolerated because we live in a humane age, but essentially
despicable.

Yet if one looks closely one sees that there is no _essential_
difference between a beggar's livelihood and that of numberless respectable
people. Beggars do not work, it is said; but, then, what is _work_? A navvy
works by swinging a pick. An accountant works by adding up figures. A
beggar works by standing out of doors in all weathers and getting varicose
veins, chronic bronchitis, etc. It is a trade like any other; quite
useless, of course--but, then, many reputable trades are quite useless.
And as a social type a beggar compares well with scores of others. He is
honest compared with the sellers of most patent medicines, high-minded
compared with a Sunday newspaper proprietor, amiable compared with a
hire-purchase tout--in short, a parasite, but a fairly harmless parasite.
He seldom extracts more than a bare living from the community, and, what
should justify him according to our ethical ideas, he pays for it over and
over in suffering. I do not think there is anything about a beggar that
sets him in a different class from other people, or gives most modern men
the right to despise him.

Then the question arises, Why are beggars despised?--for they are
despised, universally. I believe it is for the simple reason that they fail
to earn a decent living. In practice nobody cares whether work is useful or
useless, productive or parasitic; the sole thing demanded is that it shall
be profitable. In all the modern talk about energy, efficiency, social
service and the rest of it, what meaning is there except 'Get money, get it
legally, and get a lot of it'? Money has become the grand test of virtue.
By this test beggars fail, and for this they are despised. If one could
earn even ten pounds a week at begging, it would become a respectable
profession immediately. A beggar, looked at realistically, is simply a
businessman, getting his living, like other businessmen, in the way that
comes to hand. He has not, more than most modern people, sold his honour; he
has merely made the mistake of choosing a trade at which it is impossible
to grow rich.




XXXII



I WANT to put in some notes, as short as possible, on London slang and
swearing. These (omitting the ones that everyone knows) are some of the
cant words now used in London:

A gagger--beggar or street performer of any kind. A moocher--one
who begs outright, without pretence of doing a trade. A nobbier--one who
collects pennies for a beggar. A chanter--a street singer. A clodhopper
--a street dancer. A mugfaker--a street photographer. A glimmer--one
who watches vacant motor-cars. A gee (or jee--it is pronounced jee)--
the accomplice of a cheapjack, who stimulates trade by pretending to buy
something. A split--a detective. A flattie--a policeman. A dideki--a
gypsy. A toby--a tramp.

A drop--money given to a beggar. Funkum--lavender or other perfume
sold in envelopes. A boozer--a public-house. A slang--a hawker's
licence. A kip--a place to sleep in, or a night's lodging. Smoke--
London. A judy--a woman. The spike--the casual ward. The lump--the
casual ward. A tosheroon--a half-crown. A deaner--a shilling. A hog--
a shilling. A sprowsie--a sixpence. Clods--coppers. A drum--a billy
can. Shackles--soup. A chat--a louse. Hard-up--tobacco made from
cigarette ends. A stick or cane--a burglar's jemmy. A peter--a safe. A
bly--a burglar's oxy-acetylene blow-lamp.

To bawl--to suck or swallow. To knock off--to steal. To skipper--to sleep
in the open.

About half of these words are in the larger dictionaries. It is
interesting to guess at the derivation of some of them, though one or two
--for instance, 'funkum' and 'tosheroon'--are beyond guessing. 'Deaner'
presumably comes from 'denier'. 'Glimmer' (with the verb 'to glim') may
have something to do with the old word 'glim', meaning a light, or another
old word 'glim', meaning a glimpse; but it is an instance of the formation
of new words, for in its present sense it can hardly be older than
motor-cars. 'Gee' is a curious word; conceivably it has arisen out of
'gee', meaning horse, in the sense of stalking horse. The derivation of
'screever' is mysterious. It must come ultimately from _scribo_, but there
has been no similar word in English for the past hundred and fifty years;
nor can it have come directly from the French, for pavement artists are
unknown in France. 'Judy' and 'bawl' are East End words, not found west of
Tower Bridge. 'Smoke' is a word used only by tramps. 'Kip' is Danish. Till
quite recently the word 'doss' was used in this sense, but it is now quite
obsolete.

London slang and dialect seem to change very rapidly. The old London
accent described by Dickens and Surtees, with v for w and w for v and so
forth, has now vanished utterly. The Cockney accent as we know it seems to
have come up in the 'forties (it is first mentioned in an American book,
Herman Melville's _White Jacket_), and Cockney is already changing; there are
few people now who say 'fice' for 'face', 'nawce' for 'nice' and so forth
as consistently as they did twenty years ago. The slang changes together
with the accent. Twenty-five or thirty years ago, for instance, the
'rhyming slang' was all the rage in London. In the 'rhyming slang'
everything was named by something rhyming with it--a 'hit or miss' for a
kiss, 'plates of meat' for feet, etc. It was so common that it was even
reproduced in novels; now it is almost extinct*. Perhaps all the words I
have mentioned above will have vanished in another twenty years.

[* It survives in certain abbreviations, such as 'use your twopenny' or
'use your head.' 'Twopenny' is arrived at like this: head--loaf of
bread--twopenny loaf--twopenny]

The swear words also change--or, at any rate, they are subject to
fashions. For example, twenty years ago the London working classes
habitually used the word 'bloody'. Now they have abandoned it utterly,
though novelists still represent them as using it. No born Londoner (it is
different with people of Scotch or Irish origin) now says 'bloody', unless
he is a man of some education. The word has, in fact, moved up in the
social scale and ceased to be a swear word for the purposes of the working
classes. The current London adjective, now tacked on to every noun, is
----. No doubt in time ----, like 'bloody', will find its way into the
drawing-room and be replaced by some other word.

The whole business of swearing, especially English swearing, is
mysterious. Of its very nature swearing is as irrational as magic--
indeed, it is a species of magic. But there is also a paradox about it,
namely this: Our intention in swearing is to shock and wound, which we do
by mentioning something that should be kept secret--usually something to
do with the sexual functions. But the strange thing is that when a word is
well established as a swear word, it seems to lose its original meaning;
that is, it loses the thing that made it into a swear word. A word becomes
an oath because it means a certain thing, and, because it has become an
oath, it ceases to mean that thing. For example--. The Londoners do not
now use, or very seldom use, this word in its original meaning; it is on
their lips from morning till night, but it is a mere expletive and means
nothing. Similarly with--, which is rapidly losing its original sense. One
can think of similar instances in French--for example--, which is now a
quite meaningless expletive.

The word--, also, is still used occasionally in Paris, but the people
who use it, or most of them, have no idea of what it once meant. The rule
seems to be that words accepted as swear words have some magical character,
which sets them apart and makes them useless for ordinary conversation.

Words used as insults seem to be governed by the same paradox as swear
words. A word becomes an insult, one would suppose, because it means
something bad; but in practice its insult-value has little to do with its
actual meaning. For example, the most bitter insult one can offer to a
Londoner is 'bastard'--which, taken for what it means, is hardly an
insult at all. And the worst insult to a woman, either in London or Paris,
is 'cow'; a name which might even be a compliment, for cows are among the
most likeable of animals. Evidently a word is an insult simply because it
is meant as an insult, without reference to its dictionary meaning; words,
especially swear words, being what public opinion chooses to make them. In
this connexion it is interesting to see how a swear word can change
character by crossing a frontier. In England you can print '_Je m'en fous_'
without protest from anybody. In France you have to print it '_Je m'en f--_'.
Or, as another example, take the word 'barnshoot'--a corruption of the
Hindustani word _bahinchut_. A vile and unforgivable insult in India, this
word is a piece of gentle badinage in England. I have even seen it in a
school text-book; it was in one of Aristophanes' plays, and the annotator
suggested it as a rendering of some gibberish spoken by a Persian
ambassador. Presumably the annotator knew what _bahinchut_ meant. But,
because it was a foreign word, it had lost its magical swear-word quality
and could be printed.

One other thing is noticeable about swearing in London, and that is
that the men do not usually swear in front of the women. In Paris it is
quite different. A Parisian workman may prefer to suppress an oath in front
of a woman, but he is not at all scrupulous about it, and the women
themselves swear freely. The Londoners are more polite, or more squeamish,
in this matter.

These are a few notes that I have set down more or less at random. It
is a pity that someone capable of dealing with the subject does not keep a
year-book of London slang and swearing, registering the changes accurately.
It might throw useful light upon the formation, development, and
obsolescence of words.




XXXIII



THE two pounds that B. had given me lasted about ten days. That it
lasted so long was due to Paddy, who had learned parsimony on the road and
considered even one sound meal a day a wild extravagance. Food, to him, had
come to mean simply bread and margarine--the eternal tea-and-two-slices,
which will cheat hunger for an hour or two. He taught me how to live, food,
bed, tobacco, and all, at the rate of half a crown a day. And he managed to
earn a few extra shillings by 'glimming' in the evenings. It was a
precarious job, because illegal, but it brought in a little and eked out
our money.

One morning we tried for a job as sandwich men. We went at five to an
alley-way behind some offices, but there was already a queue of thirty or
forty men waiting, and after two hours we were told that there was no work
for us. We had not missed much, for sandwich men have an unenviable job.
They are paid about three shillings a day for ten hours' work--it is hard
work, especially in windy weather, and there is no skulking, for an
inspector comes round frequently to see that the men are on their beat. To
add to their troubles, they are only engaged by the day, or sometimes for
three days, never weekly, so that they have to wait hours for their job
every morning. The number of unemployed men who are ready to do the work
makes them powerless to fight for better treatment. The job all sandwich
men covet is distributing handbills, which is paid for at the same rate.
When you see a man distributing handbills you can do him a good turn by
taking one, for he goes off duty when he has distributed all his bills.

Meanwhile we went on with the lodging-house life--a squalid,
eventless life of crushing boredom. For days together there was nothing to
do but sit in the underground kitchen, reading yesterday's newspaper, or,
when one could get hold of it, a back number of the _Union Jack_. It rained a
great deal at this time, and everyone who came in Steamed, so that the
kitchen stank horribly. One's only excitement was the periodical
tea-and-two-slices. I do not know how many men are living this life in
London--it must be thousands at the least. As to Paddy, it was actually
the best life he had known for two years past. His interludes from
tramping, the times when he had somehow laid hands on a few shillings, had
all been like this; the tramping itself had been slightly worse. Listening
to his whimpering voice--he was always whimpering when he was not eating
--one realized what torture unemployment must be to him. People are wrong
when they think that an unemployed man only worries about losing his wages;
on the contrary, an illiterate man, with the work habit in his bones, needs
work even more than he needs money. An educated man can put up with
enforced idleness, which is one of the worst evils of poverty. But a man
like Paddy, with no means of filling up time, is as miserable out of work
as a dog on the chain. That is why it is such nonsense to pretend that
those who have 'come down in the world' are to be pitied above all others.
The man who really merits pity is the man who has been down from the start,
and faces poverty with a blank, resourceless mind.

It was a dull rime, and little of it stays in my mind, except for
talks with Bozo. Once the lodging-house was invaded by a slumming-party.
Paddy and I had been out, and, coming back in the afternoon, we heard
sounds of music downstairs. We went down to find three gentle-people,
sleekly dressed, holding a religious service in our kitchen. They Were a
grave and reverend seignior in a frock coat, a lady sitting at a portable
harmonium, and a chinless youth toying with a crucifix. It appeared that
they had marched in and started to hold the service, without any kind of
invitation whatever.

It was a pleasure to see how the lodgers met this intrusion. They did
not offer the smallest rudeness to the slummers; they just ignored them. By
common consent everyone in the kitchen--a hundred men, perhaps--behaved
as though the slummers had not existed. There they stood patiently singing
and exhorting, and no more notice was taken of them than if they had been
earwigs. The gentleman in the frock coat preached a sermon, but not a word
of it was audible; it was drowned in the usual din of songs, oaths, and the
clattering of pans. Men sat at their meals and card games three feet away
from the harmonium, peaceably ignoring it. Presently the slummers gave it
up and cleared out, not insulted in any way, but merely disregarded. No
doubt they consoled themselves by thinking how brave they had been, 'freely
venturing into the lowest dens,' etc. etc.

Bozo said that these people came to the lodging-house several times a
month. They had influence with the police, and the 'deputy' could not
exclude them. It is curious how people take it for granted that they have a
right to preach at you and pray over you as soon as your income falls below
a certain level.

After nine days B.'s two pounds was reduced to one and ninepence.
Paddy and I set aside eighteenpence for our beds, and spent threepence on
the usual tea-and-two-slices, which we shared--an appetizer rather than a
meal. By the afternoon we were damnably hungry and Paddy remembered a
church near King's Cross Station where a free tea was given once a week to
tramps. This was the day, and we decided to go there. Bozo, though it was
rainy weather and he was almost penniless, would not come, saying that
churches were not his style.

Outside the church quite a hundred men were waiting, dirty types who
had gathered from far and wide at the news of a free tea, like kites round
a dead buffalo. Presently the doors opened and a clergyman and some girls
shepherded us into a gallery at the top of the church. It was an
evangelical church, gaunt and wilfully ugly, with texts about blood and
fire blazoned on the walls, and a hymn-book containing twelve hundred and
fifty-one hymns; reading some of the hymns, I concluded that the book would
do as it stood for an anthology of bad verse. There was to be a service
after the tea, and the regular congregation were sitting in the well of the
church below. It was a week-day, and there were only a few dozen of them,
mostly stringy old women who reminded one of boiling-fowls. We ranged
ourselves in the gallery pews and were given our tea; it was a one-pound
jam-jar of tea each, with six slices of bread and margarine. As soon as tea
was over, a dozen tramps who had stationed themselves near the door bolted
to avoid the service; the rest stayed, less from gratitude than lacking the
cheek to go.

The organ let out a few preliminary hoots and the service began. And
instantly, as though at a signal, the tramps began to misbehave in the most
outrageous way. One would not have thought such scenes possible in a
church. All round the gallery men lolled in their pews, laughed, chattered,
leaned over and flicked pellets of bread among the congregation; I had to
restrain the man next to me, more or less by force, from lighting a
cigarette. The tramps treated the service as a purely comic spectacle. It
was, indeed, a sufficiently ludicrous service--the kind where there are
sudden yells of 'Hallelujah!' and endless extempore prayers--but their
behaviour passed all bounds. There was one old fellow in the congregation
--Brother Bootle or some such name--who was often called on to lead us
in prayer, and whenever he stood up the tramps would begin stamping as
though in a theatre; they said that on a previous occasion he had kept up
an extempore prayer for twenty-five minutes, until the minister had
interrupted him. Once when Brother Bootle stood up a tramp called out, 'Two
to one 'e don't beat seven minutes!' so loud that the whole church must
hear. It was not long before we were making far more noise than the
minister. Sometimes somebody below would send up an indignant 'Hush!' but
it made no impression. We had set ourselves to guy the service, and there
was no stopping us.

It was a queer, rather disgusting scene. Below were the handful of
simple, well-meaning people, trying hard to worship; and above were the
hundred men whom they had fed, deliberately making worship impossible. A
ring of dirty, hairy faces grinned down from the gallery, openly jeering.
What could a few women and old men do against a hundred hostile tramps?
They were afraid of us, and we were frankly bullying them. It was our
revenge upon them for having humiliated us by feeding us.

The minister was a brave man. He thundered steadily through a long
sermon on Joshua, and managed almost to ignore the sniggers and chattering
from above. But in the end, perhaps goaded beyond endurance, he announced
loudly:

'I shall address the last five minutes of my sermon to the _unsaved_
sinners!'

Having said which, he turned his face to the gallery and kept it so
for five minutes, lest there should be any doubt about who were saved and
who unsaved. But much we cared! Even while the minister was threatening
hell fire, we were rolling cigarettes, and at the last amen we clattered
down the stairs with a yell, many agreeing to come back for another free
tea next week.

The scene had interested me. It was so different from the ordinary
demeanour of tramps--from the abject worm-like gratitude with which they
normally accept charity. The explanation, of course, was that we
outnumbered the congregation and so were not afraid of them. A man
receiving charity practically always hates his benefactor--it is a fixed
characteristic of human nature; and, when he has fifty or a hundred others
to back him, he will show it.

In the evening, after the free tea, Paddy unexpectedly earned another
eighteenpence at 'glimming'. It was exactly enough for another night's
lodging, and we put it aside and went hungry till nine the next evening.
Bozo, who might have given us some food, was away all day. The pavements
were wet, and he had gone to the Elephant and Castle, where he knew of a
pitch under shelter. Luckily I still had some tobacco, so that the day
might have been worse.

At half past eight Paddy took me to the Embankment, where a clergyman
was known to distribute meal tickets once a week. Under Charing Cross
Bridge fifty men were waiting, mirrored in the shivering puddles. Some of
them were truly appalling specimens--they were Embankment sleepers, and
the Embankment dredges up worse types than the spike. One of them, I
remember, was dressed in an overcoat without buttons, laced up with rope, a
pair of ragged trousers, and boots exposing his toes--not a rag else. He
was bearded like a fakir, and he had managed to streak his chest and
shoulders with some horrible black filth resembling train oil. What one
could see of his face under the dirt and hair was bleached white as paper
by some malignant disease. I heard him speak, and he had a goodish accent,
as of a clerk or shopwalker.

Presently the clergyman appeared and the men ranged themselves in a
queue in the order in which they had arrived. The clergyman was a nice,
chubby, youngish man, and, curiously enough, very like Charlie, my friend
in Paris. He was shy and embarrassed, and did not speak except for a brief
good evening; he simply hurried down the line of men, thrusting a ticket
upon each, and not waiting to be thanked. The consequence was that, for
once, there was genuine gratitude, and everyone said that the clergyman was
a--good feller. Someone (in his hearing, I believe) called out: 'Well,
_he'll_ never be a--bishop!'--this, of course, intended as a warm
compliment.

The tickets were worth sixpence each, and were directed to an
eating-house not far away. When we got there we found that the proprietor,
knowing that the tramps could not go elsewhere, was cheating by only giving
four pennyworth of food for each ticket. Paddy and I pooled our tickets,
and received food which we could have got for sevenpence or eightpence at
most coffee-shops. The clergyman had distributed well over a pound in
tickets, so that the proprietor was evidently swindling the tramps to the
tune of seven shillings or more a week. This kind of victimization is a
regular part of a tramp's life, and it will go on as long as people
continue to give meal tickets instead of money.

Paddy and I went back to the lodging-house and, still hungry, loafed
in the kitchen, making the warmth of the fire a substitute for food. At
half-past ten Bozo arrived, tired out and haggard, for his mangled leg made
walking an agony. He had not earned a penny at screeving, all the pitches
under shelter being taken, and for several hours he had begged outright,
with one eye on the policemen. He had amassed eightpence--a penny short
of his kip. It was long past the hour for paying, and he had only managed
to slip indoors when the deputy was not looking; at any moment he might be
caught and turned out, to sleep on the Embankment. Bozo took the things out
of his pockets and looked them over, debating what to sell. He decided on
his razor, took it round the kitchen, and in a few minutes he had sold it
for threepence--enough to pay his kip, buy a basin of tea, and leave a
half-penny over.

Bozo got his basin of tea and sat down by the fire to dry his clothes.
As he drank the tea I saw that he was laughing to himself, as though at
some good joke. Surprised, I asked him what he had to laugh at.

'It's bloody funny!' he said. 'It's funny enough for _Punch_. What do
you think I been and done?'

'What?'

'Sold my razor without having a shave first: Of all the--fools!'

He had not eaten since the morning, had walked several miles with a
twisted leg, his clothes were drenched, and he had a halfpenny between
himself and starvation. With all this, he could laugh over the loss of his
razor. One could not help admiring him.




XXXIV



THE next morning, our money being at an end, Paddy and I set out for
the spike. We went southward by the Old Kent Road, making for Cromley; we
could not go to a London spike, for Paddy had been in one recently and did
not care to risk going again. It was a sixteen-mile walk over asphalt,
blistering to the heels, and we were acutely hungry. Paddy browsed the
pavement, laying up a store of cigarette ends against his time in the
spike. In the end his perseverance was rewarded, for he picked up a penny.
We bought a large piece of stale bread, and devoured it as we walked.

When we got to Cromley, it was too early to go to the spike, and we
walked several miles farther, to a plantation beside a meadow, where one
could sit down. It was a regular caravanserai of tramps--one could tell
it by the worn grass and the sodden newspaper and rusty cans that they had
left behind. Other tramps were arriving by ones and twos. It was jolly
autumn weather. Near by, a deep bed of tansies was growing; it seems to me
that even now I can smell the sharp reek of those tansies, warring with the
reek of tramps. In the meadow two carthorse colts, raw sienna colour with
white manes and tails, were nibbling at a gate. We. sprawled about on the
ground, sweaty and exhausted. Someone managed to find dry sticks and get a
fire going, and we all had milkless tea out of a tin 'drum' which was
passed round.

Some of the tramps began telling stories. One of them, Bill, was an
interesting type, a genuine sturdy beggar of the old breed, strong as
Hercules and a frank foe of work. He boasted that with his great strength
he could get a navvying job any time he liked, but as soon as he drew his
first week's wages he went on a terrific drunk and was sacked. Between
whiles he 'mooched', chiefly from shopkeepers. He talked like this:

'I ain't goin' far in--Kent. Kent's a tight county, Kent is. There's
too many bin' moochin' about 'ere. The--bakers get so as they'll throw
their bread away sooner'n give it you. Now Oxford, that's the place for
moochin', Oxford is. When I was in Oxford I mooched bread, and I mooched
bacon, and I mooched beef, and every night I mooched tanners for my kip off
of the students. The last night I was twopence short of my kip, so I goes
up to a parson and mooches 'im for threepence. He give me threepence, and
the next moment he turns round and gives me in charge for beggin'. "You bin
beggin'," the copper says. "No I ain't," I says, "I was askin' the
gentleman the time," I says. The copper starts feelin' inside my coat, and
he pulls out a pound of meat and two loaves of bread. "Well, what's all
this, then?" he says. "You better come 'long to the station," he says. The
beak give me seven days. I don't mooch from no more--parsons. But Christ!
what do I care for a lay-up of seven days?' etc. etc.

It seemed that his whole life was this--a round of mooching, drunks,
and lay-ups. He laughed as he talked of it, taking it all for a tremendous
joke. He looked as though he made a poor thing out of begging, for he wore
only a corduroy suit, scarf, and cap--no socks or linen. Still, he was
fat and jolly, and he even smelt of beer, a most unusual smell in a tramp
nowadays.

Two of the tramps had been in Cromley spike recently, and they told a
ghost story connected with it. Years earlier, they said, there had been a
suicide there. A tramp had managed to smuggle a razor into his cell, and
there cut his throat. In the morning, when the Tramp Major came round, the
body was jammed against the door, and to open it they had to break the dead
man's arm. In revenge for this, the dead man haunted his cell, and anyone
who slept there was certain to die within the year; there were copious
instances, of course. If a cell door stuck when you tried to open it, you
should avoid that cell like the plague, for it was the haunted one.

Two tramps, ex-sailors, told another grisly story. A man (they swore
they had known him) had planned to stow away on a boat bound for Chile. It
was laden with manufactured goods packed in big wooden crates, and with the
help of a docker the stowaway had managed to hide himself in one of these.
But the docker had made a mistake about the order in which the crates were
to be loaded. The crane gripped the stowaway, swung him aloft, and
deposited him--at the very bottom of the hold, beneath hundreds of
crates. No one discovered what had happened until the end of the voyage,
when they found the stowaway rotting, dead of suffocation.

Another tramp told the story of Gilderoy, the Scottish robber.
Gilderoy was the man who was condemned to be hanged, escaped, captured the
judge who had sentenced him, and (splendid fellow!) hanged him. The tramps
liked the story, of course, but the interesting thing was to see that they
had got it all wrong. Their version was that Gilderoy escaped to America,
whereas in reality he was recaptured and put to death. The story had been
amended, no doubt deliberately; just as children amend the stories of
Samson and Robin Hood, giving them happy endings which are quite imaginary.

This set the tramps talking about history, and a very old man declared
that the 'one bite law' was a survival from days when the nobles hunted men
instead of deer. Some of the others laughed at him, but he had the idea
firm in his head. He had heard, too, of the Corn Laws, and the _jus primae
noctis_ (he believed it had really existed); also of the Great Rebellion,
which he thought was a rebellion of poor against rich--perhaps he had got
it mixed up with the peasant rebellions. I doubt whether the old man could
read, and certainly he was not repeating newspaper articles. His scraps of
history had been passed from generation to generation of tramps, perhaps
for centuries in some cases. It was oral tradition lingering on, like a
faint echo from the Middle Ages.

Paddy and I went to the spike at six in the evening, getting out at
ten in the morning. It was much like Romton and Edbury, and we saw nothing
of the ghost. Among the casuals were two young men named William and Fred,
ex-fishermen from Norfolk, a lively pair and fond of singing. They had a
song called 'Unhappy Bella' that is worth writing down. I heard them sing
it half a dozen times during the next two days, and I managed to get it by
heart, except a line or two which I have guessed. It ran:


Bella was young and Bella was fair
With bright blue eyes and golden hair,
O unhappy Bella!
Her step was light and her heart was gay,
But she had no sense, and one fine day
She got herself put in the family way
By a wicked, heartless, cruel deceiver.

Poor Bella was young, she didn't believe
That the world is hard and men deceive,
O unhappy Bella!
She said, 'My man will do what's just,
He'll marry me now, because he must';
Her heart was full of loving trust
In a wicked, heartless, cruel deceiver.

She went to his house; that dirty skunk
Had packed his bags and done a bunk,
O unhappy Bella!
Her landlady said, 'Get out, you whore,
I won't have your sort a-darkening my door.'
Poor Bella was put to affliction sore
By a wicked, heartless, cruel deceiver.

All night she tramped the cruel snows,
What she must have suffered nobody knows,
O unhappy Bella!
And when the morning dawned so red,
Alas, alas, poor Bella was dead,
Sent so young to her lonely bed
By a wicked, heartless, cruel deceiver.

So thus, you see, do what you will,
The fruits of sin are suffering still,
O unhappy Bella!
As into the grave they laid her low,
The men said, 'Alas, but life is so,'
But the women chanted, sweet and low,
'It's all the men, the dirty bastards!'


Written by a woman, perhaps.

William and Fred, the singers of this song, were thorough scallywags,
the sort of men who get tramps a bad name. They happened to know that the
Tramp Major at Cromley had a stock of old clothes, which were to be given
at need to casuals. Before going in William and Fred took off their boots,
ripped the seams and cut pieces off the soles, more or less ruining them.
Then they applied for two pairs of boots, and the Tramp Major, seeing how
bad their boots were, gave them almost new pairs. William and Fred were
scarcely outside the spike in the morning before they had sold these boots
for one and ninepence. It seemed to them quite worth while, for one and
ninepence, to make their own boots practically unwearable.

Leaving the spike, we all started southward, a long slouching
procession, for Lower Binfield and Ide Hill. On the way there was a fight
between two of the tramps. They had quarrelled overnight (there was some
silly _casus belli_ about one saying to the other, 'Bull shit', which was
taken for Bolshevik--a deadly insult), and they fought it out in a field.
A dozen of us stayed to watch them. The scene sticks in my mind for one
thing--the man who was beaten going down, and his cap falling off and
showing that his hair was quite white. After that some of us intervened and
stopped the fight. Paddy had meanwhile been making inquiries, and found
that the real cause of the quarrel was, as usual, a few pennyworth of food.

We got to Lower Binfield quite early, and Paddy filled in the time by
asking for work at back doors. At one house he was given some boxes to chop
up for firewood, and, saying he had a mate outside, he brought me in and we
did the work together. When it was done the householder told the maid to
take us out a cup of tea. I remember the terrified way in which she brought
it out, and then, losing her courage, set the cups down on the path and
bolted back to the house, shutting herself in the kitchen. So dreadful is
the name of 'tramp'. They paid us sixpence each, and we bought a threepenny
loaf and half an ounce of tobacco, leaving fivepence.

Paddy thought it wiser to bury our fivepence, for the Tramp Major at
Lower Binfield was renowned as a tyrant and might refuse to admit us if we
had any money at all. It is quite a common practice of tramps to bury their
money. If they intend to smuggle at all a large sum into the spike they
generally sew it into their clothes, which may mean prison if they are
caught, of course. Paddy and Bozo used to tell a good story about this. An
Irishman (Bozo said it was an Irishman; Paddy said an Englishman), not a
tramp, and in possession of thirty pounds, was stranded in a small village
where he could not get a bed. He consulted a tramp, who advised him to go
to the workhouse. It is quite a regular proceeding, if one cannot get a bed
elsewhere, to get one at the workhouse, paying a reasonable sum for it. The
Irishman, however, thought he would be clever and get a bed for nothing, so
he presented himself at the workhouse as an ordinary casual. He had sewn
the thirty pounds into his clothes. Meanwhile the tramp who had advised him
had seen his chance, and that night he privately asked the Tramp Major for
permission to leave the spike early in the morning, as he had to see about
a job. At six in the morning he was released and went out--in the
Irishman's clothes. The Irishman complained of the theft, and was given
thirty days for going into a casual ward under false pretences.




XXXV



ARRIVED at Lower Binfield, we sprawled for a long time on the green,
watched by cottagers from their front gates. A clergyman and his daughter
came and stared silently at us for a while, as though we had been aquarium
fishes, and then went away again. There were several dozen of us waiting.
William and Fred were there, still singing, and the men who had fought, and
Bill the moocher. He had been mooching from bakers, and had quantities of
stale bread tucked away between his coat and his bare body. He shared it
out, and we were all glad of it. There was a woman among us, the first
woman tramp I had ever seen. She was a fattish, battered, very dirty woman
of sixty, in a long, trailing black skirt. She put on great airs of
dignity, and if anyone sat down near her she sniffed and moved farther off.

'Where you bound for, missis?' one of the tramps called to her.

The woman sniffed and looked into the distance.

'Come on, missis,' he said, 'cheer up. Be chummy. We're all in the
same boat 'ere.'

'Thank you,' said the woman bitterly, 'when I want to get mixed up
with a set of _tramps_, I'll let you know.'

I enjoyed the way she said _tramps_. It seemed to show you in a flash
the whole other soul; a small, blinkered, feminine soul, that had learned
absolutely nothing from years on the road. She was, no doubt, a respectable
widow woman, become a tramp through some grotesque accident.

The spike opened at six. This was Saturday, and we were to be confined
over the week-end, which is the usual practice; why, I do not know, unless
it is from a vague feeling that Sunday merits something disagreeable. When
we registered I gave my trade as 'journalist'. It was truer than 'painter',
for I had sometimes earned money from newspaper articles, but it was a
silly thing to say, being bound to lead to questions. As soon as we were
inside the spike and had been lined up for the search, the Tramp Major
called my name. He was a stiff, soldierly man of forty, not looking the
bully he had been represented, but with an old soldier's gruffness. He said
sharply:

'Which of you is Blank?' (I forget what name I had given.)

'Me, sir.'

'So you are a journalist?'

'Yes, sir,' I said, quaking. A few questions would betray the fact
that I had been lying, which might mean prison. But the Tramp Major only
looked me up and down and said:

'Then you are a gentleman?'

'I suppose so.'

He gave me another long look. 'Well, that's bloody bad luck, guv'nor,'
he said; 'bloody bad luck that is.' And thereafter he treated me with
unfair favouritism, and even with a kind of deference. He did not search
me, and in the bathroom he actually gave me a clean towel to myself--an
unheard-of luxury. So powerful is the word 'gentleman' in an old soldier's
ear.

By seven we had wolfed our bread and tea and were in our cells. We
slept one in a cell, and there were bedsteads and straw palliasses, so that
one ought to have had a good night's sleep. But no spike is perfect, and
the peculiar shortcoming at Lower Binfield was the cold. The hot pipes were
not working, and the two blankets we had been given were thin cotton things
and almost useless. It was only autumn, but the cold was bitter. One spent
the long twelve-hour night in turning from side to side, falling asleep for
a few minutes and waking up shivering. We could not smoke, for our tobacco,
which we had managed to smuggle in, was in our clothes and we should not
get these back till the morning. All down the passage one could hear
groaning noises, and sometimes a shouted oath. No one, I imagine, got more
than an hour or two of sleep.

In the morning, after breakfast and the doctor's inspection, the Tramp
Major herded us all into the dining-room and locked the door upon us. It
was a limewashed, stone-floored room, unutterably dreary, with its
furniture of deal boards and benches, and its prison smell. The barred
windows were too high to look out of, and there were no ornaments save a
clock and a copy of the workhouse rules. Packed elbow to elbow on the
benches, we were bored already, though it was barely eight in the morning.
There was nothing to do, nothing to talk about, not even room to move. The
sole consolation was that one could smoke, for smoking was connived at so
long as one was not caught in the act. Scotty, a little hairy tramp with a
bastard accent sired by Cockney out of Glasgow, was tobaccoless, his tin of
cigarette ends having fallen out of his boot during the search and been
impounded. I stood him the makings of a cigarette. We smoked furtively,
thrusting our cigarettes into our pockets, like schoolboys, when we heard
the Tramp Major coming.

Most of the tramps spent ten continuous hours in this comfortless,
soulless room. Heaven knows how they put up with it. I was luckier than the
others, for at ten o'clock the Tramp Major told off a few men for odd jobs,
and he picked me out to help in the workhouse kitchen, the most coveted job
of all. This, like the clean towel, was a charm worked by the word
'gentleman'.

There was no work to do in the kitchen, and I sneaked off into a small
shed used for storing potatoes, where some workhouse paupers were skulking
to avoid the Sunday morning service. There were comfortable packing-cases
to sit on, and some back numbers of the _Family Herald_, and even a copy of
_Raffles_ from the workhouse library. The paupers talked interestingly about
workhouse life. They told me, among other things, that the thing really
hated in the workhouse, as a stigma of charity, is the uniform; if the men
could wear their own clothes, or even their own caps and scarves, they
would not mind being paupers. I had my dinner from the workhouse table, and
it was a meal fit for a boa-constrictor--the largest meal I had eaten
since my first day at the Hôtel X. The paupers said that they habitually
gorged to the bursting-point on Sunday and were underfed the rest of the
week. After dinner the cook set me to do the washing up, and told me to
throw away the food that remained. The wastage was astonishing and, in the
circumstances, appalling. Half-eaten joints of meat, and bucketfuls of
broken bread and vegetables, were pitched away like so much rubbish and
then defiled with tea-leaves. I filled five dustbins to overflowing with
quite eatable food. And while I did so fifty tramps were sitting in the
spike with their bellies half filled by the spike dinner of bread and
cheese, and perhaps two cold boiled potatoes each in honour of Sunday.
According to the paupers, the food was thrown away from deliberate policy,
rather than that it should be given to the tramps.

At three I went back to the spike. The tramps had been sitting there
since eight, with hardly room to move an elbow, and they were now half mad
with boredom. Even smoking was at an end, for a tramp's tobacco is
picked-up cigarette ends, and he starves if he is more than a few hours
away from the pavement. Most of the men were too bored even to talk; they
just sat packed on the benches, staring at nothing, their scrubby faces
split in two by enormous yawns. The room stank of _ennui_.

Paddy, his backside aching from the hard bench, was in a whimpering
mood, and to pass the time away I talked with a rather superior tramp, a
young carpenter who wore a collar and tie and was on the road, he said, for
lack of a set of tools. He kept a little aloof from the other tramps, and
held himself more like a free man than a casual. He had literary tastes,
too, and carried a copy of _Quentin Durward_ in his pocket. He told me that
he never went into a spike unless driven there by hunger, sleeping under
hedges and behind ricks in preference. Along the south coast he had begged
by day and slept in bathing-huts for weeks at a time.

We talked of life on the road. He criticized the system that makes a
tramp spend fourteen hours a day in the spike, and the other ten in walking
and dodging the police. He spoke of his own case--six months at the
public charge for want of a few pounds' worth of tools. It was idiotic, he
said.

Then I told him about the wastage of food in the workhouse kitchen,
and what I thought of it. And at that he changed his tone instantly. I saw
that I had awakened the pew-renter who sleeps in every English workman.
Though he had been famished along with the others, he at once saw reasons
why the food should have been thrown away rather that given to the tramps.
He admonished me quite severely.

'They have to do it,' he said. 'If they made these places too
comfortable, you'd have all the scum of the country flocking into them.
It's only the bad food as keeps all that scum away. These here tramps are
too lazy to work, that's all that's wrong with them. You don't want to go
encouraging of them. They're scum.'

I produced arguments to prove him wrong, but he would not listen. He
kept repeating:

'You don't want to have any pity on these here tramps--scum, they
are. You don't want to judge them by the same standards as men like you and
me. They're scum, just scum.'

It was interesting to see the subtle way in which he disassociated
himself from 'these here tramps'. He had been on the road six months, but
in the sight of God, he seemed to imply, he was not a tramp. I imagine
there are quite a lot of tramps who thank God they are not tramps. They are
like the trippers who say such cutting things about trippers.

Three hours dragged by. At six supper arrived, and turned out to be
quite uneatable; the bread, tough enough in the morning (it had been cut
into slices on Saturday night), was now as hard as ship's biscuit. Luckily
it was spread with dripping, and we scraped the dripping off and ate that
alone, which was better than nothing. At a quarter past six we were sent to
bed. New tramps were arriving, and in order not to mix the tramps of
different days (for fear of infectious diseases) the new men were put in
the cells and we in dormitories. Our dormitory was a barn-like room with
thirty beds close together, and a tub to serve as a common chamber-pot. It
stank abominably, and the older men coughed and got up all night. But being
so many together kept the room warm, and we had some sleep.

We dispersed at ten in the morning, after a fresh medical inspection,
with a hunk of bread and cheese for our midday dinner. William and Fred,
strong in the possession of a shilling, impaled their bread on the spike
railings--as a protest, they said. This was the second spike in Kent that
they had made too hot to hold them, and they thought it a great joke. They
were cheerful souls, for tramps. The imbecile (there is an imbecile in
every collection of tramps) said that he was too tired to walk and clung to
the railings, until the Tramp Major had to dislodge him and start him with
a kick. Paddy and I turned north, for London. Most of the others were going
on to Ide Hill, said to be about the worst spike in England*.

[* I have been in it since, and it is not so bad.]

Once again it was jolly autumn weather, and the road was quiet, with
few cars passing. The air was like sweet-briar after the spike's mingled
stenches of sweat, soap, and drains. We two seemed the only tramps on the
road. Then I heard a hurried step behind us, and someone calling. It was
little Scotty, the Glasgow tramp, who had run after us panting. He produced
a rusty tin from his pocket. He wore a friendly smile, like someone
repaying an obligation.

'Here y'are, mate,' he said cordially. 'I owe you some fag ends. You
stood me a smoke yesterday. The Tramp Major give me back my box of fag ends
when we come out this morning. One good turn deserves another--here
y'are.'

And he put four sodden, debauched, loathly cigarette ends into my
hand.




XXXVI



I WANT to set down some general remarks about tramps. When one comes
to think of it, tramps are a queer product and worth thinking over. It is
queer that a tribe of men, tens of thousands in number, should be marching
up and down England like so many Wandering Jews. But though the case
obviously wants considering, one cannot even start to consider it until one
has got rid of certain prejudices. These prejudices are rooted in the idea
that every tramp, _ipso facto_, is a blackguard. In childhood we have been
taught that tramps are blackguards, and consequently there exists in our
minds a sort of ideal or typical tramp--a repulsive, rather dangerous
creature, who would die rather than work or wash, and wants nothing but to
beg, drink, and rob hen-houses. This tramp-monster is no truer to life than
the sinister Chinaman of the magazine stories, but he is very hard to get
rid of. The very word 'tramp' evokes his image. And the belief in him
obscures the real questions of vagrancy.

To take a fundamental question about vagrancy: Why do tramps exist at
all? It is a curious thing, but very few people know what makes a tramp
take to the road. And, because of the belief in the tramp-monster, the most
fantastic reasons are suggested. It is said, for instance, that tramps
tramp to avoid work, to beg more easily, to seek opportunities for crime,
even--least probable of reasons--because they like tramping. I have
even read in a book of criminology that the tramp is an atavism, a
throw-back to the nomadic stage of humanity. And meanwhile the quite
obvious cause of vagrancy is staring one in the face. Of course a tramp is
not a nomadic atavism--one might as well say that a commercial traveller
is an atavism. A tramp tramps, not because he likes it, but for the same
reason as a car keeps to the left; because there happens to be a law
compelling him to do so. A destitute man, if he is not supported by the
parish, can only get relief at the casual wards, and as each casual ward
will only admit him for one night, he is automatically kept moving. He is a
vagrant because, in the state of the law, it is that or starve. But people
have been brought up to believe in the tramp-monster, and so they prefer to
think that there must be some more or less villainous motive for tramping.

As a matter of fact, very little of the tramp-monster will survive
inquiry. Take the generally accepted idea that tramps are dangerous
characters. Quite apart from experience, one can say _a priori_ that very few
tramps are dangerous, because if they were dangerous they would be treated
accordingly. A casual ward will often admit a hundred tramps in one night,
and these are handled by a staff of at most three porters. A hundred
ruffians could not be controlled by three unarmed men. Indeed, when one
sees how tramps let themselves be bullied by the workhouse officials, it is
obvious that they are the most docile, broken-spirited creatures
imaginable. Or take the idea that all tramps are drunkards--an idea
ridiculous on the face of it. No doubt many tramps would drink if they got
the chance, but in the nature of things they cannot get the chance. At this
moment a pale watery stuff called beer is sevenpence a pint in England. To
be drunk on it would cost at least half a crown, and a man who can command
half a crown at all often is not a tramp. The idea that tramps are impudent
social parasites ('sturdy beggars') is not absolutely unfounded, but it is
only true in a few per cent of the cases. Deliberate, cynical parasitism,
such as one reads of in Jack London's books on American tramping, is not in
the English character. The English are a conscience-ridden race, with a
strong sense of the sinfulness of poverty. One cannot imagine the average
Englishman deliberately turning parasite, and this national character does
not necessarily change because a man is thrown out of work. Indeed, if one
remembers that a tramp is only an Englishman out of work, forced by law to
live as a vagabond, then the tramp-monster vanishes. I am not saying, of
course, that most tramps are ideal characters; I am only saying that they
are ordinary human beings, and that if they are worse than other people it
is the result and not the cause of their way of life.

It follows that the 'Serve them damned well right' attitude that is
normally taken towards tramps is no fairer than it would be towards
cripples or invalids. When one has realized that, one begins to put oneself
in a tramp's place and understand what his life is like. It is an
extraordinarily futile, acutely unpleasant life. I have described the
casual ward--the routine of a tramp's day--but there are three especial
evils that need insisting upon. The first is hunger, which is the almost
general fate of tramps. The casual ward gives them a ration which is
probably not even meant to be sufficient, and anything beyond this must be
got by begging--that is, by breaking the law. The result is that nearly
every tramp is rotted by malnutrition; for proof of which one need only
look at the men lining up outside any casual ward. The second great evil of
a tramp's life--it seems much smaller at first sight, but it is a good
second--is that he is entirely cut off from contact with women. This
point needs elaborating.

Tramps are cut off from women, in the first place, because there are
very few women at their level of society. One might imagine that among
destitute people the sexes would be as equally balanced as elsewhere. But
it is not so; in fact, one can almost say that below a certain level
society is entirely male. The following figures, published by the L.C.C.
from a night census taken on February 13th, 1931, will show the relative
numbers of destitute men and destitute women:


Spending the night in the streets, 60 men, 18 women*.
In shelters and homes not licensed as common lodging-houses, 1,057 men,
137 women.
In the crypt of St Martin's-in-the-Fields Church, 88 men, 12 women.
In L.C.C. casual wards and hostels, 674 men, 15 women.

[* This must be an underestimate. Still, the proportions probably
hold good.]


It will be seen from these figures that at the charity level men
outnumber women by something like ten to one. The cause is presumably that
unemployment affects women less than men; also that any presentable woman
can, in the last resort, attach herself to some man. The result, for a
tramp, is that he is condemned to perpetual celibacy. For of course it goes
without saying that if a tramp finds no women at his own level, those above
--even a very little above--are as far out of his reach as the moon. The
reasons are not worth discussing, but there is no doubt that women never,
or hardly ever, condescend to men who are much poorer than themselves. A
tramp, therefore, is a celibate from the moment when he takes to the road.
He is absolutely without hope of getting a wife, a mistress, or any kind of
woman except--very rarely, when he can raise a few shillings--a
prostitute.

It is obvious what the results of this must be: homosexuality, for
instance, and occasional rape cases. But deeper than these there is the
degradation worked in a man who knows that he is not even considered fit
for marriage. The sexual impulse, not to put it any higher, is a
fundamental impulse, and starvation of it can be almost as demoralizing as
physical hunger. The evil of poverty is not so much that it makes a man
suffer as that it rots him physically and spiritually. And there can be no
doubt that sexual starvation contributes to this rotting process. Cut off
from the whole race of women, a tramp feels himself degraded to the rank of
a cripple or a lunatic. No humiliation could do more damage to a man's
self-respect.

The other great evil of a tramp's life is enforced idleness. By our
vagrancy laws things are so arranged that when he is not walking the road
he is sitting in a cell; or, in the intervals, lying on the ground waiting
for the casual ward to open. It is obvious that this is a dismal,
demoralizing way of life, especially for an uneducated man.

Besides these one could enumerate scores of minor evils--to name
only one, discomfort, which is inseparable from life on the road; it is
worth remembering that the average tramp has no clothes but what he stands
up in, wears boots that are ill-fitting, and does not sit in a chair for
months together. But the important point is that a tramp's sufferings are
entirely useless. He lives a fantastically disagreeable life, and lives it
to no purpose whatever. One could not, in fact, invent a more futile
routine than walking from prison to prison, spending perhaps eighteen hours
a day in the cell and on the road. There must be at the least several tens
of thousands of tramps in England. Each day they expend innumerable
foot-pounds of energy--enough to plough thousands of acres, build miles
of road, put up dozens of houses--in mere, useless walking. Each day they
waste between them possibly ten years of time in staring at cell walls.
They cost the country at least a pound a week a man, and give nothing in
return for it. They go round and round, on an endless boring game of
general post, which is of no use, and is not even meant to be of any use to
any person whatever. The law keeps this process going, and we have got so
accustomed to it that We are not surprised. But it is very silly.

Granting the futility of a tramp's life, the question is whether
anything could be done to improve it. Obviously it would be possible, for
instance, to make the casual wards a little more habitable, and this is
actually being done in some cases. During the last year some of the casual
wards have been improved--beyond recognition, if the accounts are true--
and there is talk of doing the same to all of them. But this does not go to
the heart of the problem. The problem is how to turn the tramp from a
bored, half alive vagrant into a self-respecting human being. A mere
increase of comfort cannot do this. Even if the casual wards became
positively luxurious (they never will)* a tramp's life would still be
wasted. He would still be a pauper, cut off from marriage and home life,
and a dead loss to the community. What is needed is to depauperize him, and
this can only be done by finding him work--not work for the sake of
working, but work of which he can enjoy the benefit. At present, in the
great majority of casual wards, tramps do no work whatever. At one time
they were made to break stones for their food, but this was stopped when
they had broken enough stone for years ahead and put the stone-breakers out
of work. Nowadays they are kept idle, because there is seemingly nothing
for them to do. Yet there is a fairly obvious way of making them useful,
namely this: Each workhouse could run a small farm, or at least a kitchen
garden, and every able-bodied tramp who presented himself could be made to
do a sound day's work. The produce of the farm or garden could be used for
feeding the tramps, and at the worst it would be better than the filthy
diet of bread and margarine and tea. Of course, the casual wards could
never be quite self-supporting, but they could go a long way towards it,
and the rates would probably benefit in the long run. It must be remembered
that under the present system tramps are as dead a loss to the country as
they could possibly be, for they do not only do no work, but they live on a
diet that is bound to undermine their health; the system, therefore, loses
lives as well as money. A scheme which fed them decently, and made them
produce at least a part of their own food, would be worth trying.

[* In fairness, it must be added that a few of the casual wards have been
improved recently, at least from the point of view of sleeping
accommodation. But most of them are the same as ever, and there has been
no real improvement in the food.]

It may be objected that a farm or even a garden could not be run with
casual labour. But there is no real reason why tramps should only stay a
day at each casual ward; they might stay a month or even a year, if there
were work for them to do. The constant circulation of tramps is something
quite artificial. At present a tramp is an expense to the rates, and the
object of each workhouse is therefore to push him on to the next; hence the
rule that he can stay only one night. If he returns within a month he is
penalized by being confined for a week, and, as this is much the same as
being in prison, naturally he keeps moving. But if he represented labour to
the workhouse, and the workhouse represented sound food to him, it would be
another matter. The workhouses would develop into partially self-supporting
institutions, and the tramps, settling down here or there according as they
were needed, would cease to be tramps. They would be doing something
comparatively useful, getting decent food, and living a settled life. By
degrees, if the scheme worked well, they might even cease to be regarded as
paupers, and be able to marry and take a respectable place in society.

This is only a rough idea, and there are some obvious objections to
it. Nevertheless, it does suggest a way of improving the status of tramps
without piling new burdens on the rates. And the solution must, in any
case, be something of this kind. For the question is, what to do with men
who are underfed and idle; and the answer--to make them grow their own
food--imposes itself automatically.




XXXVII



A WORD about the sleeping accommodation open to a homeless person in
London. At present it is impossible to get a _bed_ in any non-charitable
institution in London for less than sevenpence a night. If you cannot
afford seven-pence for a bed, you must put up with one of the following
substitutes:

1. The Embankment. Here is the account that Paddy gave me of sleeping
on the Embankment:

'De whole t'ing wid de Embankment is gettin' to sleep early. You got
to be on your bench by eight o'clock, because dere ain't too many benches
and sometimes dey're all taken. And you got to try to get to sleep at once.
'Tis too cold to sleep much after twelve o'clock, an' de police turns you
off at four in de mornin'. It ain't easy to sleep, dough, wid dem bloody
trams flyin' past your head all de time, an' dem sky-signs across de river
flickin' on an' off in your eyes. De cold's cruel. Dem as sleeps dere
generally wraps demselves up in newspaper, but it don't do much good. You'd
be bloody lucky if you got t'ree hours' sleep.'

I have slept on the Embankment and found that it corresponded to
Paddy's description. It is, however, much better than not sleeping at all,
which is the alternative if you spend the night in the streets, elsewhere
than on the Embankment. According to the law in London, you may sit down
for the night, but the police must move you on if they see you asleep; the
Embankment and one or two odd corners (there is one behind the Lyceum
Theatre) are special exceptions. This law is evidently a piece of wilful
offensiveness. Its object, so it is said, is to prevent people from dying
of exposure; but clearly if a man has no home and is going to die of
exposure, die he will, asleep or awake. In Paris there is no such law.
There, people sleep by the score under the Seine bridges, and in doorways,
and on benches in the squares, and round the ventilating shafts of the
Métro, and even inside the Métro stations. It does no apparent harm. No one
will spend a night in the street if he can possibly help it, and if he is
going to stay out of doors he might as well be allowed to sleep, if he can.

2. The Twopenny Hangover. This comes a little higher than the
Embankment. At the Twopenny Hangover, the lodgers sit in a row on a bench;
there is a rope in front of them, and they lean on this as though leaning
over a fence. A man, humorously called the valet, cuts the rope at five in
the morning. I have never been there myself, but Bozo had been there often.
I asked him whether anyone could possibly sleep in such an attitude, and he
said that it was more comfortable than it sounded--at any rate, better
than bare floor. There are similar shelters in Paris, but the charge there
is only twenty-five centimes (a halfpenny) instead of twopence.

3. The Coffin, at fourpence a night. At the Coffin you sleep in a
wooden box, with a tarpaulin for covering. It is cold, and the worst thing
about it are the bugs, which, being enclosed in a box, you cannot escape.

Above this come the common lodging-houses, with charges varying
between sevenpence and one and a penny a night. The best are the Rowton
Houses, where the charge is a shilling, for which you get a cubicle to
yourself, and the use of excellent bathrooms. You can also pay half a crown
for a 'special', which is practically hotel accommodation. The Rowton
Houses are splendid buildings, and the only objection to them is the strict
discipline, with rules against cooking, card-playing, etc. Perhaps the best
advertisement for the Rowton Houses is the fact that they are always full
to overflowing. The Bruce Houses, at one and a penny, are also excellent.

Next best, in point of cleanliness, are the Salvation Army hostels, at
sevenpence or eightpence. They vary (I have been in one or two that were
not very unlike common lodging-houses), but most of them are clean, and
they have good bathrooms; you have to pay extra for a bath, however. You
can get a cubicle for a shilling. In the eightpenny dormitories the beds
are comfortable, but there are so many of them (as a rule at least forty to
a room), and so close together, that it is impossible to get a quiet night.
The numerous restrictions stink of prison and charity. The Salvation Army
hostels would only appeal to people who put cleanliness before anything
else.

Beyond this there are the ordinary common lodging-houses. Whether you
pay sevenpence or a shilling, they are all stuffy and noisy, and the beds
are uniformly dirty and uncomfortable. What redeems them are their
_laissez-faire_ atmosphere and the warm home-like kitchens where one can
lounge at all hours of the day or night. They are squalid dens, but some
kind of social life is possible in them. The women's lodging-houses are
said to be generally worse than the men's, and there are very few houses
with accommodation for married couples. In fact, it is nothing out of the
common for a homeless man to sleep in one lodging-house and his wife in
another.

At this moment at least fifteen thousand people in London are living
in common lodging-houses. For an unattached man earning two pounds a week,
or less, a lodging-house is a great convenience. He could hardly get a
furnished room so cheaply, and the lodging-house gives him free firing, a
bathroom of sorts, and plenty of society. As for the dirt, it is a minor
evil. The really bad fault of lodging-houses is that they are places in
which one pays to sleep, and in which sound sleep is impossible. All one
gets for one's money is a bed measuring five feet six by two feet six, with
a hard convex mattress and a pillow like a block of wood, covered by one
cotton counterpane and two grey, stinking sheets. In winter there are
blankets, but never enough. And this bed is in a room where there are never
less than five, and sometimes fifty or sixty beds, a yard or two apart. Of
course, no one can sleep soundly in such circumstances. The only other
places where people are herded like this are barracks and hospitals. In the
public wards of a hospital no one even hopes to sleep well. In barracks the
soldiers are crowded, but they have good beds, and they are healthy; in a
common lodging-house nearly all the lodgers have chronic coughs, and a
large number have bladder diseases which make them get up at all the hours
of the night. The result is a perpetual racket, making sleep impossible. So
far as my observation goes, no one in a lodging-house sleeps more than five
hours a night--a damnable swindle when one has paid sevenpence or more.

Here legislation could accomplish something. At present there is all
manner of legislation by the L.C.C. about lodging-houses, but it is not
done in the interests of the lodgers. The L.C.C. only exert themselves to
forbid drinking, gambling, fighting, etc. etc. There is no law to say that
the beds in a lodging-house must be comfortable. This would be quite an
easy thing to enforce--much easier, for instance, than restrictions upon
gambling. The lodging-house keepers should be compelled to provide adequate
bedclothes and better mattresses, and above all to divide their dormitories
into cubicles. It does not matter how small a cubicle is, the important
thing is that a man should be alone when he sleeps. These few changes,
strictly enforced, would make an enormous difference. It is not impossible
to make a lodging-house reasonably comfortable at the usual rates of
payment. In the Croydon municipal lodging-house, where the charge is only
ninepence, there are cubicles, good beds, chairs (a very rare luxury in
lodging-houses), and kitchens above ground instead of in a cellar. There is
no reason why every ninepenny lodging-house should not come up to this
standard.

Of course, the owners of lodging-houses would be opposed _en bloc_ to
any improvement, for their present business is an immensely profitable one.
The average house takes five or ten pounds a night, with no bad debts
(credit being strictly forbidden), and except for rent the expenses are
small. Any improvement would mean less crowding, and hence less profit.
Still, the excellent municipal lodging-house at Croydon shows how well one
_can_ be served for ninepence. A few well-directed laws could make these
conditions general. If the authorities are going to concern themselves with
lodging-houses at all, they ought to start by making them more comfortable,
not by silly restrictions that would never be tolerated in a hotel.

XXXVIII

AFTER we left the spike at Lower Binfield, Paddy and I earned half a
crown at weeding and sweeping in somebody's garden, stayed the night at
Cromley, and walked back to London. I parted from Paddy a day or two later.
B. lent me a final two pounds, and, as I had only another eight days to
hold out, that was the end of my troubles. My tame imbecile turned out
worse than I had expected, but not bad enough to make me wish myself back
in the spike or the Auberge de Jehan Cottard.

Paddy set out for Portsmouth, where he had a. friend who might
conceivably find work for him, and I have never seen him since. A short
time ago I was told that he had been run over and killed, but perhaps my
informant was mixing him up with someone else. I had news of Bozo only
three days ago. He is in Wandsworth--fourteen days for begging. I do not
suppose prison worries him very much.

My story ends here. It is a fairly trivial story, and I can only hope
that it has been interesting in the same way as a travel diary is
interesting. I can at least say, Here is the world that awaits you if you
are ever penniless. Some days I want to explore that world more thoroughly.
I should like to know people like Mario and Paddy and Bill the moocher, not
from casual encounters, but intimately; I should like to understand what
really goes on in the souls of _plongeurs_ and tramps and Embankment
sleepers. At present I do not feel that I have seen more than the fringe of
poverty.

Still I can point to one or two things I have definitely learned by
being hard up. I shall never again think that all tramps are drunken
scoundrels, nor expect a beggar to be grateful when I give him a penny, nor
be surprised if men out of work lack energy, nor subscribe to the Salvation
Army, nor pawn my clothes, nor refuse a handbill, nor enjoy a meal at a
smart restaurant. That is a beginning.

THE END

Project Gutenberg Australia


Title:      A Clergyman's Daughter
Author:     George Orwell



CHAPTER 1


1


As the alarm clock on the chest of drawers exploded like a horrid
little bomb of bell metal, Dorothy, wrenched from the depths of
some complex, troubling dream, awoke with a start and lay on her
back looking into the darkness in extreme exhaustion.

The alarm clock continued its nagging, feminine clamour, which
would go on for five minutes or thereabouts if you did not stop it.
Dorothy was aching from head to foot, and an insidious and
contemptible self-pity, which usually seized upon her when it was
time to get up in the morning, caused her to bury her head under
the bedclothes and try to shut the hateful noise out of her ears.
She struggled against her fatigue, however, and, according to her
custom, exhorted herself sharply in the second person plural.  Come
on, Dorothy, up you get!  No snoozing, please!  Proverbs vi, 9.
Then she remembered that if the noise went on any longer it would
wake her father, and with a hurried movement she bounded out of
bed, seized the clock from the chest of drawers, and turned off the
alarm.  It was kept on the chest of drawers precisely in order that
she should have to get out of bed to silence it.  Still in
darkness, she knelt down at her bedside and repeated the Lord's
Prayer, but rather distractedly, her feet being troubled by the
cold.

It was just half past five, and coldish for an August morning.
Dorothy (her name was Dorothy Hare, and she was the only child of
the Reverend Charles Hare, Rector of St Athelstan's, Knype Hill,
Suffolk) put on her aged flannelette dressing-gown and felt her way
downstairs.  There was a chill morning smell of dust, damp plaster,
and the fried dabs from yesterday's supper, and from either side of
the passage on the second floor she could hear the antiphonal
snoring of her father and of Ellen, the maid of all work.  With
care--for the kitchen table had a nasty trick of reaching out of
the darkness and banging you on the hip-bone--Dorothy felt her way
into the kitchen, lighted the candle on the mantelpiece, and, still
aching with fatigue, knelt down and raked the ashes out of the
range.

The kitchen fire was a 'beast' to light.  The chimney was crooked
and therefore perpetually half choked, and the fire, before it
would light, expected to be dosed with a cupful of kerosene, like a
drunkard's morning nip of gin.  Having set the kettle to boil for
her father's shaving-water, Dorothy went upstairs and turned on her
bath.  Ellen was still snoring, with heavy youthful snores.  She
was a good hard-working servant once she was awake, but she was one
of those girls whom the Devil and all his angels cannot get out of
bed before seven in the morning.

Dorothy filled the bath as slowly as possible--the splashing always
woke her father if she turned on the tap too fast--and stood for a
moment regarding the pale, unappetizing pool of water.  Her body
had gone goose-flesh all over.  She detested cold baths; it was for
that very reason that she made it a rule to take all her baths cold
from April to November.  Putting a tentative hand into the water--
and it was horribly cold--she drove herself forward with her usual
exhortations.  Come on, Dorothy!  In you go!  No funking, please!
Then she stepped resolutely into the bath, sat down and let the icy
girdle of water slide up her body and immerse her all except her
hair, which she had twisted up behind her head.  The next moment
she came to the surface gasping and wriggling, and had no sooner
got her breath back than she remembered her 'memo list', which she
had brought down in her dressing-gown pocket and intended to read.
She reached out for it, and, leaning over the side of the bath,
waist deep in icy water, read through the 'memo list' by the light
of the candle on the chair.

It ran:


7 oc.  H.C.

Mrs T baby?  Must visit.

BREAKFAST.  Bacon.  MUST ask father money.  (P)

Ask Ellen what stuff kitchen father's tonic NB. to ask about stuff
for curtains at Solepipe's.

Visiting call on Mrs P cutting from Daily M angelica tea good for
rheumatism Mrs L's cornplaster.

12 oc.  Rehearsal Charles I.  NB. to order 1/2 lb glue 1 pot
aluminium paint.

DINNER (crossed out) LUNCHEON . . . ?

Take round Parish Mag NB. Mrs F owes 3/6d.

4.30 pm Mothers' U tea don't forget 2 1/2 yards casement cloth.

Flowers for church NB. 1 tin Brasso.

SUPPER.  Scrambled eggs.

Type Father's sermon what about new ribbon typewriter?

NB. to fork between peas bindweed awful.


Dorothy got out of her bath, and as she dried herself with a towel
hardly bigger than a table napkin--they could never afford decent-
sized towels at the Rectory--her hair came unpinned and fell down
over her collar-bones in two heavy strands.  It was thick, fine,
exceedingly pale hair, and it was perhaps as well that her father
had forbidden her to bob it, for it was her only positive beauty.
For the rest, she was a girl of middle height, rather thin, but
strong and shapely, and her face was her weak point.  It was a
thin, blonde, unremarkable kind of face, with pale eyes and a nose
just a shade too long; if you looked closely you could see crow's
feet round the eyes, and the mouth, when it was in repose, looked
tired.  Not definitely a spinsterish face as yet, but it certainly
would be so in a few years' time.  Nevertheless, strangers commonly
took her to be several years younger than her real age (she was not
quite twenty-eight) because of the expression of almost childish
earnestness in her eyes.  Her left forearm was spotted with tiny
red marks like insect bites.

Dorothy put on her nightdress again and cleaned her teeth--plain
water, of course; better not to use toothpaste before H.C.  After
all, either you are fasting or you aren't.  The R.C.s are quite
right there--and, even as she did so, suddenly faltered and
stopped.  She put her toothbrush down.  A deadly pang, an actual
physical pang, had gone through her viscera.

She had remembered, with the ugly shock with which one remembers
something disagreeable for the first time in the morning, the bill
at Cargill's, the butcher's, which had been owing for seven months.
That dreadful bill--it might be nineteen pounds or even twenty, and
there was hardly the remotest hope of paying it--was one of the
chief torments of her life.  At all hours of the night or day it
was waiting just round the corner of her consciousness, ready to
spring upon her and agonize her; and with it came the memory of a
score of lesser bills, mounting up to a figure of which she dared
not even think.  Almost involuntarily she began to pray, 'Please
God, let not Cargill send in his bill again today!' but the next
moment she decided that this prayer was worldly and blasphemous,
and she asked forgiveness for it.  Then she put on her dressing-
gown and ran down to the kitchen in hopes of putting the bill out
of mind.

The fire had gone out, as usual.  Dorothy relaid it, dirtying her
hands with coal-dust, dosed it afresh with kerosene and hung about
anxiously until the kettle boiled.  Father expected his shaving-
water to be ready at a quarter past six.  Just seven minutes late,
Dorothy took the can upstairs and knocked at her father's door.

'Come in, come in!' said a muffled, irritable voice.

The room, heavily curtained, was stuffy, with a masculine smell.
The Rector had lighted the candle on his bed-table, and was lying
on his side, looking at his gold watch, which he had just drawn
from beneath his pillow.  His hair was as white and thick as
thistledown.  One dark bright eye glanced irritably over his
shoulder at Dorothy.

'Good morning, father.'

'I do wish, Dorothy,' said the Rector indistinctly--his voice
always sounded muffled and senile until he put his false teeth in--
'you would make some effort to get Ellen out of bed in the
mornings.  Or else be a little more punctual yourself.'

'I'm so sorry, Father.  The kitchen fire kept going out.'

'Very well!  Put it down on the dressing-table.  Put it down and
draw those curtains.'

It was daylight now, but a dull, clouded morning.  Dorothy hastened
up to her room and dressed herself with the lightning speed which
she found necessary six mornings out of seven.  There was only a
tiny square of mirror in the room, and even that she did not use.
She simply hung her gold cross about her neck--plain gold cross; no
crucifixes, please!--twisted her hair into a knot behind, stuck a
number of hairpins rather sketchily into it, and threw her clothes
(grey jersey, threadbare Irish tweed coat and skirt, stockings not
quite matching the coat and skirt, and much-worn brown shoes) on to
herself in the space of about three minutes.  She had got to 'do
out' the dining-room and her father's study before church, besides
saying her prayers in preparation for Holy Communion, which took
her not less than twenty minutes.

When she wheeled her bicycle out of the front gate the morning was
still overcast, and the grass sodden with heavy dew.  Through the
mist that wreathed the hillside St Athelstan's Church loomed dimly,
like a leaden sphinx, its single bell tolling funereally boom!
boom! boom!  Only one of the bells was now in active use; the other
seven had been unswung from their cage and had lain silent these
three years past, slowly splintering the floor of the belfry
beneath their weight.  In the distance, from the mists below, you
could hear the offensive clatter of the bell in the R.C. church--a
nasty, cheap, tinny little thing which the Rector of St Athelstan's
used to compare with a muffin-bell.

Dorothy mounted her bicycle and rode swiftly up the hill, leaning
over her handlebars.  The bridge of her thin nose was pink in the
morning cold.  A redshank whistled overhead, invisible against the
clouded sky.  Early in the morning my song shall rise to Thee!
Dorothy propped her bicycle against the lychgate, and, finding her
hands still grey with coal-dust, knelt down and scrubbed them clean
in the long wet grass between the graves.  Then the bell stopped
ringing, and she jumped up and hastened into church, just as
Proggett, the sexton, in ragged cassock and vast labourer's boots,
was clumping up the aisle to take his place at the side altar.

The church was very cold, with a scent of candle-wax and ancient
dust.  It was a large church, much too large for its congregation,
and ruinous and more than half empty.  The three narrow islands of
pews stretched barely half-way down the nave, and beyond them were
great wastes of bare stone floor in which a few worn inscriptions
marked the sites of ancient graves.  The roof over the chancel was
sagging visibly; beside the Church Expenses box two fragments of
riddled beam explained mutely that this was due to that mortal foe
of Christendom, the death-watch beetle.  The light filtered, pale-
coloured, through windows of anaemic glass.  Through the open south
door you could see a ragged cypress and the boughs of a lime-tree,
greyish in the sunless air and swaying faintly.

As usual, there was only one other communicant--old Miss Mayfill,
of The Grange.  The attendance at Holy Communion was so bad that
the Rector could not even get any boys to serve him, except on
Sunday mornings, when the boys liked showing off in front of the
congregation in their cassocks and surplices.  Dorothy went into
the pew behind Miss Mayfill, and, in penance for some sin of
yesterday, pushed away the hassock and knelt on the bare stones.
The service was beginning.  The Rector, in cassock and short linen
surplice, was reciting the prayers in a swift practised voice,
clear enough now that his teeth were in, and curiously ungenial.
In his fastidious, aged face, pale as a silver coin, there was an
expression of aloofness, almost of contempt.  'This is a valid
sacrament,' he seemed to be saying, 'and it is my duty to
administer it to you.  But remember that I am only your priest, not
your friend.  As a human being I dislike you and despise you.'
Proggett, the sexton, a man of forty with curly grey hair and a
red, harassed face, stood patiently by, uncomprehending but
reverent, fiddling with the little communion bell which was lost in
his huge red hands.

Dorothy pressed her fingers against her eyes.  She had not yet
succeeded in concentrating her thoughts--indeed, the memory of
Cargill's bill was still worrying her intermittently.  The prayers,
which she knew by heart, were flowing through her head unheeded.
She raised her eyes for a moment, and they began immediately to
stray.  First upwards, to the headless roof-angels on whose necks
you could still see the sawcuts of the Puritan soldiers, then back
again, to Miss Mayfill's black, quasi-pork-pie hat and tremulous
jet ear-rings.  Miss Mayfill wore a long musty black overcoat, with
a little collar of greasy-looking astrakhan, which had been the
same ever since Dorothy could remember.  It was of some very
peculiar stuff, like watered silk but coarser, with rivulets of
black piping wandering all over it in no discoverable pattern.  It
might even have been that legendary and proverbial substance, black
bombazine.  Miss Mayfill was very old, so old that no one
remembered her as anything but an old woman.  A faint scent
radiated from her--an ethereal scent, analysable as eau-de-Cologne,
mothballs, and a sub-flavour of gin.

Dorothy drew a long glass-headed pin from the lapel of her coat,
and furtively, under cover of Miss Mayfill's back, pressed the
point against her forearm.  Her flesh tingled apprehensively.  She
made it a rule, whenever she caught herself not attending to her
prayers, to prick her arm hard enough to make blood come.  It was
her chosen form of self-discipline, her guard against irreverence
and sacrilegious thoughts.

With the pin poised in readiness she managed for several moments
to pray more collectedly.  Her father had turned one dark eye
disapprovingly upon Miss Mayfill, who was crossing herself at
intervals, a practice he disliked.  A starling chattered outside.
With a shock Dorothy discovered that she was looking vaingloriously
at the pleats of her father's surplice, which she herself had sewn
two years ago.  She set her teeth and drove the pin an eighth of an
inch into her arm.

They were kneeling again.  It was the General Confession.  Dorothy
recalled her eyes--wandering, alas! yet again, this time to the
stained-glass window on her right, designed by Sir Warde Tooke,
A.R.A., in 1851 and representing St Athelstan's welcome at the gate
of heaven by Gabriel and a legion of angels all remarkably like one
another and the Prince Consort--and pressed the pinpoint against a
different part of her arm.  She began to meditate conscientiously
upon the meaning of each phrase of the prayer, and so brought her
mind back to a more attentive state.  But even so she was all but
obliged to use the pin again when Proggett tinkled the bell in the
middle of 'Therefore with Angels and Archangels'--being visited, as
always, by a dreadful temptation to begin laughing at that passage.
It was because of a story her father had told her once, of how when
he was a little boy, and serving the priest at the altar, the
communion bell had a screw-on clapper, which had come loose; and so
the priest had said:  'Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and
with all the company of Heaven, we laud and magnify Thy glorious
name; evermore praising Thee, and saying, Screw it up, you little
fat-head, screw it up!'

As the Rector finished the consecration Miss Mayfill began to
struggle to her feet with extreme difficulty and slowness, like
some disjointed wooden creature picking itself up by sections, and
disengaging at each movement a powerful whiff of mothballs.  There
was an extraordinary creaking sound--from her stays, presumably,
but it was a noise as of bones grating against one another.  You
could have imagined that there was only a dry skeleton inside that
black overcoat.

Dorothy remained on her feet a moment longer.  Miss Mayfill was
creeping towards the altar with slow, tottering steps.  She could
barely walk, but she took bitter offence if you offered to help
her.  In her ancient, bloodless face her mouth was surprisingly
large, loose, and wet.  The underlip, pendulous with age, slobbered
forward, exposing a strip of gum and a row of false teeth as yellow
as the keys of an old piano.  On the upper lip was a fringe of
dark, dewy moustache.  It was not an appetizing mouth; not the kind
of mouth that you would like to see drinking out of your cup.
Suddenly, spontaneously, as though the Devil himself had put it
there, the prayer slipped from Dorothy's lips:  O God, let me not
have to take the chalice after Miss Mayfill!

The next moment, in self-horror, she grasped the meaning of what
she had said, and wished that she had bitten her tongue in two
rather than utter that deadly blasphemy upon the altar steps.  She
drew the pin again from her lapel and drove it into her arm so hard
that it was all she could do to suppress a cry of pain.  Then she
stepped to the altar and knelt down meekly on Miss Mayfill's left,
so as to make quite sure of taking the chalice after her.

Kneeling, with head bent and hands clasped against her knees, she
set herself swiftly to pray for forgiveness before her father
should reach her with the wafer.  But the current of her thoughts
had been broken.  Suddenly it was quite useless attempting to pray;
her lips moved, but there was neither heart nor meaning in her
prayers.  She could hear Proggett's boots shuffling and her
father's clear low voice murmuring 'Take and eat', she could see
the worn strip of red carpet beneath her knees, she could smell
dust and eau-de-Cologne and mothballs; but of the Body and Blood of
Christ, of the purpose for which she had come here, she was as
though deprived of the power to think.  A deadly blankness had
descended upon her mind.  It seemed to her that actually she COULD
not pray.  She struggled, collected her thoughts, uttered
mechanically the opening phrases of a prayer; but they were
useless, meaningless--nothing but the dead shells of words.  Her
father was holding the wafer before her in his shapely, aged hand.
He held it between finger and thumb, fastidiously, somehow
distastefully, as though it had been a spoon of medicine.  His eye
was upon Miss Mayfill, who was doubling herself up like a geometrid
caterpillar, with many creakings and crossing herself so
elaborately that one might have imagined that she was sketching a
series of braid frogs on the front of her coat.  For several
seconds Dorothy hesitated and did not take the wafer.  She dared
not take it.  Better, far better to step down from the altar than
to accept the sacrament with such chaos in her heart!

Then it happened that she glanced sidelong, through the open south
door.  A momentary spear of sunlight had pierced the clouds.  It
struck downwards through the leaves of the limes, and a spray of
leaves in the doorway gleamed with a transient, matchless green,
greener than jade or emerald or Atlantic waters.  It was as though
some jewel of unimaginable splendour had flashed for an instant,
filling the doorway with green light, and then faded.  A flood of
joy ran through Dorothy's heart.  The flash of living colour had
brought back to her, by a process deeper than reason, her peace of
mind, her love of God, her power to worship.  Somehow, because of
the greenness of the leaves, it was again possible to pray.  O all
ye green things upon the earth, praise ye the Lord!  She began to
pray, ardently, joyfully, thankfully.  The wafer melted upon her
tongue.  She took the chalice from her father, and tasted with
repulsion, even with an added joy in this small act of self-
abasement, the wet imprint of Miss Mayfill's lips on its silver
rim.



2


St Athelstan's Church stood at the highest point of Knype Hill, and
if you chose to climb the tower you could see ten miles or so
across the surrounding country.  Not that there was anything worth
looking at--only the low, barely undulating East Anglian landscape,
intolerably dull in summer, but redeemed in winter by the recurring
patterns of the elms, naked and fanshaped against leaden skies.

Immediately below you lay the town, with the High Street running
east and west and dividing unequally.  The southern section of the
town was the ancient, agricultural, and respectable section.  On
the northern side were the buildings of the Blifil-Gordon sugar-
beet refinery, and all round and leading up to them were higgledy-
piggledly rows of vile yellow brick cottages, mostly inhabited by
the employees of the factory.  The factory employees, who made up
more than half of the town's two thousand inhabitants, were
newcomers, townfolk, and godless almost to a man.

The two pivots, or foci, about which the social life of the town
moved were Knype Hill Conservative Club (fully licensed), from
whose bow window, any time after the bar was open, the large, rosy-
gilled faces of the town's elite were to be seen gazing like chubby
goldfish from an aquarium pane; and Ye Olde Tea Shoppe, a little
farther down the High Street, the principal rendezvous of the Knype
Hill ladies.  Not to be present at Ye Olde Tea Shoppe between ten
and eleven every morning, to drink your 'morning coffee' and spend
your half-hour or so in that agreeable twitter of upper-middle-
class voices ('My dear, he had NINE spades to the ace-queen and he
went one no trump, if you please.  What, my dear, you don't mean to
say you're paying for my coffee AGAIN?  Oh, but my dear, it is
simply TOO sweet of you!  Now tomorrow I shall SIMPLY INSIST upon
paying for yours.  And just LOOK at dear little Toto sitting up and
looking such a CLEVER little man with his little black nose
wiggling, and he would, would he, the darling duck, he would, he
would, and his mother would give him a lump of sugar, she would,
she would.  THERE, Toto!'), was to be definitely out of Knype Hill
society.  The Rector in his acid way nicknamed these ladies 'the
coffee brigade'.  Close to the colony of sham-picturesque villas
inhabited by the coffee brigade, but cut off from them by its
larger grounds, was The Grange, Miss Mayfill's house.  It was a
curious, machicolated, imitation castle of dark red brick--
somebody's Folly, built about 1870--and fortunately almost hidden
among dense shrubberies.

The Rectory stood half way up the hill, with its face to the church
and its back to the High Street.  It was a house of the wrong age,
inconveniently large, and faced with chronically peeling yellow
plaster.  Some earlier Rector had added, at one side, a large
greenhouse which Dorothy used as a workroom, but which was
constantly out of repair.  The front garden was choked with ragged
fir-trees and a great spreading ash which shadowed the front rooms
and made it impossible to grow any flowers.  There was a large
vegetable garden at the back.  Proggett did the heavy digging of
the garden in the spring and autumn, and Dorothy did the sowing,
planting, and weeding in such spare time as she could command; in
spite of which the vegetable garden was usually an impenetrable
jungle of weeds.

Dorothy jumped off her bicycle at the front gate, upon which some
officious person had stuck a poster inscribed 'Vote for Blifil-
Gordon and Higher Wages!'  (There was a by-election going on, and
Mr Blifil-Gordon was standing in the Conservative interest.)  As
Dorothy opened the front door she saw two letters lying on the worn
coconut mat.  One was from the Rural Dean, and the other was a
nasty, thin-looking letter from Catkin & Palm, her father's
clerical tailors.  It was a bill undoubtedly.  The Rector had
followed his usual practice of collecting the letters that
interested him and leaving the others.  Dorothy was just bending
down to pick up the letters, when she saw, with a horrid shock of
dismay, an unstamped envelope sticking to the letter flap.

It was a bill--for certain it was a bill!  Moreover, as soon as she
set eyes on it she 'knew' that it was that horrible bill from
Cargill's, the butcher's.  A sinking feeling passed through her
entrails.  For a moment she actually began to pray that it might
not be Cargill's bill--that it might only be the bill for three
and nine from Solepipe's, the draper's, or the bill from the
International or the baker's or the dairy--anything except
Cargill's bill!  Then, mastering her panic, she took the envelope
from the letter-flap and tore it open with a convulsive movement.

'To account rendered: L21 7S. 9d.'

This was written in the innocuous handwriting of Mr Cargill's
accountant.  But underneath, in thick, accusing-looking letters,
was added and heavily underlined:  'Shd. like to bring to your
notice that this bill has been owing a VERY LONG TIME.  The
EARLIEST POSSIBLE settlement will oblige, S. Cargill.'

Dorothy had turned a shade paler, and was conscious of not wanting
any breakfast.  She thrust the bill into her pocket and went into
the dining-room.  It was a smallish, dark room, badly in need of
repapering, and, like every other room in the Rectory, it had the
air of having been furnished from the sweepings of an antique shop.
The furniture was 'good', but battered beyond repair, and the
chairs were so worm-eaten that you could only sit on them in safety
if you knew their individual foibles.  There were old, dark,
defaced steel engravings hanging on the walls, one of them--an
engraving of Van Dyck's portrait of Charles I--probably of some
value if it had not been ruined by damp.

The Rector was standing before the empty grate, warming himself at
an imaginary fire and reading a letter that came from a long blue
envelope.  He was still wearing his cassock of black watered silk,
which set off to perfection his thick white hair and his pale,
fine, none too amiable face.  As Dorothy came in he laid the letter
aside, drew out his gold watch and scrutinized it significantly.

'I'm afraid I'm a bit late, Father.'

'Yes, Dorothy, you are A BIT LATE,' said the Rector, repeating her
words with delicate but marked emphasis.  'You are twelve minutes
late, to be exact.  Don't you think, Dorothy, that when I have to
get up at a quarter past six to celebrate Holy Communion, and come
home exceedingly tired and hungry, it would be better if you could
manage to come to breakfast without being A BIT LATE?'

It was clear that the Rector was in what Dorothy called,
euphemistically, his 'uncomfortable mood'.  He had one of those
weary, cultivated voices which are never definitely angry and never
anywhere near good humour--one of those voices which seem all the
while to be saying, 'I really CANNOT see what you are making all
this fuss about!'  The impression he gave was of suffering
perpetually from other people's stupidity and tiresomeness.

'I'm so sorry, Father!  I simply had to go and ask after Mrs
Tawney.'  (Mrs Tawney was the 'Mrs T' of the 'memo list'.)  'Her
baby was born last night, and you know she promised me she'd come
and be churched after it was born.  But of course she won't if she
thinks we aren't taking any interest in her.  You know what these
women are--they seem so to hate being churched.  They'll never come
unless I coax them into it.'

The Rector did not actually grunt, but he uttered a small
dissatisfied sound as he moved towards the breakfast table.  It was
intended to mean, first, that it was Mrs Tawney's duty to come and
be churched without Dorothy's coaxing; secondly, that Dorothy had
no business to waste her time visiting all the riffraff of the
town, especially before breakfast.  Mrs Tawney was a labourer's
wife and lived in partibus infidelium, north of the High Street.
The Rector laid his hand on the back of his chair, and, without
speaking, cast Dorothy a glance which meant:  'Are we ready NOW?
Or are there to be any MORE delays?'

'I think everything's here, Father,' said Dorothy.  'Perhaps if
you'd just say grace--'

'Benedictus benedicat,' said the Rector, lifting the worn silver
coverlet off the breakfast dish.  The silver coverlet, like the
silver-gilt marmalade spoon, was a family heirloom; the knives and
forks, and most of the crockery, came from Woolworths.  'Bacon
again, I see,' the Rector added, eyeing the three minute rashers
that lay curled up on squares of fried bread.

'It's all we've got in the house, I'm afraid,' Dorothy said.

The Rector picked up his fork between finger and thumb, and with a
very delicate movement, as though playing at spillikins, turned one
of the rashers over.

'I know, of course,' he said, 'that bacon for breakfast is an
English institution almost as old as parliamentary government.  But
still, don't you think we might OCCASIONALLY have a change,
Dorothy?'

'Bacon's so cheap now,' said Dorothy regretfully.  'It seems a sin
not to buy it.  This was only fivepence a pound, and I saw some
quite decent-looking bacon as low as threepence.'

'Ah, Danish, I suppose?  What a variety of Danish invasions we have
had in this country!  First with fire and sword, and now with their
abominable cheap bacon.  Which has been responsible for the more
deaths, I wonder?'

Feeling a little better after this witticism, the Rector settled
himself in his chair and made a fairly good breakfast off the
despised bacon, while Dorothy (she was not having any bacon this
morning--a penance she had set herself yesterday for saying 'Damn'
and idling for half an hour after lunch) meditated upon a good
conversational opening.

There was an unspeakably hateful job in front of her--a demand for
money.  At the very best of times getting money out of her father
was next door to impossible, and it was obvious that this morning
he was going to be even more 'difficult' than usual.  'Difficult'
was another of her euphemisms.  He's had bad news, I suppose, she
thought despondently, looking at the blue envelope.

Probably no one who had ever spoken to the Rector for as long as
ten minutes would have denied that he was a 'difficult' kind of
man.  The secret of his almost unfailing ill humour really lay in
the fact that he was an anachronism.  He ought never to have been
born into the modern world; its whole atmosphere disgusted and
infuriated him.  A couple of centuries earlier, a happy pluralist
writing poems or collecting fossils while curates at 40 pounds a
year administered his parishes, he would have been perfectly at
home. Even now, if he had been a richer man, he might have consoled
himself by shutting the twentieth century out of his consciousness.
But to live in past ages is very expensive; you can't do it on less
than two thousand a year.  The Rector, tethered by his poverty to
the age of Lenin and the Daily Mail, was kept in a state of chronic
exasperation which it was only natural that he should work off on
the person nearest to him--usually, that is, on Dorothy.

He had been born in 1871, the younger son of the younger son of a
baronet, and had gone into the Church for the outmoded reason that
the Church is the traditional profession for younger sons.  His
first cure had been in a large, slummy parish in East London--a
nasty, hooliganish place it had been, and he looked back on it with
loathing.  Even in those days the lower class (as he made a point
of calling them) were getting decidedly out of hand.  It was a
little better when he was curate-in-charge at some remote place in
Kent (Dorothy had been born in Kent), where the decently down-
trodden villagers still touched their hats to 'parson'.  But by
that time he had married, and his marriage had been diabolically
unhappy; moreover, because clergymen must not quarrel with their
wives, its unhappiness had been secret and therefore ten times
worse.  He had come to Knype Hill in 1908, aged thirty-seven and
with a temper incurably soured--a temper which had ended by
alienating every man, woman, and child in the parish.

It was not that he was a bad priest, merely AS a priest.  In his
purely clerical duties he was scrupulously correct--perhaps a
little too correct for a Low Church East Anglian parish.  He
conducted his services with perfect taste, preached admirable
sermons, and got up at uncomfortable hours of the morning to
celebrate Holy Communion every Wednesday and Friday.  But that a
clergyman has any duties outside the four walls of the church was a
thing that had never seriously occurred to him.  Unable to afford a
curate, he left the dirty work of the parish entirely to his wife,
and after her death (she died in 1921) to Dorothy.  People used to
say, spitefully and untruly, that he would have let Dorothy preach
his sermons for him if it had been possible.  The 'lower classes'
had grasped from the first what was his attitude towards them, and
if he had been a rich man they would probably have licked his
boots, according to their custom; as it was, they merely hated him.
Not that he cared whether they hated him or not, for he was largely
unaware of their existence.  But even with the upper classes he had
got on no better.  With the County he had quarrelled one by one,
and as for the petty gentry of the town, as the grandson of a
baronet he despised them, and was at no pains to hide it.  In
twenty-three years he had succeeded in reducing the congregation of
St Athelstan's from six hundred to something under two hundred.

This was not solely due to personal reasons.  It was also because
the old-fashioned High Anglicanism to which the Rector obstinately
clung was of a kind to annoy all parties in the parish about
equally.  Nowadays, a clergyman who wants to keep his congregation
has only two courses open to him.  Either it must be Anglo-
Catholicism pure and simple--or rather, pure and not simple; or he
must be daringly modern and broad-minded and preach comforting
sermons proving that there is no Hell and all good religions are
the same.  The Rector did neither.  On the one hand, he had the
deepest contempt for the Anglo-Catholic movement.  It had passed
over his head, leaving him absolutely untouched; 'Roman Fever' was
his name for it.  On the other hand, he was too 'high' for the
older members of his congregation.  From time to time he scared
them almost out of their wits by the use of the fatal word
'Catholic', not only in its sanctified place in the Creeds, but
also from the pulpit.  Naturally the congregation dwindled year by
year, and it was the Best People who were the first to go.  Lord
Pockthorne of Pockthorne Court, who owned a fifth of the county, Mr
Leavis, the retired leather merchant, Sir Edward Huson of Crabtree
Hall, and such of the petty gentry as owned motor-cars, had all
deserted St Athelstan's.  Most of them drove over on Sunday
mornings to Millborough, five miles away.  Millborough was a town
of five thousand inhabitants, and you had your choice of two
churches, St Edmund's and St Wedekind's.  St Edmund's was
Modernist--text from Blake's 'Jerusalem' blazoned over the altar,
and communion wine out of liqueur glasses--and St Wedekind's was
Anglo-Catholic and in a state of perpetual guerrilla warfare with
the Bishop.  But Mr Cameron, the secretary of the Knype Hill
Conservative Club, was a Roman Catholic convert, and his children
were in the thick of the Roman Catholic literary movement.  They
were said to have a parrot which they were teaching to say 'Extra
ecclesiam nulla salus'.  In effect, no one of any standing remained
true to St Athelstan's, except Miss Mayfill, of The Grange.  Most
of Miss Mayfill's money was bequeathed to the Church--so she said;
meanwhile, she had never been known to put more than sixpence in
the collection bag, and she seemed likely to go on living for ever.

The first ten minutes of breakfast passed in complete silence.
Dorothy was trying to summon up courage to speak--obviously she had
got to start SOME kind of conversation before raising the money-
question--but her father was not an easy man with whom to make
small talk.  At times he would fall into such deep fits of
abstraction that you could hardly get him to listen to you; at
other times he was all too attentive, listened carefully to what
you said and then pointed out, rather wearily, that it was not
worth saying.  Polite platitudes--the weather, and so forth--
generally moved him to sarcasm.  Nevertheless, Dorothy decided to
try the weather first.

'It's a funny kind of day, isn't it?' she said--aware, even as she
made it, of the inanity of this remark.

'WHAT is funny?' inquired the Rector.

'Well, I mean, it was so cold and misty this morning, and now the
sun's come out and it's turned quite fine.'

'IS there anything particularly funny about that?'

That was no good, obviously.  He MUST have had bad news, she
thought.  She tried again.

'I do wish you'd come out and have a look at the things in the back
garden some time, Father.  The runner beans are doing so splendidly!
The pods are going to be over a foot long.  I'm going to keep all
the best of them for the Harvest Festival, of course.  I thought it
would look so nice if we decorated the pulpit with festoons of
runner beans and a few tomatoes hanging in among them.'

This was a faux pas.  The Rector looked up from his plate with an
expression of profound distaste.

'My dear Dorothy,' he said sharply, 'IS it necessary to begin
worrying me about the Harvest Festival already?'

'I'm sorry, Father!' said Dorothy, disconcerted.  'I didn't mean to
worry you.  I just thought--'

'Do you suppose', proceeded the Rector, 'it is any pleasure to me
to have to preach my sermon among festoons of runner beans?  I am
not a greengrocer.  It quite puts me off my breakfast to think of
it.  When is the wretched thing due to happen?'

'It's September the sixteenth, Father.'

'That's nearly a month hence.  For Heaven's sake let me forget it
a little longer!  I suppose we must have this ridiculous business
once a year to tickle the vanity of every amateur gardener in the
parish.  But don't let's think of it more than is absolutely
necessary.'

The Rector had, as Dorothy ought to have remembered, a perfect
abhorrence of Harvest Festivals.  He had even lost a valuable
parishioner--a Mr Toagis, a surly retired market gardener--through
his dislike, as he said, of seeing his church dressed up to imitate
a coster's stall.  Mr Toagis, anima naturaliter Nonconformistica,
had been kept 'Church' solely by the privilege, at Harvest Festival
time, of decorating the side altar with a sort of Stonehenge
composed of gigantic vegetable marrows.  The previous summer he had
succeeded in growing a perfect leviathan of a pumpkin, a fiery red
thing so enormous that it took two men to lift it.  This monstrous
object had been placed in the chancel, where it dwarfed the altar
and took all the colour out of the east window.  In no matter what
part of the church you were standing, the pumpkin, as the saying
goes, hit you in the eye.  Mr Toagis was in raptures.  He hung
about the church at all hours, unable to tear himself away from his
adored pumpkin, and even bringing relays of friends in to admire
it.  From the expression of his face you would have thought that he
was quoting Wordsworth on Westminster Bridge:


Earth has not any thing to show more fair:
Dull would he be of soul who could pass by
A sight so touching in its majesty!


Dorothy even had hopes, after this, of getting him to come to Holy
Communion.  But when the Rector saw the pumpkin he was seriously
angry, and ordered 'that revolting thing' to be removed at once.
Mr Toagis had instantly 'gone chapel', and he and his heirs were
lost to the Church for ever.

Dorothy decided to make one final attempt at conversation.

'We're getting on with the costumes for Charles I,' she said.  (The
Church School children were rehearsing a play entitled Charles I in
aid of the organ fund.)  'But I do wish we'd chosen something a bit
easier.  The armour is a dreadful job to make, and I'm afraid the
jackboots are going to be worse.  I think next time we must really
have a Roman or Greek play.  Something where they only have to wear
togas.'

This elicited only another muted grunt from the Rector.  School
plays, pageants, bazaars, jumble sales, and concerts in aid of were
not quite so bad in his eyes as Harvest Festivals, but he did not
pretend to be interested in them.  They were necessary evils, he
used to say.  At this moment Ellen, the maidservant, pushed open
the door and came gauchely into the room with one large, scaly hand
holding her sacking apron against her belly.  She was a tall,
round-shouldered girl with mouse-coloured hair, a plaintive voice,
and a bad complexion, and she suffered chronically from eczema.
Her eyes flitted apprehensively towards the Rector, but she
addressed herself to Dorothy, for she was too much afraid of the
Rector to speak to him directly.

'Please, Miss--' she began.

'Yes, Ellen?'

'Please, Miss,' went on Ellen plaintively, 'Mr Porter's in the
kitchen, and he says, please could the Rector come round and
baptize Mrs Porter's baby?  Because they don't think as it's going
to live the day out, and it ain't been baptized yet, Miss.'

Dorothy stood up.  'Sit down,' said the Rector promptly, with his
mouth full.

'What do they think is the matter with the baby?' said Dorothy.

'Well, Miss, it's turning quite black.  And it's had diarrhoea
something cruel.'

The Rector emptied his mouth with an effort.  'Must I have these
disgusting details while I am eating my breakfast?' he exclaimed.
He turned on Ellen:  'Send Porter about his business and tell him
I'll be round at his house at twelve o'clock.  I really cannot
think why it is that the lower classes always seem to choose
mealtimes to come pestering one,' he added, casting another
irritated glance at Dorothy as she sat down.

Mr Porter was a labouring man--a bricklayer, to be exact.  The
Rector's views on baptism were entirely sound.  If it had been
urgently necessary he would have walked twenty miles through snow
to baptize a dying baby.  But he did not like to see Dorothy
proposing to leave the breakfast table at the call of a common
bricklayer.

There was no further conversation during breakfast.  Dorothy's
heart was sinking lower and lower.  The demand for money had got to
be made, and yet it was perfectly obvious that it was foredoomed to
failure.  His breakfast finished, the Rector got up from the table
and began to fill his pipe from the tobacco-jar on the mantelpiece.
Dorothy uttered a short prayer for courage, and then pinched
herself.  Go on, Dorothy!  Out with it!  No funking, please!  With
an effort she mastered her voice and said:

'Father--'

'What is it?' said the Rector, pausing with the match in his hand.

'Father, I've something I want to ask you.  Something important.'

The expression of the Rector's face changed.  He had divined
instantly what she was going to say; and, curiously enough, he now
looked less irritable than before.  A stony calm had settled upon
his face.  He looked like a rather exceptionally aloof and
unhelpful sphinx.

'Now, my dear Dorothy, I know very well what you are going to say.
I suppose you are going to ask me for money again.  Is that it?'

'Yes, Father.  Because--'

'Well, I may as well save you the trouble.  I have no money at all--
absolutely no money at all until next quarter.  You have had your
allowance, and I can't give you a halfpenny more.  It's quite
useless to come worrying me now.'

'But, Father--'

Dorothy's heart sank yet lower.  What was worst of all when she
came to him for money was the terrible, unhelpful calmness of his
attitude.  He was never so unmoved as when you were reminding him
that he was up to his eyes in debt.  Apparently he could not
understand that tradesmen occasionally want to be paid, and that no
house can be kept going without an adequate supply of money.  He
allowed Dorothy eighteen pounds a month for all the household
expenses, including Ellen's wages, and at the same time he was
'dainty' about his food and instantly detected any falling off in
its quality.  The result was, of course, that the household was
perennially in debt.  But the Rector paid not the smallest
attention to his debts--indeed, he was hardly even aware of them.
When he lost money over an investment, he was deeply agitated; but
as for a debt to a mere tradesman--well, it was the kind of thing
that he simply could not bother his head about.

A peaceful plume of smoke floated upwards from the Rector's pipe.
He was gazing with a meditative eye at the steel engraving of
Charles I and had probably forgotten already about Dorothy's demand
for money.  Seeing him so unconcerned, a pang of desperation went
through Dorothy, and her courage came back to her.  She said more
sharply than before:

'Father, please listen to me!  I MUST have some money soon!  I
simply MUST!  We can't go on as we're doing.  We owe money to
nearly every tradesman in the town.  It's got so that some mornings
I can hardly bear to go down the street and think of all the bills
that are owing.  Do you know that we owe Cargill nearly twenty-two
pounds?'

'What of it?' said the Rector between puffs of smoke.

'But the bill's been mounting up for over seven months!  He's sent
it in over and over again.  We MUST pay it!  It's so unfair to him
to keep him waiting for his money like that!'

'Nonsense, my dear child!  These people expect to be kept waiting
for their money.  They like it.  It brings them more in the end.
Goodness knows how much I owe to Catkin & Palm--I should hardly
care to inquire.  They are dunning me by every post.  But you don't
hear ME complaining, do you?'

'But, Father, I can't look at it as you do, I can't!  It's so
dreadful to be always in debt!  Even if it isn't actually wrong,
it's so HATEFUL.  It makes me so ashamed!  When I go into Cargill's
shop to order the joint, he speaks to me so shortly and makes me
wait after the other customers, all because our bill's mounting up
the whole time.  And yet I daren't stop ordering from him.  I
believe he'd run us in if I did.'

The Rector frowned.  'What!  Do you mean to say the fellow has been
impertinent to you?'

'I didn't say he'd been impertinent, Father.  But you can't blame
him if he's angry when his bill's not paid.'

'I most certainly can blame him!  It is simply abominable how these
people take it upon themselves to behave nowadays--abominable!  But
there you are, you see.  That is the kind of thing that we are
exposed to in this delightful century.  That is democracy--
PROGRESS, as they are pleased to call it.  Don't order from the
fellow again.  Tell him at once that you are taking your account
elsewhere.  That's the only way to treat these people.'

'But, Father, that doesn't settle anything.  Really and truly,
don't you think we ought to pay him?  Surely we can get hold of the
money somehow?  Couldn't you sell out some shares, or something?'

'My dear child, don't talk to me about selling out shares!  I have
just had the most disagreeable news from my broker.  He tells me
that my Sumatra Tin shares have dropped from seven and fourpence to
six and a penny.  It means a loss of nearly sixty pounds.  I am
telling him to sell out at once before they drop any further.'

'Then if you sell out you'll have some ready money, won't you?
Don't you think it would be better to get out of debt once and for
all?'

'Nonsense, nonsense,' said the Rector more calmly, putting his pipe
back in his mouth.  'You know nothing whatever about these matters.
I shall have to reinvest at once in something more hopeful--it's
the only way of getting my money back.'

With one thumb in the belt of his cassock he frowned abstractedly
at the steel engraving.  His broker had advised United Celanese.
Here--in Sumatra Tin, United Celanese, and numberless other remote
and dimly imagined companies--was the central cause of the Rector's
money troubles.  He was an inveterate gambler.  Not, of course,
that he thought of it as gambling; it was merely a lifelong search
for a 'good investment'.  On coming of age he had inherited four
thousand pounds, which had gradually dwindled, thanks to his
'investments', to about twelve hundred.  What was worse, every year
he managed to scrape together, out of his miserable income, another
fifty pounds which vanished by the same road.  It is a curious fact
that the lure of a 'good investment' seems to haunt clergymen more
persistently than any other class of man.  Perhaps it is the modern
equivalent of the demons in female shape who used to haunt the
anchorites of the Dark Ages.

'I shall buy five hundred United Celanese,' said the Rector finally.

Dorothy began to give up hope.  Her father was now thinking of his
'investments' (she new nothing whatever about these 'investments',
except that they went wrong with phenomenal regularity), and in
another moment the question of the shop-debts would have slipped
entirely out of his mind.  She made a final effort.

'Father, let's get this settled, please.  Do you think you'll be
able to let me have some extra money fairly soon?  Not this moment,
perhaps--but in the next month or two?'

'No, my dear, I don't.  About Christmas time, possibly--it's very
unlikely even then.  But for the present, certainly not.  I haven't
a halfpenny I can spare.'

'But, Father, it's so horrible to feel we can't pay our debts!  It
disgraces us so!  Last time Mr Welwyn-Foster was here' (Mr Welwyn-
Foster was the Rural Dean) 'Mrs Welwyn-Foster was going all round
the town asking everyone the most personal questions about us--
asking how we spent our time, and how much money we had, and how
many tons of coal we used in a year, and everything.  She's always
trying to pry into our affairs.  Suppose she found out that we were
badly in debt!'

'Surely it is our own business?  I fail entirely to see what it has
to do with Mrs Welwyn-Foster or anyone else.'

'But she'd repeat it all over the place--and she'd exaggerate it
too!  You know what Mrs Welwyn-Foster is.  In every parish she goes
to she tries to find out something disgraceful about the clergyman,
and then she repeats every word of it to the Bishop.  I don't want
to be uncharitable about her, but really she--'

Realizing that she DID want to be uncharitable, Dorothy was silent.

'She is a detestable woman,' said the Rector evenly.  'What of it?
Who ever heard of a Rural Dean's wife who wasn't detestable?'

'But, Father, I don't seem to be able to get you to see how serious
things are!  We've simply nothing to live on for the next month.  I
don't even know where the meat's coming from for today's dinner.'

'Luncheon, Dorothy, luncheon!' said the Rector with a touch of
irritation.  'I do wish you would drop that abominable lower-class
habit of calling the midday meal DINNER!'

'For luncheon, then.  Where are we to get the meat from?  I daren't
ask Cargill for another joint.'

'Go to the other butcher--what's his name?  Salter--and take no
notice of Cargill.  He knows he'll be paid sooner or later.  Good
gracious, I don't know what all this fuss is about!  Doesn't
everyone owe money to his tradesmen?  I distinctly remember'--the
Rector straightened his shoulders a little, and, putting his pipe
back into his mouth, looked into the distance; his voice became
reminiscent and perceptibly more agreeable--'I distinctly remember
that when I was up at Oxford, my father had still not paid some of
his own Oxford bills of thirty years earlier.  Tom' (Tom was the
Rector's cousin, the Baronet) 'owed seven thousand before he came
into his money.  He told me so himself.'

At that, Dorothy's last hope vanished.  When her father began to
talk about his cousin Tom, and about things that had happened 'when
I was up at Oxford', there was nothing more to be done with him.
It meant that he had slipped into an imaginary golden past in which
such vulgar things as butchers' bills simply did not exist.  There
were long periods together when he seemed actually to forget that
he was only a poverty-stricken country Rector--that he was not a
young man of family with estates and reversions at his back.  The
aristocratic, the expensive attitude was the one that in all
circumstances came the most naturally to him.  And of course while
he lived, not uncomfortably, in the world of his imagination, it
was Dorothy who had to fight the tradesmen and make a leg of mutton
last from Sunday to Wednesday.  But she knew the complete
uselessness of arguing with him any longer.  It would only end in
making him angry.  She got up from the table and began to pile the
breakfast things on to the tray.

'You're absolutely certain you can't let me have any money,
Father?' she said for the last time, at the door; with the tray in
her arms.

The Rector, gazing into the middle distance, amid comfortable
wreaths of smoke, did not hear her.  He was thinking, perhaps, of
his golden Oxford days.  Dorothy went out of the room distressed
almost to the point of tears.  The miserable question of the debts
was once more shelved, as it had been shelved a thousand times
before, with no prospect of final solution.



3


On her elderly bicycle with the basketwork carrier on the handle-
bars, Dorothy free-wheeled down the hill, doing mental arithmetic
with three pounds nineteen and fourpence--her entire stock of money
until next quarter-day.

She had been through the list of things that were needed in the
kitchen.  But indeed, was there anything that was NOT needed in the
kitchen?  Tea, coffee, soap, matches, candles, sugar, lentils,
firewood, soda, lamp oil, boot polish, margarine, baking powder--
there seemed to be practically nothing that they were not running
short of.  And at every moment some fresh item that she had
forgotten popped up and dismayed her.  The laundry bill, for
example, and the fact that the coal was running short, and the
question of the fish for Friday.  The Rector was 'difficult' about
fish.  Roughly speaking, he would only eat the more expensive
kinds; cod, whiting, sprats, skate, herrings, and kippers he
refused.

Meanwhile, she had got to settle about the meat for today's dinner--
luncheon.  (Dorothy was careful to obey her father and call it
LUNCHEON, when she remembered it.  On the other hand, you could not
in honesty call the evening meal anything but 'supper'; so there
was no such meal as 'dinner' at the Rectory.)  Better make an
omelette for luncheon today, Dorothy decided.  She dared not go to
Cargill again.  Though, of course, if they had an omelette for
luncheon and then scrambled eggs for supper, her father would
probably be sarcastic about it.  Last time they had eggs twice in
one day, he had inquired coldly, 'Have you started a chicken farm,
Dorothy?'  And perhaps tomorrow she would get two pounds of
sausages at the International, and that staved off the meat-
question for one day more.

Thirty-nine further days, with only three pounds nineteen and
fourpence to provide for them, loomed up in Dorothy's imagination,
sending through her a wave of self-pity which she checked almost
instantly.  Now then, Dorothy!  No snivelling, please!  It all
comes right somehow if you trust in God.  Matthew vi, 25.  The Lord
will provide.  Will He?  Dorothy removed her right hand from the
handle-bars and felt for the glass-headed pin, but the blasphemous
thought faded.  At this moment she became aware of the gloomy red
face of Proggett, who was hailing her respectfully but urgently
from the side of the road.

Dorothy stopped and got off her bicycle.

'Beg pardon, Miss,' said Proggett.  'I been wanting to speak to
you, Miss--PARTIC'LAR.'

Dorothy sighed inwardly.  When Proggett wanted to speak to you
PARTIC'LAR, you could be perfectly certain what was coming; it was
some piece of alarming news about the condition of the church.
Proggett was a pessimistic, conscientious man, and very loyal
churchman, after his fashion.  Too dim of intellect to have any
definite religious beliefs, he showed his piety by an intense
solicitude about the state of the church buildings.  He had decided
long ago that the Church of Christ meant the actual walls, roof,
and tower of St Athelstan's, Knype Hill, and he would poke round
the church at all hours of the day, gloomily noting a cracked stone
here, a worm-eaten beam there--and afterwards, of course, coming to
harass Dorothy with demands for repairs which would cost impossible
sums of money.

'What is it, Proggett?' said Dorothy.

'Well, Miss, it's they --'--here a peculiar, imperfect sound, not a
word exactly, but the ghost of a word, all but formed itself on
Proggett's lips.  It seemed to begin with a B.  Proggett was one of
those men who are for ever on the verge of swearing, but who always
recapture the oath as it is escaping between their teeth.  'It's
they BELLS, Miss,' he said, getting rid of the B sound with an
effort.  'They bells up in the church tower.  They're a-splintering
through that there belfry floor in a way as it makes you fair
shudder to look at 'em.  We'll have 'em down atop of us before we
know where we are.  I was up the belfry 'smorning, and I tell you I
come down faster'n I went up, when I saw how that there floor's a-
busting underneath 'em.'

Proggett came to complain about the condition of the bells not less
than once a fortnight.  It was now three years that they had been
lying on the floor of the belfry, because the cost of either
reswinging or removing them was estimated at twenty-five pounds,
which might as well have been twenty-five thousand for all the
chance there was of paying for it.  They were really almost as
dangerous as Proggett made out.  It was quite certain that, if not
this year or next year, at any rate at some time in the near
future, they would fall through the belfry floor into the church
porch.  And, as Proggett was fond of pointing out, it would
probably happen on a Sunday morning just as the congregation were
coming into church.

Dorothy sighed again.  Those wretched bells were never out of mind
for long; there were times when the thought of their falling even
got into her dreams.  There was always some trouble or other at the
church.  If it was not the belfry, then it was the roof or the
walls; or it was a broken pew which the carpenter wanted ten
shillings to mend; or it was seven hymn-books needed at one and
sixpence each, or the flue of the stove choked up--and the sweep's
fee was half a crown--or a smashed window-pane or the choir-boys'
cassocks in rags.  There was never enough money for anything.  The
new organ which the rector had insisted on buying five years
earlier--the old one, he said, reminded him of a cow with the
asthma--was a burden under which the Church Expenses fund had been
staggering ever since.

'I don't know WHAT we can do,' said Dorothy finally; 'I really
don't.  We've simply no money at all.  And even if we do make
anything out of the school-children's play, it's all got to go to
the organ fund.  The organ people are really getting quite nasty
about their bill.  Have you spoken to my father?'

'Yes, Miss.  He don't make nothing of it.  "Belfry's held up five
hundred years," he says; "we can trust it to hold up a few years
longer."'

This was quite according to precedent.  The fact that the church
was visibly collapsing over his head made no impression on the
Rector; he simply ignored it, as he ignored anything else that he
did not wish to be worried about.

'Well, I don't know WHAT we can do,' Dorothy repeated.  'Of course
there's the jumble sale coming off the week after next.  I'm
counting on Miss Mayfill to give us something really NICE for the
jumble sale.  I know she could afford to.  She's got such lots of
furniture and things that she never uses.  I was in her house the
other day, and I saw a most beautiful Lowestoft china tea service
which was put away in a cupboard, and she told me it hadn't been
used for over twenty years.  Just suppose she gave us that tea
service!  It would fetch pounds and pounds.  We must just pray that
the jumble sale will be a success, Proggett.  Pray that it'll bring
us five pounds at least.  I'm sure we shall get the money somehow
if we really and truly pray for it.'

'Yes, Miss,' said Proggett respectfully, and shifted his gaze to
the far distance.

At this moment a horn hooted and a vast, gleaming blue car came
very slowly down the road, making for the High Street.  Out of one
window Mr Blifil-Gordon, the Proprietor of the sugar-beet refinery,
was thrusting a sleek black head which went remarkably ill with his
suit of sandy-coloured Harris tweed.  As he passed, instead of
ignoring Dorothy as usual, he flashed upon her a smile so warm that
it was almost amorous.  With him were his eldest son Ralph--or, as
he and the rest of the family pronounced it, Walph--an epicene
youth of twenty, given to the writing of sub-Eliot vers libre
poems, and Lord Pockthorne's two daughters.  They were all smiling,
even Lord Pockthorne's daughters.  Dorothy was astonished, for it
was several years since any of these people had deigned to
recognize her in the street.

'Mr Blifil-Gordon is very friendly this morning,' she said.

'Aye, Miss.  I'll be bound he is.  It's the election coming on next
week, that's what 'tis.  All honey and butter they are till they've
made sure as you'll vote for them; and then they've forgot your
very face the day afterwards.'

'Oh, the election!' said Dorothy vaguely.  So remote were such
things as parliamentary elections from the daily round of parish
work that she was virtually unaware of them--hardly, indeed, even
knowing the difference between Liberal and Conservative or
Socialist and Communist.  'Well, Proggett,' she said, immediately
forgetting the election in favour of something more important,
'I'll speak to Father and tell him how serious it is about the
bells.  I think perhaps the best thing we can do will be to get up
a special subscription, just for the bells alone.  There's no
knowing, we might make five pounds.  We might even make ten pounds!
Don't you think if I went to Miss Mayfill and asked her to start
the subscription with five pounds, she might give it to us?'

'You take my word, Miss, and don't you let Miss Mayfill hear
nothing about it.  It'd scare the life out of her.  If she thought
as that tower wasn't safe, we'd never get her inside that church
again.'

'Oh dear!  I suppose not.'

'No, Miss.  We shan't get nothing out of HER; the old--'

A ghostly B floated once more across Proggett's lips.  His mind a
little more at rest now that he had delivered his fortnightly
report upon the bells, he touched his cap and departed, while
Dorothy rode on into the High Street, with the twin problems of the
shop-debts and the Church Expenses pursuing one another through her
mind like the twin refrains of a villanelle.

The still watery sun, now playing hide-and-seek, April-wise, among
woolly islets of cloud, sent an oblique beam down the High Street,
gilding the house-fronts of the northern side.  It was one of those
sleepy, old-fashioned streets that look so ideally peaceful on a
casual visit and so very different when you live in them and have
an enemy or a creditor behind every window.  The only definitely
offensive buildings were Ye Olde Tea Shoppe (plaster front with
sham beams nailed on to it, bottle-glass windows and revolting
curly roof like that of a Chinese joss-house), and the new, Doric-
pillared post office.  After about two hundred yards the High
Street forked, forming a tiny market-place, adorned with a pump,
now defunct, and a worm-eaten pair of stocks.  On either side of
the pump stood the Dog and Bottle, the principal inn of the town,
and the Knype Hill Conservative Club.  At the end, commanding the
street, stood Cargill's dreaded shop.

Dorothy came round the corner to a terrific din of cheering,
mingled with the strains of 'Rule Britannia' played on the
trombone.  The normally sleepy street was black with people, and
more people were hurrying from all the sidestreets.  Evidently a
sort of triumphal procession was taking place.  Right across the
street, from the roof of the Dog and Bottle to the roof of the
Conservative Club, hung a line with innumerable blue streamers, and
in the middle a vast banner inscribed 'Blifil-Gordon and the
Empire!'  Towards this, between the lanes of people, the Blifil-
Gordon car was moving at a foot-pace, with Mr Blifil-Gordon smiling
richly, first to one side, then to the other.  In front of the car
marched a detachment of the Buffaloes, headed by an earnest-looking
little man playing the trombone, and carrying among them another
banner inscribed:


Who'll save Britain from the Reds?

BLIFIL-GORDON

Who'll put the Beer back into your Pot?

BLIFIL-GORDON

Blifil-Gordon for ever!


From the window of the Conservative Club floated an enormous Union
Jack, above which six scarlet faces were beaming enthusiastically.

Dorothy wheeled her bicycle slowly down the street, too much
agitated by the prospect of passing Cargill's shop (she had got to
pass, it, to get to Solepipe's) to take much notice of the
procession.  The Blifil-Gordon car had halted for a moment outside
Ye Olde Tea Shoppe.  Forward, the coffee brigade!  Half the ladies
of the town seemed to be hurrying forth, with lapdogs or shopping
baskets on their arms, to cluster about the car like Bacchantes
about the car of the vine-god.  After all, an election is
practically the only time when you get a chance of exchanging
smiles with the County.  There were eager feminine cries of 'Good
luck, Mr Blifil-Gordon!  DEAR Mr Blifil-Gordon!  We DO hope you'll
get in, Mr Blifil-Gordon!'  Mr Blifil-Gordon's largesse of smiles
was unceasing, but carefully graded.  To the populace he gave a
diffused, general smile, not resting on individuals; to the coffee
ladies and the six scarlet patriots of the Conservative Club he
gave one smile each; to the most favoured of all, young Walph gave
an occasional wave of the hand and a squeaky 'Cheewio!'

Dorothy's heart tightened.  She had seen that Mr Cargill, like the
rest of the shopkeepers, was standing on his doorstep.  He was a
tall, evil-looking man, in blue-striped apron, with a lean, scraped
face as purple as one of his own joints of meat that had lain a
little too long in the window.  So fascinated were Dorothy's eyes
by that ominous figure that she did not look where she was going,
and bumped into a very large, stout man who was stepping off the
pavement backwards.

The stout man turned round.  'Good Heavens!  It's Dorothy!' he
exclaimed.

'Why, Mr Warburton!  How extraordinary!  Do you know, I had a
feeling I was going to meet you today.'

'By the pricking of your thumbs, I presume?' said Mr Warburton,
beaming all over a large, pink, Micawberish face.  'And how are
you?  But by Jove!' he added, 'What need is there to ask?  You look
more bewitching than ever.'

He pinched Dorothy's bare elbow--she had changed, after breakfast,
into a sleeveless gingham frock.  Dorothy stepped hurriedly
backwards to get out of his reach--she hated being pinched or
otherwise 'mauled about'--and said rather severely:

'PLEASE don't pinch my elbow.  I don't like it.'

'My dear Dorothy, who could resist an elbow like yours?  It's the
sort of elbow one pinches automatically.  A reflex action, if you
understand me.'

'When did you get back to Knype Hill?' said Dorothy, who had put
her bicycle between Mr Warburton and herself.  It's over two months
since I've seen you.'

'I got back the day before yesterday.  But this is only a flying
visit.  I'm off again tomorrow.  I'm taking the kids to Brittany.
The BASTARDS, you know.'

Mr Warburton pronounced the word BASTARDS, at which Dorothy looked
away in discomfort, with a touch of naive pride.  He and his
'bastards' (he had three of them) were one of the chief scandals of
Knype Hill.  He was a man of independent income, calling himself a
painter--he produced about half a dozen mediocre landscapes every
year--and he had come to Knype Hill two years earlier and bought
one of the new villas behind the Rectory.  There he lived, or
rather stayed periodically, in open concubinage with a woman whom
he called his housekeeper.  Four months ago this woman--she was a
foreigner, a Spaniard it was said--had created a fresh and worse
scandal by abruptly deserting him, and his three children were now
parked with some long-suffering relative in London.  In appearance
he was a fine, imposing-looking man, though entirely bald (he was
at great pains to conceal this), and he carried himself with such a
rakish air as to give the impression that his fairly sizeable belly
was merely a kind of annexe to his chest.  His age was forty-eight,
and he owned to forty-four.  People in the town said that he was a
'proper old rascal'; young girls were afraid of him, not without
reason.

Mr Warburton had laid his hand pseudo-paternally on Dorothy's
shoulder and was shepherding her through the crowd, talking all the
while almost without a pause.  The Blifil-Gordon car, having
rounded the pump, was now wending its way back, still accompanied
by its troupe of middle-aged Bacchantes.  Mr Warburton, his
attention caught, paused to scrutinize it.

'What is the meaning of these disgusting antics?' he asked.

'Oh, they're--what is it they call it?--electioneering.  Trying to
get us to vote for them, I suppose.'

'Trying to get us to vote for them!  Good God!' murmured Mr
Warburton, as he eyed the triumphal cortege.  He raised the large,
silver-headed cane that he always carried, and pointed, rather
expressively, first at one figure in the procession and then at
another.  'Look at it!  Just look at it!  Look at those fawning
hags, and that half-witted oaf grinning at us like a monkey that
sees a bag of nuts.  Did you ever see such a disgusting spectacle?'

'Do be careful!' Dorothy murmured.  'Somebody's sure to hear you.'

'Good!' said Mr Warburton, immediately raising his voice.  'And to
think that low-born hound actually has the impertinence to think
that he's pleasing us with the sight of his false teeth!  And that
suit he's wearing is an offence in itself.  Is there a Socialist
candidate?  If so, I shall certainly vote for him.'

Several people on the pavement turned and stared.  Dorothy saw
little Mr Twiss, the ironmonger, a weazened, leather-coloured old
man, peering with veiled malevolence round the corner of the rush
baskets that hung in his doorway.  He had caught the word
Socialist, and was mentally registering Mr Warburton as a Socialist
and Dorothy as the friend of Socialists.

'I really MUST be getting on,' said Dorothy hastily, feeling that
she had better escape before Mr Warburton said something even more
tactless.  'I've got ever such a lot of shopping to do.  I'll say
good-bye for the present, then.'

'Oh, no, you won't!' said Mr Warburton cheerfully.  'Not a bit of
it!  I'll come with you.'

As she wheeled her bicycle down the street he marched at her side,
still talking, with his large chest well forward and his stick
tucked under his arm.  He was a difficult man to shake off, and
though Dorothy counted him as a friend, she did sometimes wish, he
being the town scandal and she the Rector's daughter, that he would
not always choose the most public places to talk to her in.  At
this moment, however, she was rather grateful for his company,
which made it appreciably easier to pass Cargill's shop--for
Cargill was still on his doorstep and was regarding her with a
sidelong, meaning gaze.

'It was a bit of luck my meeting you this morning,' Mr Warburton
went on.  'In fact, I was looking for you.  Who do you think I've
got coming to dinner with me tonight?  Bewley--Ronald Bewley.
You've heard of him, of course?'

'Ronald Bewley?  No, I don't think so.  Who is he?'

'Why, dash it!  Ronald Bewley, the novelist.  Author of Fishpools
and Concubines.  Surely you've read Fishpools and Concubines?'

'No, I'm afraid I haven't.  In fact, I'd never even heard of it.'

'My dear Dorothy!  You HAVE been neglecting yourself.  You
certainly ought to read Fishpools and Concubines.  It's hot stuff,
I assure you--real high-class pornography.  Just the kind of thing
you need to take the taste of the Girl Guides out of your mouth.'

'I do wish you wouldn't say such things!' said Dorothy, looking
away uncomfortably, and then immediately looking back again because
she had all but caught Cargill's eye.  'Where does this Mr Bewley
live?' she added.  'Not here, surely, does he?'

'No.  He's coming over from Ipswich for dinner, and perhaps to stay
the night.  That's why I was looking for you.  I thought you might
like to meet him.  How about your coming to dinner tonight?'

'I can't possibly come to dinner,' said Dorothy.  'I've got
Father's supper to see to, and thousands of other things.  I shan't
be free till eight o'clock or after.'

'Well, come along after dinner, then.  I'd like you to know Bewley.
He's an interesting fellow--very au fait with all the Bloomsbury
scandal, and all that.  You'll enjoy meeting him.  It'll do you
good to escape from the church hen-coop for a few hours.'

Dorothy hesitated.  She was tempted.  To tell the truth, she
enjoyed her occasional visits to Mr Warburton's house extremely.
But of course they were VERY occasional--once in three or four
months at the oftenest; it so obviously DIDN'T DO to associate too
freely with such a man.  And even when she did go to his house she
was careful to make sure beforehand that there was going to be at
least one other visitor.

Two years earlier, when Mr Warburton had first come to Knype Hill
(at that time he was posing as a widower with two children; a
little later, however, the housekeeper suddenly gave birth to a
third child in the middle of the night), Dorothy had met him at a
tea-party and afterwards called on him.  Mr Warburton had given
her a delightful tea, talked amusingly about books, and then,
immediately after tea, sat down beside her on the sofa and begun
making love to her, violently, outrageously, even brutally.  It was
practically an assault.  Dorothy was horrified almost out of her
wits, though not too horrified to resist.  She escaped from him and
took refuge on the other side of the sofa, white, shaking, and
almost in tears.  Mr Warburton, on the other hand, was quite
unashamed and even seemed rather amused.

'Oh, how could you, how could you?' she sobbed.

'But it appears that I couldn't,' said Mr Warburton.

'Oh, but how could you be such a brute?'

'Oh, THAT?  Easily, my child, easily.  You will understand that
when you get to my age.'

In spite of this bad beginning, a sort of friendship had grown up
between the two, even to the extent of Dorothy being 'talked about'
in connexion with Mr Warburton.  It did not take much to get you
'talked about' in Knype Hill.  She only saw him at long intervals
and took the greatest care never to be alone with him, but even so
he found opportunities of making casual love to her.  But it was
done in a gentlemanly fashion; the previous disagreeable incident
was not repeated.  Afterwards, when he was forgiven, Mr Warburton
had explained that he 'always tried it on' with every presentable
woman he met.

'Don't you get rather a lot of snubs?' Dorothy could not help
asking him.

'Oh, certainly.  But I get quite a number of successes as well, you
know.'

People wondered sometimes how such a girl as Dorothy could consort,
even occasionally, with such a man as Mr Warburton; but the hold
that he had over her was the hold that the blasphemer and evil-
liver always has over the pious.  It is a fact--you have only to
look about you to verify it--that the pious and the immoral drift
naturally together.  The best brothel-scenes in literature have
been written, without exception, by pious believers or pious
unbelievers.  And of course Dorothy, born into the twentieth
century, made a point of listening to Mr Warburton's blasphemies as
calmly as possible; it is fatal to flatter the wicked by letting
them see that you are shocked by them.  Besides, she was genuinely
fond of him.  He teased her and distressed her, and yet she got
from him, without being fully aware of it, a species of sympathy
and understanding which she could not get elsewhere.  For all his
vices he was distinctly likeable, and the shoddy brilliance of his
conversation--Oscar Wilde seven times watered--which she was too
inexperienced to see through, fascinated while it shocked her.
Perhaps, too, in this instance, the prospect of meeting the
celebrated Mr Bewley had its effect upon her; though certainly
Fishponds and Concubines sounded like the kind of book that she
either didn't read or else set herself heavy penances for reading.
In London, no doubt, one would hardly cross the road to see fifty
novelists; but these things appeared differently in places like
Knype Hill.

'Are you SURE Mr Bewley is coming?' she said.

'Quite sure.  And his wife's coming as well, I believe.  Full
chaperonage.  No Tarquin and Lucrece business this evening.'

'All right,' said Dorothy finally; 'thanks very much.  I'll come
round--about half past eight, I expect.'

'Good.  If you can manage to come while it is still daylight, so
much the better.  Remember that Mrs Semprill is my next-door
neighbour.  We can count on her to be on the qui vive any time
after sundown.'

Mrs Semprill was the town scandalmonger--the most eminent, that is,
of the town's many scandalmongers.  Having got what he wanted (he
was constantly pestering Dorothy to come to his house more often),
Mr Warburton said au revoir and left Dorothy to do the remainder of
her shopping.

In the semi-gloom of Solepipe's shop, she was just moving away from
the counter with her two and a half yards of casement cloth, when
she was aware of a low, mournful voice at her ear.  It was Mrs
Semprill.  She was a slender woman of forty, with a lank, sallow,
distinguished face, which, with her glossy dark hair and air of
settled melancholy, gave her something the appearance of a Van Dyck
portrait.  Entrenched behind a pile of cretonnes near the window,
she had been watching Dorothy's conversation with Mr Warburton.
Whenever you were doing something that you did not particularly
want Mrs Semprill to see you doing, you could trust her to be
somewhere in the neighbourhood.  She seemed to have the power of
materializing like an Arabian jinneeyeh at any place where she was
not wanted.  No indiscretion, however small, escaped her vigilance.
Mr Warburton used to say that she was like the four beasts of the
Apocalypse--'They are full of eyes, you remember, and they rest not
night nor day.'

'Dorothy DEAREST,' murmured Mrs Semprill in the sorrowful,
affectionate voice of someone breaking a piece of bad news as
gently as possible.  'I've been so WANTING to speak to you.  I've
something simply DREADFUL to tell you--something that will really
HORRIFY you!'

'What is it?' said Dorothy resignedly, well knowing what was
coming--for Mrs Semprill had only one subject of conversation.

They moved out of the shop and began to walk down the street,
Dorothy wheeling her bicycle, Mrs Semprill mincing at her side with
a delicate birdlike step and bringing her mouth closer and closer
to Dorothy's ear as her remarks grew more and more intimate.

'Do you happen to have noticed,' she began, 'that girl who sits at
the end of the pew nearest the organ in church?  A rather PRETTY
girl, with red hair.  I've no idea what her name is,' added Mrs
Semprill, who knew the surname and all the Christian names of every
man, woman, and child in Knype Hill.

'Molly Freeman,' said Dorothy.  'She's the niece of Freeman the
greengrocer.'

'Oh, Molly Freeman?  Is THAT her name?  I'd often wondered.  Well--'

The delicate red mouth came closer, the mournful voice sank to a
shocked whisper.  Mrs Semprill began to pour forth a stream of
purulent libel involving Molly Freeman and six young men who worked
at the sugar-beet refinery.  After a few moments the story became
so outrageous that Dorothy, who had turned very pink, hurriedly
withdrew her ear from Mrs Semprill's whispering lips.  She stopped
her bicycle.

'I won't listen to such things!' she said abruptly.  'I KNOW that
isn't true about Molly Freeman.  It CAN'T be true!  She's such a
nice quiet girl--she was one of my very best Girl Guides, and she's
always been so good about helping with the church bazaars and
everything.  I'm perfectly certain she wouldn't do such things as
you're saying.'

'But, Dorothy DEAREST!  When, as I told you, I actually saw with my
own eyes . . .'

'I don't care!  It's not fair to say such things about people.
Even if they were true it wouldn't be right to repeat them.
There's quite enough evil in the world without going about looking
for it.'

'LOOKING for it!' sighed Mrs Semprill.  'But, my dear Dorothy, as
though one ever wanted or NEEDED to look!  The trouble is that one
can't HELP seeing all the dreadful wickedness that goes on in this
town.'

Mrs Semprill was always genuinely astonished if you accused her of
LOOKING for subjects for scandal.  Nothing, she would protest,
pained her more than the spectacle of human wickedness; but it was
constantly forced upon her unwilling eyes, and only a stern sense
of duty impelled her to make it public.  Dorothy's remarks, so far
from silencing her, merely set her talking about the general
corruption of Knype Hill, of which Molly Freeman's misbehaviour was
only one example.  And so from Molly Freeman and her six young men
she proceeded to Dr Gaythorne, the town medical officer, who had
got two of the nurses at the Cottage Hospital with child, and then
to Mrs Corn, the Town Clerk's wife, found lying in a field dead
drunk on eau-de-Cologne, and then to the curate at St Wedekind's in
Millborough, who had involved himself in a grave scandal with a
choirboy; and so it went on, one thing leading to another.  For
there was hardly a soul in the town or the surrounding country
about whom Mrs Semprill could not disclose some festering secret if
you listened to her long enough.

It was noticeable that her stories were not only dirty and
libellous, but they had nearly always some monstrous tinge of
perversion about them.  Compared with the ordinary scandalmongers
of a country town, she was Freud to Boccaccio.  From hearing her
talk you would have gathered the impression that Knype Hill with
its thousand inhabitants held more of the refinements of evil than
Sodom, Gomorrah, and Buenos Aires put together.  Indeed, when you
reflected upon the lives led by the inhabitants of this latter-day
City of the Plain--from the manager of the local bank squandering
his clients' money on the children of his second and bigamous
marriage, to the barmaid of the Dog and Bottle serving drinks in
the taproom dressed only in high-heeled satin slippers, and from
old Miss Channon, the music-teacher, with her secret gin bottle and
her anonymous letters, to Maggie White, the baker's daughter, who
had borne three children to her own brother--when you considered
these people, all, young and old, rich and poor, sunken in
monstrous and Babylonian vices, you wondered that fire did not come
down from Heaven and consume the town forthwith.  But if you
listened just a little longer, the catalogue of obscenities became
first monstrous and then unbearably dull.  For in a town in which
EVERYONE is either a bigamist, a pederast, or a drug-taker, the
worst scandal loses its sting.  In fact, Mrs Semprill was something
worse than a slanderer; she was a bore.

As to the extent to which her stories were believed, it varied.  At
times the word would go round that she was a foul-mouthed old cat
and everything she said was a pack of lies; at other times one of
her accusations would take effect on some unfortunate person, who
would need months or even years to live it down.  She had certainly
been instrumental in breaking off not less than half a dozen
engagements and starting innumerable quarrels between husbands and
wives.

All this while Dorothy had been making abortive efforts to shake
Mrs Semprill off.  She had edged her way gradually across the
street until she was wheeling her bicycle along the right-hand
kerb; but Mrs Semprill had followed, whispering without cease.  It
was not until they reached the end of the High Street that Dorothy
summoned up enough firmness to escape.  She halted and put her
right foot on the pedal of her bicycle.

'I really can't stop a moment longer,' she said.  'I've got a
thousand things to do, and I'm late already.'

'Oh, but, Dorothy dear!  I've something else I simply MUST tell
you--something most IMPORTANT!'

'I'm sorry--I'm in such a terrible hurry.  Another time, perhaps.'

'It's about that DREADFUL Mr Warburton,' said Mrs Semprill hastily,
lest Dorothy should escape without hearing it.  'He's just come
back from London, and do you know--I most PARTICULARLY wanted to
tell you this--do you know, he actually--'

But here Dorothy saw that she must make off instantly, at no matter
what cost.  She could imagine nothing more uncomfortable than to
have to discuss Mr Warburton with Mrs Semprill.  She mounted her
bicycle, and with only a very brief 'Sorry--I really CAN'T stop!'
began to ride hurriedly away.

'I wanted to tell you--he's taken up with a new woman!' Mrs
Semprill cried after her, even forgetting to whisper in her
eagerness to pass on this juicy titbit.

But Dorothy rode swiftly round the corner, not looking back, and
pretending not to have heard.  An unwise thing to do, for it did
not pay to cut Mrs Semprill too short.  Any unwillingness to listen
to her scandals was taken as a sign of depravity, and led to fresh
and worse scandals being published about yourself the moment you
had left her.

As Dorothy rode homewards she had uncharitable thoughts about Mrs
Semprill, for which she duly pinched herself.  Also, there was
another, rather disturbing idea which had not occurred to her till
this moment--that Mrs Semprill would certainly learn of her visit
to Mr Warburton's house this evening, and would probably have
magnified it into something scandalous by tomorrow.  The thought
sent a vague premonition of evil through Dorothy's mind as she
jumped off her bicycle at the Rectory gate, where Silly Jack, the
town idiot, a third-grade moron with a triangular scarlet face like
a strawberry, was loitering, vacantly flogging the gatepost with a
hazel switch.



4


It was a little after eleven.  The day, which, like some overripe
but hopeful widow playing at seventeen, had been putting on
unseasonable April airs, had now remembered that it was August and
settled down to be boiling hot.

Dorothy rode into the hamlet of Fennelwick, a mile out of Knype
Hill.  She had delivered Mrs Lewin's corn-plaster, and was dropping
in to give old Mrs Pither that cutting from the Daily Mail about
angelica tea for rheumatism.  The sun, burning in the cloudless
sky, scorched her back through her gingham frock, and the dusty
road quivered in the heat, and the hot, flat meadows, over which
even at this time of year numberless larks chirruped tiresomely,
were so green that it hurt your eyes to look at them.  It was the
kind of day that is called 'glorious' by people who don't have to
work.

Dorothy leaned her bicycle against the gate of the Pithers'
cottage, and took her handkerchief out of her bag and wiped her
hands, which were sweating from the handle-bars.  In the harsh
sunlight her face looked pinched and colourless.  She looked her
age, and something over, at that hour of the morning.  Throughout
her day--and in general it was a seventeen-hour day--she had
regular, alternating periods of tiredness and energy; the middle of
the morning, when she was doing the first instalment of the day's
'visiting', was one of the tired periods.

'Visiting', because of the distances she had to bicycle from house
to house, took up nearly half of Dorothy's day.  Every day of her
life, except on Sundays, she made from half a dozen to a dozen
visits at parishioners' cottages.  She penetrated into cramped
interiors and sat on lumpy, dust-diffusing chairs gossiping with
overworked, blowsy housewives; she spent hurried half-hours giving
a hand with the mending and the ironing, and read chapters from the
Gospels, and readjusted bandages on 'bad legs', and condoled with
sufferers from morning-sickness; she played ride-a-cock-horse with
sour-smelling children who grimed the bosom of her dress with their
sticky little fingers; she gave advice about ailing aspidistras,
and suggested names for babies, and drank 'nice cups of tea'
innumerable--for the working women always wanted her to have a
'nice cup of tea', out of the teapot endlessly stewing.

Much of it was profoundly discouraging work.  Few, very few, of the
women seemed to have even a conception of the Christian life that
she was trying to help them to lead.  Some of them were shy and
suspicious, stood on the defensive, and made excuses when urged to
come to Holy Communion; some shammed piety for the sake of the tiny
sums they could wheedle out of the church alms box; those who
welcomed her coming were for the most part the talkative ones, who
wanted an audience for complaints about the 'goings on' of their
husbands, or for endless mortuary tales ('And he had to have glass
chubes let into his veins,' etc., etc.) about the revolting
diseases their relatives had died of.  Quite half the women on her
list, Dorothy knew, were at heart atheistical in a vague
unreasoning way.  She came up against it all day long--that vague,
blank disbelief so common in illiterate people, against which all
argument is powerless.  Do what she would, she could never raise
the number of regular communicants to more than a dozen or
thereabouts.  Women would promise to communicate, keep their
promise for a month or two, and then fall away.  With the younger
women it was especially hopeless.  They would not even join the
local branches of the church leagues that were run for their
benefit--Dorothy was honorary secretary of three such leagues,
besides being captain of the Girl Guides.  The Band of Hope and the
Companionship of Marriage languished almost memberless, and the
Mothers' Union only kept going because gossip and unlimited strong
tea made the weekly sewing-parties acceptable.  Yes, it was
discouraging work; so discouraging that at times it would have
seemed altogether futile if she had not known the sense of futility
for what it is--the subtlest weapon of the Devil.

Dorothy knocked at the Pithers' badly fitting door, from beneath
which a melancholy smell of boiled cabbage and dish-water was
oozing.  From long experience she knew and could taste in advance
the individual smell of every cottage on her rounds.  Some of their
smells were peculiar in the extreme.  For instance, there was the
salty, feral smell that haunted the cottage of old Mr Tombs, an
aged retired bookseller who lay in bed all day in a darkened room,
with his long, dusty nose and pebble spectacles protruding from
what appeared to be a fur rug of vast size and richness.

But if you put your hand on the fur rug it disintegrated, burst and
fled in all directions.  It was composed entirely of cats--twenty-
four cats, to be exact.  Mr Tombs 'found they kept him warm', he
used to explain.  In nearly all the cottages there was a basic
smell of old overcoats and dish-water upon which the other,
individual smells were superimposed; the cesspool smell, the
cabbage smell, the smell of children, the strong, bacon-like reek
of corduroys impregnated with the sweat of a decade.

Mrs Pither opened the door, which invariably stuck to the jamb, and
then, when you wrenched it open, shook the whole cottage.  She was
a large, stooping, grey woman with wispy grey hair, a sacking
apron, and shuffling carpet slippers.

'Why, if it isn't Miss Dorothy!' she exclaimed in a dreary,
lifeless but not unaffectionate voice.

She took Dorothy between her large, gnarled hands, whose knuckles
were as shiny as skinned onions from age and ceaseless washing up,
and gave her a wet kiss.  Then she drew her into the unclean
interior of the cottage.

'Pither's away at work, Miss,' she announced as they got inside.
'Up to Dr Gaythorne's he is, a-digging over the doctor's flower-
beds for him.'

Mr Pither was a jobbing gardener.  He and his wife, both of them
over seventy, were one of the few genuinely pious couples on
Dorothy's visiting list.  Mrs Pither led a dreary, wormlike life of
shuffling to and fro, with a perpetual crick in her neck because
the door lintels were too low for her, between the well, the sink,
the fireplace, and the tiny plot of kitchen garden.  The kitchen
was decently tidy, but oppressively hot, evil-smelling and
saturated with ancient dust.  At the end opposite the fireplace Mrs
Pither had made a kind of prie-dieu out of a greasy rag mat laid in
front of a tiny, defunct harmonium, on top of which were an
oleographed crucifixion, 'Watch and Pray' done in beadwork, and a
photograph of Mr and Mrs Pither on their wedding day in 1882.

'Poor Pither!' went on Mrs Pither in her depressing voice, 'him a-
digging at his age, with his rheumatism THAT bad!  Ain't it cruel
hard, Miss?  And he's had a kind of a pain between his legs, Miss,
as he can't seem to account for--terrible bad he's been with it,
these last few mornings.  Ain't it bitter hard, Miss, the lives us
poor working folks has to lead?'

'It's a shame,' said Dorothy.  'But I hope you've been keeping a
little better yourself, Mrs Pither?'

'Ah, Miss, there's nothing don't make ME better.  I ain't a case
for curing, not in THIS world, I ain't.  I shan't never get no
better, not in this wicked world down here.'

'Oh, you mustn't say that, Mrs Pither!  I hope we shall have you
with us for a long time yet.'

'Ah, Miss, you don't know how poorly I've been this last week!
I've had the rheumatism a-coming and a-going all down the backs of
my poor old legs, till there's some mornings when I don't feel as I
can't walk so far as to pull a handful of onions in the garden.
Ah, Miss, it's a weary world we lives in, ain't it, Miss?  A weary,
sinful world.'

'But of course we must never forget, Mrs Pither, that there's a
better world coming.  This life is only a time of trial--just to
strengthen us and teach us to be patient, so that we'll be ready
for Heaven when the time comes.'

At this a sudden and remarkable change came over Mrs Pither.  It
was produced by the word 'Heaven'.  Mrs Pither had only two
subjects of conversation; one of them was the joys of Heaven, and
the other the miseries of her present state.  Dorothy's remark
seemed to act upon her like a charm.  Her dull grey eye was not
capable of brightening, but her voice quickened with an almost
joyful enthusiasm.

'Ah, Miss, there you said it!  That's a true word, Miss!  That's
what Pither and me keeps a-saying to ourselves.  And that's just
the one thing as keeps us a-going--just the thought of Heaven and
the long, long rest we'll have there.  Whatever we've suffered, we
gets it all back in Heaven, don't we, Miss?  Every little bit of
suffering, you gets it back a hundredfold and a thousandfold.  That
IS true, ain't it, Miss?  There's rest for us all in Heaven--rest
and peace and no more rheumatism nor digging nor cooking nor
laundering nor nothing.  You DO believe that, don't you, Miss
Dorothy?'

'Of course,' said Dorothy.

'Ah, Miss, if you knew how it comforts us--just the thoughts of
Heaven!  Pither he says to me, when he comes home tired of a night
and our rheumatism's bad, "Never you mind, my dear," he says, "we
ain't far off Heaven now," he says.  "Heaven was made for the likes
of us," he says; "just for poor working folks like us, that have
been sober and godly and kept our Communions regular."  That's the
best way, ain't it, Miss Dorothy--poor in this life and rich in the
next?  Not like some of them rich folks as all their motorcars and
their beautiful houses won't save from the worm that dieth not and
the fire that's not quenched.  Such a beautiful text, that is.  Do
you think you could say a little prayer with me, Miss Dorothy?  I
been looking forward all the morning to a little prayer.

Mrs Pither was always ready for a 'little prayer' at any hour of
the night or day.  It was her equivalent to a 'nice cup of tea'.
They knelt down on the rag mat and said the Lord's Prayer and the
Collect for the week; and then Dorothy, at Mrs Pither's request,
read the parable of Dives and Lazarus, Mrs Pither coming in from
time to time with 'Amen!  That's a true word, ain't it, Miss
Dorothy?  "And he was carried by angels into Abraham's bosom."
Beautiful!  Oh, I do call that just too beautiful!  Amen, Miss
Dorothy--Amen!'

Dorothy gave Mrs Pither the cutting from the Daily Mail about
angelica tea for rheumatism, and then, finding that Mrs Pither had
been too 'poorly' to draw the day's supply of water, she drew three
bucketfuls for her from the well.  It was a very deep well, with
such a low parapet that Mrs Pither's final doom would almost
certainly be to fall into it and get drowned, and it had not even a
winch--you had to haul the bucket up hand over hand.  And then they
sat down for a few minutes, and Mrs Pither talked some more about
Heaven.  It was extraordinary how constantly Heaven reigned in her
thoughts; and more extraordinary yet was the actuality, the
vividness with which she could see it.  The golden streets and the
gates of orient pearl were as real to her as though they had been
actually before her eyes.  And her vision extended to the most
concrete, the most earthly details.  The softness of the beds up
there!  The deliciousness of the food!  The lovely silk clothes
that you would put on clean every morning!  The surcease from
everlasting to everlasting from work of any description!  In almost
every moment of her life the vision of Heaven supported and
consoled her, and her abject complaints about the lives of 'poor
working folks' were curiously tempered by a satisfaction in the
thought that, after all, it is 'poor working folks' who are the
principal inhabitants of Heaven.  It was a sort of bargain that she
had struck, setting her lifetime of dreary labour against an
eternity of bliss.  Her faith was almost TOO great, if that is
possible.  For it was a curious fact, but the certitude with which
Mrs Pither looked forward to Heaven--as to some kind of glorified
home for incurables--affected Dorothy with strange uneasiness.

Dorothy prepared to depart, while Mrs Pither thanked her, rather
too effusively, for her visit, winding up, as usual, with fresh
complaints about her rheumatism.

'I'll be sure and take the angelica tea,' she concluded, 'and thank
you kindly for telling me of it, Miss.  Not as I don't expect as
it'll do me much good.  Ah, Miss, if you knew how cruel bad my
rheumatism's been this last week!  All down the backs of my legs,
it is, like a regular shooting red-hot poker, and I don't seem to
be able to get at them to rub them properly.  Would it be asking
too much of you, Miss, to give me a bit of a rub-down before you
go?  I got a bottle of Elliman's under the sink.'

Unseen by Mrs Pither, Dorothy gave herself a severe pinch.  She had
been expecting this, and--she had done it so many times before--she
really did NOT enjoy rubbing Mrs Pither down.  She exhorted herself
angrily.  Come on, Dorothy!  No sniffishness, please!  John xiii,
14.  'Of course I will, Mrs Pither!' she said instantly.

They went up the narrow, rickety staircase, in which you had to
bend almost double at one place to avoid the overhanging ceiling.
The bedroom was lighted by a tiny square of window that was jammed
in its socket by the creeper outside, and had not been opened in
twenty years.  There was an enormous double bed that almost filled
the room, with sheets perennially damp and a flock mattress as full
of hills and valleys as a contour map of Switzerland.  With many
groans the old woman crept on to the bed and laid herself face
down.  The room reeked of urine and paregoric.  Dorothy took the
bottle of Elliman's embrocation and carefully anointed Mrs Pither's
large, grey-veined, flaccid legs.

Outside, in the swimming heat, she mounted her bicycle and began to
ride swiftly homewards.  The sun burned in her face, but the air
now seemed sweet and fresh.  She was happy, happy!  She was always
extravagantly happy when her morning's 'visiting' was over; and,
curiously enough, she was not aware of the reason for this.  In
Borlase the dairy-farmer's meadow the red cows were grazing, knee-
deep in shining seas of grass.  The scent of cows, like a
distillation of vanilla and fresh hay, floated into Dorothy's
nostrils.  Though she had still a morning's work in front of her
she could not resist the temptation to loiter for a moment,
steadying her bicycle with one hand against the gate of Borlase's
meadow, while a cow, with moist shell-pink nose, scratched its chin
upon the gatepost and dreamily regarded her.

Dorothy caught sight of a wild rose, flowerless of course, growing
beyond the hedge, and climbed over the gate with the intention of
discovering whether it were not sweetbriar.  She knelt down among
the tall weeds beneath the hedge.  It was very hot down there,
close to the ground.  The humming of many unseen insects sounded in
her ears, and the hot summery fume from the tangled swathes of
vegetation flowed up and enveloped her.  Near by, tall stalks of
fennel were growing, with trailing fronds of foliage like the tails
of sea-green horses.  Dorothy pulled a frond of the fennel against
her face and breathed in the strong sweet scent.  Its richness
overwhelmed her, almost dizzied her for a moment.  She drank it in,
filling her lungs with it.  Lovely, lovely scent--scent of summer
days, scent of childhood joys, scent of spice-drenched islands in
the warm foam of Oriental seas!

Her heart swelled with sudden joy.  It was that mystical joy in
the beauty of the earth and the very nature of things that she
recognized, perhaps mistakenly, as the love of God.  As she knelt
there in the heat, the sweet odour and the drowsy hum of insects,
it seemed to her that she could momentarily hear the mighty anthem
of praise that the earth and all created things send up
everlastingly to their maker.  All vegetation, leaves, flowers,
grass, shining, vibrating, crying out in their joy.  Larks also
chanting, choirs of larks invisible, dripping music from the sky.
All the riches of summer, the warmth of the earth, the song of
birds, the fume of cows, the droning of countless bees, mingling
and ascending like the smoke of ever-burning altars.  Therefore
with Angels and Archangels!  She began to pray, and for a moment
she prayed ardently, blissfully, forgetting herself in the joy of
her worship.  Then, less than a minute later, she discovered that
she was kissing the frond of the fennel that was still against her
face.

She checked herself instantly, and drew back.  What was she doing?
Was it God that she was worshipping, or was it only the earth?
The joy ebbed out of her heart, to be succeeded by the cold,
uncomfortable feeling that she had been betrayed into a half-pagan
ecstasy.  She admonished herself.  None of THAT, Dorothy!  No
Nature-worship, please!  Her father had warned her against Nature-
worship.  She had heard him preach more than one sermon against it;
it was, he said, mere pantheism, and, what seemed to offend him
even more, a disgusting modern fad.  Dorothy took a thorn of the
wild rose, and pricked her arm three times, to remind herself of
the Three Persons of the Trinity, before climbing over the gate and
remounting her bicycle.

A black, very dusty shovel hat was approaching round the corner of
the hedge.  It was Father McGuire, the Roman Catholic priest, also
bicycling his rounds.  He was a very large, rotund man, so large
that he dwarfed the bicycle beneath him and seemed to be balanced
on top of it like a golf-ball on a tee.  His face was rosy,
humorous, and a little sly.

Dorothy looked suddenly unhappy.  She turned pink, and her hand
moved instinctively to the neighbourhood of the gold cross beneath
her dress.  Father McGuire was riding towards her with an
untroubled, faintly amused air.  She made an endeavour to smile,
and murmured unhappily, 'Good morning.'  But he rode on without a
sign; his eyes swept easily over her face and then beyond her into
vacancy, with an admirable pretence of not having noticed her
existence.  It was the Cut Direct.  Dorothy--by nature, alas!
unequal to delivering the Cut Direct--got on to her bicycle and
rode away, struggling with the uncharitable thoughts which a
meeting with Father McGuire never failed to arouse in her.

Five or six years earlier, when Father McGuire was holding a
funeral in St Athelstan's churchyard (there was no Roman Catholic
cemetery at Knype Hill), there had been some dispute with the
Rector about the propriety of Father McGuire robing in the church,
or not robing in the church, and the two priests had wrangled
disgracefully over the open grave.  Since then they had not been on
speaking terms.  It was better so, the Rector said.

As to the other ministers of religion in Knype Hill--Mr Ward the
Congregationalist minister, Mr Foley the Wesleyan pastor, and the
braying bald-headed elder who conducted the orgies at Ebenezer
Chapel--the Rector called them a pack of vulgar Dissenters and had
forbidden Dorothy on pain of his displeasure to have anything to do
with them.



5


It was twelve o'clock.  In the large, dilapidated conservatory,
whose roof-panes, from the action of time and dirt, were dim,
green, and iridescent like old Roman glass, they were having a
hurried and noisy rehearsal of Charles I.

Dorothy was not actually taking part in the rehearsal, but was busy
making costumes.  She made the costumes, or most of them, for all
the plays the schoolchildren acted.  The production and stage
management were in the hands of Victor Stone--Victor, Dorothy
called him--the Church schoolmaster.  He was a small-boned,
excitable, black-haired youth of twenty-seven, dressed in dark sub-
clerical clothes, and at this moment he was gesturing fiercely with
a roll of manuscript at six dense-looking children.  On a long
bench against the wall four more children were alternately
practising 'noises off' by clashing fire-irons together, and
squabbling over a grimy little bag of Spearmint Bouncers, forty a
penny.

It was horribly hot in the conservatory, and there was a powerful
smell of glue and the sour sweat of children.  Dorothy was kneeling
on the floor, with her mouth full of pins and a pair of shears in
her hand, rapidly slicing sheets of brown paper into long narrow
strips.  The glue-pot was bubbling on an oil-stove beside her;
behind her, on the rickety, ink-stained work-table, were a tangle
of half-finished costumes, more sheets of brown paper, her sewing-
machine, bundles of tow, shards of dry glue, wooden swords, and
open pots of paint.  With half her mind Dorothy was meditating upon
the two pairs of seventeenth-century jackboots that had got to be
made for Charles I and Oliver Cromwell, and with the other half
listening to the angry shouts of Victor, who was working himself up
into a rage, as he invariably did at rehearsals.  He was a natural
actor, and withal thoroughly bored by the drudgery of rehearsing
half-witted children.  He strode up and down, haranguing the
children in a vehement slangy style, and every now and then
breaking off to lunge at one or other of them with a wooden sword
that he had grabbed from the table.

'Put a bit of life into it, can't you?' he cried, prodding an ox-
faced boy of eleven in the belly.  'Don't drone!  Say it as if it
meant something!  You look like a corpse that's been buried and dug
up again.  What's the good of gurgling it down in your inside like
that?  Stand up and shout at him.  Take off that second murderer
expression!'

'Come here, Percy!' cried Dorothy through her pins.  'Quick!'

She was making the armour--the worst job of the lot, except those
wretched jackboots--out of glue and brown paper.  From long
practice Dorothy could make very nearly anything out of glue and
brown paper; she could even make a passably good periwig, with a
brown paper skull-cap and dyed tow for the hair.  Taking the year
through, the amount of time she spent in struggling with glue,
brown paper, butter muslin, and all the other paraphernalia of
amateur theatricals was enormous.  So chronic was the need of money
for all the church funds that hardly a month ever passed when there
was not a school play or a pageant or an exhibition of tableaux
vivants on hand--not to mention the bazaars and jumble sales.

As Percy--Percy Jowett, the blacksmith's son, a small curly-headed
boy--got down from the bench and stood wriggling unhappily before
her, Dorothy seized a sheet of brown paper, measured it against
him, snipped out the neckhole and armholes, draped it round his
middle and rapidly pinned it into the shape of a rough breastplate.
There was a confused din of voices.


VICTOR:  Come on, now, come on!  Enter Oliver Cromwell--that's you!
NO, not like that!  Do you think Oliver Cromwell would come
slinking on like a dog that's just had a hiding?  Stand up.  Stick
your chest out.  Scowl.  That's better.  Now go on, CROMWELL:
'Halt!  I hold a pistol in my hand!'  Go on.

A GIRL:  Please, Miss, Mother said as I was to tell you, Miss--

DOROTHY:  Keep still, Percy!  For goodness' SAKE keep still!

CROMWELL:  'Alt!  I 'old a pistol in my 'and!

A SMALL GIRL ON THE BENCH:  Mister!  I've dropped my sweetie!
[Snivelling]  I've dropped by swee-e-e-etie!

VICTOR:  No, no, NO, Tommie!  No, no, NO!

THE GIRL:  Please, Miss, Mother said as I was to tell you as she
couldn't make my knickers like she promised, Miss, because--

DOROTHY:  You'll make me swallow a pin if you do that again.

CROMWELL:  Halt!  I Hold a pistol--

THE SMALL GIRL [in tears]:  My swee-e-e-e-eetie!


Dorothy seized the glue-brush, and with feverish speed pasted
strips of brown paper all over Percy's thorax, up and down,
backwards and forwards, one on top of another, pausing only when
the paper stuck to her fingers.  In five minutes she had made a
cuirass of glue and brown paper stout enough, when it was dry, to
have defied a real sword-blade.  Percy, 'locked up in complete
steel' and with the sharp paper edge cutting his chin, looked down
at himself with the miserable resigned expression of a dog having
its bath.  Dorothy took the shears, slit the breastplate up one
side, set it on end to dry and started immediately on another
child.  A fearful clatter broke out as the 'noises off' began
practising the sound of pistol-shots and horses galloping.
Dorothy's fingers were getting stickier and stickier, but from time
to time she washed some of the glue off them in a bucket of hot
water that was kept in readiness.  In twenty minutes she had
partially completed three breastplates.  Later on they would have
to be finished off, painted over with aluminium paint and laced up
the sides; and after that there was the job of making the thigh-
pieces, and, worst of all, the helmets to go with them.  Victor,
gesticulating with his sword and shouting to overcome the din of
galloping horses, was personating in turn Oliver Cromwell, Charles
I, Roundheads, Cavaliers, peasants, and Court ladies.  The children
were now growing restive and beginning to yawn, whine, and exchange
furtive kicks and pinches.  The breastplates finished for the
moment, Dorothy swept some of the litter off the table, pulled her
sewing-machine into position and set to work on a Cavalier's green
velvet doublet--it was butter muslin Twinked green, but it looked
all right at a distance.

There was another ten minutes of feverish work.  Dorothy broke her
thread, all but said 'Damn!' checked herself and hurriedly re-
threaded the needle.  She was working against time.  The play was
now a fortnight distant, and there was such a multitude of things
yet to be made--helmets, doublets, swords, jackboots (those
miserable jackboots had been haunting her like a nightmare for days
past), scabbards, ruffles, wigs, spurs, scenery--that her heart
sank when she thought of them.  The children's parents never helped
with the costumes for the school plays; more exactly, they always
promised to help and then backed out afterwards.  Dorothy's head
was aching diabolically, partly from the heat of the conservatory,
partly from the strain of simultaneously sewing and trying to
visualize patterns for brown paper jackboots.  For the moment she
had even forgotten the bill for twenty-one pounds seven and
ninepence at Cargill's.  She could think of nothing save that
fearful mountain of unmade clothes that lay ahead of her.  It was
so throughout the day.  One thing loomed up after another--whether
it was the costumes for the school play or the collapsing floor of
the belfry, or the shop-debts or the bindweed in the peas--and each
in its turn so urgent and so harassing that it blotted all the
others out of existence.

Victor threw down his wooden sword, took out his watch and looked
at it.

'That'll do!' he said in the abrupt, ruthless tone from which he
never departed when he was dealing with children.  'We'll go on on
Friday.  Clear out, the lot of you!  I'm sick of the sight of you.'

He watched the children out, and then, having forgotten their
existence as soon as they were out of his sight, produced a page of
music from his pocket and began to fidget up and down, cocking his
eye at two forlorn plants in the corner which trailed their dead
brown tendrils over the edges of their pots.  Dorothy was still
bending over her machine, stitching up the seams of the green
velvet doublet.

Victor was a restless, intelligent little creature, and only happy
when he was quarrelling with somebody or something.  His pale,
fine-featured face wore an expression that appeared to be
discontent and was really boyish eagerness.  People meeting him for
the first time usually said that he was wasting his talents in his
obscure job as a village schoolmaster; but the truth was that
Victor had no very marketable talents except a slight gift for
music and a much more pronounced gift for dealing with children.
Ineffectual in other ways, he was excellent with children; he had
the proper, ruthless attitude towards them.  But of course, like
everyone else, he despised his own especial talent.  His interests
were almost purely ecclesiastical.  He was what people call a
CHURCHY young man.  It had always been his ambition to enter the
Church, and he would actually have done so if he had possessed the
kind of brain that is capable of learning Greek and Hebrew.
Debarred from the priesthood, he had drifted quite naturally into
his position as a Church schoolmaster and organist.  It kept him,
so to speak, within the Church precincts.  Needless to say, he was
an Anglo-Catholic of the most truculent Church Times breed--more
clerical than the clerics, knowledgeable about Church history,
expert on vestments, and ready at any moment with a furious tirade
against Modernists, Protestants, scientists, Bolshevists, and
atheists.

'I was thinking,' said Dorothy as she stopped her machine and
snipped off the thread, 'we might make those helmets out of old
bowler hats, if we can get hold of enough of them.  Cut the brims
off, put on paper brims of the right shape and silver them over.'

'Oh Lord, why worry your head about such things?' said Victor, who
had lost interest in the play the moment the rehearsal was over.

'It's those wretched jackboots that are worrying me the most,' said
Dorothy, taking the doublet on to her knee and looking at it.

'Oh, bother the jackboots!  Let's stop thinking about the play for
a moment.  Look here,' said Victor, unrolling his page of music, 'I
want you to speak to your father for me.  I wish you'd ask him
whether we can't have a procession some time next month.'

'Another procession?  What for?'

'Oh, I don't know.  You can always find an excuse for a procession.
There's the Nativity of the B.V.M. coming off on the eighth--that's
good enough for a procession, I should think.  We'll do it in
style.  I've got hold of a splendid rousing hymn that they can all
bellow, and perhaps we could borrow their blue banner with the
Virgin Mary on it from St Wedekind's in Millborough.  If he'll say
the word I'll start practising the choir at once.'

'You know he'll only say no,' said Dorothy, threading a needle to
sew buttons on the doublet.  'He doesn't really approve of
processions.  It's much better not to ask him and make him angry.'

'Oh, but dash it all!' protested Victor.  'It's simply months since
we've had a procession.  I never saw such dead-alive services as we
have here.  You'd think we were a Baptist chapel or something, from
the way we go on.'

Victor chafed ceaselessly against the dull correctness of the
Rector's services.  His ideal was what he called 'the real Catholic
worship'--meaning unlimited incense, gilded images, and more Roman
vestments.  In his capacity of organist he was for ever pressing
for more processions, more voluptuous music, more elaborate
chanting in the liturgy, so that it was a continuous pull devil,
pull baker between him and the Rector.  And on this point Dorothy
sided with her father.  Having been brought up in the peculiar,
frigid via media of Anglicanism, she was by nature averse to and
half-afraid of anything 'ritualistic'.

'But dash it all!' went on Victor, 'a procession is such fun!  Down
the aisle, out through the west door and back through the south
door, with the choir carrying candles behind and the Boy Scouts in
front with the banner.  It would look fine.'  He sang a stave in a
thin but tuneful tenor:

'Hail thee, Festival Day, blest day that art hallowed for ever!'

'If I had MY way,' he added, 'I'd have a couple of boys swinging
jolly good censers of incense at the same time.'

'Yes, but you know how much Father dislikes that kind of thing.
Especially when it's anything to do with the Virgin Mary.  He says
it's all Roman Fever and leads to people crossing themselves and
genuflecting at the wrong times and goodness knows what.  You
remember what happened at Advent.'

The previous year, on his own responsibility, Victor had chosen as
one of the hymns for Advent, Number 642, with the refrain 'Hail
Mary, hail Mary, hail Mary full of grace!'  This piece of
popishness had annoyed the Rector extremely.  At the close of the
first verse he had pointedly laid down his hymn book, turned round
in his stall and stood regarding the congregation with an air so
stony that some of the choirboys faltered and almost broke down.
Afterwards he had said that to hear the rustics bawling ''Ail Mary!
'Ail Mary!' made him think he was in the four-ale bar of the Dog
and Bottle.

'But dash it!' said Victor in his aggrieved way, 'your father
always puts his foot down when I try and get a bit of life into the
service.  He won't allow us incense, or decent music, or proper
vestments, or anything.  And what's the result?  We can't get
enough people to fill the church a quarter full, even on Easter
Sunday.  You look round the church on Sunday morning, and it's
nothing but the Boy Scouts and the Girl Guides and a few old
women.'

'I know.  It's dreadful,' admitted Dorothy, sewing on her button.
'It doesn't seem to make any difference what we do--we simply CAN'T
get the people to come to church.  Still,' she added, 'they do come
to us to be married and buried.  And I don't think the congregation's
actually gone down this year.  There were nearly two hundred people
at Easter Communion.'

'Two hundred!  It ought to be two thousand.  That's the population
of this town.  The fact is that three quarters of the people in
this place never go near a church in their lives.  The Church has
absolutely lost its hold over them.  They don't know that it
exists.  And why?  That's what I'm getting at.  Why?'

'I suppose it's all this Science and Free Thought and all that,'
said Dorothy rather sententiously, quoting her father.

This remark deflected Victor from what he had been about to say.
He had been on the very point of saying that St Athelstan's
congregation had dwindled because of the dullness of the services;
but the hated words of Science and Free Thought set him off in
another and even more familiar channel.

'Of course it's this so-called Free Thought!' he exclaimed,
immediately beginning to fidget up and down again.  'It's these
swine of atheists like Bertrand Russell and Julian Huxley and all
that crowd.  And what's ruined the Church is that instead of jolly
well answering them and showing them up for the fools and liars
they are, we just sit tight and let them spread their beastly
atheist propaganda wherever they choose.  It's all the fault of the
bishops, of course.'  (Like every Anglo-Catholic, Victor had an
abysmal contempt for bishops.)  'They're all Modernists and time-
servers.  By Jove!' he added more cheerfully, halting, 'did you see
my letter in the Church Times last week?'

'No, I'm afraid I didn't,' said Dorothy, holding another button in
position with her thumb.  'What was it about?'

'Oh, Modernist bishops and all that.  I got in a good swipe at old
Barnes.'

It was very rarely that a week passed when Victor did not write a
letter to the Church Times.  He was in the thick of every
controversy and in the forefront of every assault upon Modernists
and atheists.  He had twice been in combat with Dr Major, had
written letters of withering irony about Dean Inge and the Bishop
of Birmingham, and had not hesitated to attack even the fiendish
Russell himself--but Russell, of course, had not dared to reply.
Dorothy, to tell the truth, very seldom read the Church Times, and
the Rector grew angry if he so much as saw a copy of it in the
house.  The weekly paper they took in the Rectory was the High
Churchman's Gazette--a fine old High Tory anachronism with a small
and select circulation.

'That swine Russell!' said Victor reminiscently, with his hands
deep in his pockets.  'How he does make my blood boil!'

'Isn't that the man who's such a clever mathematician, or
something?' said Dorothy, biting off her thread.

'Oh, I dare say he's clever enough in his own line, of course,'
admitted Victor grudgingly.  'But what's that got to do with it?
Just because a man's clever at figures it doesn't mean to say
that-- well, anyway!  Let's come back to what I was saying.  Why is
it that we can't get people to come to church in this place?  It's
because our services are so dreary and godless, that's what it is.
People want worship that IS worship--they want the real Catholic
worship of the real Catholic Church we belong to.  And they don't
get if from us.  All they get is the old Protestant mumbo-jumbo,
and Protestantism's as dead as a doornail, and everyone knows it.'

'That's not true!' said Dorothy rather sharply as she pressed the
third button into place.  'You know we're not Protestants.
Father's always saying that the Church of England is the Catholic
Church--he's preached I don't know how many sermons about the
Apostolic Succession.  That's why Lord Pockthorne and the others
won't come to church here.  Only he won't join in the Anglo-
Catholic movement because he thinks they're too fond of ritualism
for its own sake.  And so do I.'

'Oh, I don't say your father isn't absolutely sound on doctrine--
absolutely sound.  But if he thinks we're the Catholic Church, why
doesn't he hold the service in a proper Catholic way?  It's a shame
we can't have incense OCCASIONALLY.  And his ideas about vestments--
if you don't mind my saying it--are simply awful.  On Easter
Sunday he was wearing a Gothic cope with a modern Italian lace alb.
Dash it, it's like wearing a top hat with brown boots.'

'Well, I don't think vestments are so important as you do,' said
Dorothy.  'I think it's the spirit of the priest that matters, not
the clothes he wears.'

'That's the kind of thing a Primitive Methodist would say!'
exclaimed Victor disgustedly.  'Of course vestments are important!
Where's the sense of worshipping at all if we can't make a proper
job of it?  Now, if you want to see what real Catholic worship CAN
be like, look at St Wedekind's in Millborough!  By Jove, they do
things in style there!  Images of the Virgin, reservation of the
Sacrament--everything.  They've had the Kensitites on to them three
times, and they simply defy the Bishop.'

'Oh, I hate the way they go on at St Wedekind's!' said Dorothy.
'They're absolutely spiky.  You can hardly see what's happening at
the altar, there are such clouds of incense.  I think people like
that ought to turn Roman Catholic and have done with it.'

'My dear Dorothy, you ought to have been a Nonconformist.  You
really ought.  A Plymouth Brother--or a Plymouth Sister or whatever
it's called.  I think your favourite hymn must be Number 567, "O my
God I fear Thee, Thou art very High!"'

'Yours is Number 231, "I nightly pitch my moving tent a day's march
nearer Rome!"' retorted Dorothy, winding the thread round the last
button.

The argument continued for several minutes while Dorothy adorned a
Cavalier's beaver hat (it was an old black felt school hat of her
own) with plume and ribbons.  She and Victor were never long
together without being involved in an argument upon the question of
'ritualism'.  In Dorothy's opinion Victor was a kind to 'go over to
Rome' if not prevented, and she was very likely right.  But Victor
was not yet aware of his probable destiny.  At present the fevers
of the Anglo-Catholic movement, with its ceaseless exciting warfare
on three fronts at once--Protestants to right of you, Modernists to
the left of you, and, unfortunately, Roman Catholics to rear of you
and always ready for a sly kick in the pants--filled his mental
horizon.  Scoring off Dr Major in the Church Times meant more to
him than any of the serious business of life.  But for all his
churchiness he had not an atom of real piety in his constitution.
It was essentially as a game that religious controversy appealed to
him--the most absorbing game ever invented, because it goes on for
ever and because just a little cheating is allowed.

'Thank goodness, that's done!' said Dorothy, twiddling the
Cavalier's beaver hat round on her hand and then putting it down.
'Oh dear, what piles of things there are still to do, though!  I
wish I could get those wretched jackboots off my mind.  What's the
time, Victor?'

'It's nearly five to one.'

'Oh, good gracious!  I must run.  I've got three omelettes to make.
I daren't trust them to Ellen.  And, oh, Victor!  Have you got
anything you can give us for the jumble sale?  If you had an old
pair of trousers you could give us, that would be best of all,
because we can always sell trousers.'

'Trousers?  No.  But I tell you what I have got, though.  I've got
a copy of The Pilgrim's Progress and another of Foxe's Book of
Martyrs that I've been wanting to get rid of for years.  Beastly
Protestant trash!  An old Dissenting aunt of mine gave them to me.--
Doesn't it make you sick, all this cadging for pennies?  Now, if
we only held our services in a proper Catholic way, so that we
could get up a proper congregation, don't you see, we shouldn't
need--'

'That'll be splendid,' said Dorothy.  'We always have a stall for
books--we charge a penny for each book, and nearly all of them get
sold.  We simply MUST make that jumble sale a success, Victor!  I'm
counting on Miss Mayfill to give us something really NICE.  What
I'm specially hoping is that she might give us that beautiful old
Lowestoft china tea service of hers, and we could sell it for five
pounds at least.  I've been making special prayers all the morning
that she'll give it to us.'

'Oh?' said Victor, less enthusiastically than usual.  Like Proggett
earlier in the morning, he was embarrassed by the word 'prayer'.
He was ready to talk all day long about a point of ritual; but the
mention of private devotions struck him as slightly indecent.
'Don't forget to ask your father about the procession,' he said,
getting back to a more congenial topic.

'All right, I'll ask him.  But you know how it'll be.  He'll only
get annoyed and say it's Roman Fever.'

'Oh, damn Roman Fever!' said Victor, who, unlike Dorothy, did not
set himself penances for swearing.

Dorothy hurried to the kitchen, discovered that there were only
five eggs to make the omelettes for three people, and decided to
make one large omelette and swell it out a bit with the cold boiled
potatoes left over from yesterday.  With a short prayer for the
success of the omelette (for omelettes are so dreadfully apt to get
broken when you take them out of the pan), she whipped up the eggs,
while Victor made off down the drive, half wistfully and half
sulkily humming 'Hail thee, Festival Day', and passing on his way a
disgusted-looking manservant carrying the two handleless chamber-
pots which were Miss Mayfill's contribution to the jumble sale.



6


It was a little after ten o'clock.  Various things had happened--
nothing, however, of any particular importance; only the usual
round of parish jobs that filled up Dorothy's afternoon and
evening.  Now, as she had arranged earlier in the day, she was at
Mr Warburton's house, and was trying to hold her own in one of
those meandering arguments in which he delighted to entangle her.

They were talking--but indeed, Mr Warburton never failed to
manoeuvre the conversation towards this subject--about the question
of religious belief.

'My dear Dorothy,' he was saying argumentatively, as he walked up
and down with one hand in his coat pocket and the other manipulating
a Brazilian cigar.  'My dear Dorothy, you don't seriously mean to
tell me that at your age--twenty-seven, I believe--and with your
intelligence, you will retain your religious beliefs more or less
in toto?'

'Of course I do.  You know I do.'

'Oh, come, now!  The whole bag of tricks?  All that nonsense that
you learned at your mother's knee--surely you're not going to
pretend to me that you still believe in it?  But of course you
don't!  You can't!  You're afraid to own up, that's all it is.  No
need to worry about that here, you know.  The Rural Dean's wife
isn't listening, and _I_ won't give the show away.'

'I don't know what you mean by "all that NONSENSE",' began Dorothy,
sitting up straighter in her chair, a little offended.

'Well, let's take an instance.  Something particularly hard to
swallow--Hell, for instance.  Do you believe in Hell?  When I say
BELIEVE, mind you, I'm not asking whether you believe it in some
milk and water metaphorical way like these Modernist bishops young
Victor Stone gets so excited about.  I mean do you believe in it
literally?  Do you believe in Hell as you believe in Australia?'

'Yes, of course I do,' said Dorothy, and she endeavoured to explain
to him that the existence of Hell is much more real and permanent
than the existence of Australia.

'Hm,' said Mr Warburton, unimpressed.  'Very sound in its way, of
course.  But what always makes me so suspicious of you religious
people is that you're so deucedly cold-blooded about your beliefs.
It shows a very poor imagination, to say the least of it.  Here am
I an infidel and blasphemer and neck deep in at least six out of
the Seven Deadly, and obviously doomed to eternal torment.  There's
no knowing that in an hour's time I mayn't be roasting in the
hottest part of Hell.  And yet you can sit there talking to me as
calmly as though I'd nothing the matter with me.  Now, if I'd
merely got cancer or leprosy or some other bodily ailment, you'd be
quite distressed about it--at least, I like to flatter myself that
you would.  Whereas, when I'm going to sizzle on the grid
throughout eternity, you seem positively unconcerned about it.'

'I never said YOU were going to Hell,' said Dorothy somewhat
uncomfortably, and wishing that the conversation would take a
different turn.  For the truth was, though she was not going to
tell him so, that the point Mr Warburton had raised was one with
which she herself had had certain difficulties.  She did indeed
believe in Hell, but she had never been able to persuade herself
that anyone actually WENT there.  She believed that Hell existed,
but that it was empty.  Uncertain of the orthodoxy of this belief,
she preferred to keep it to herself.  'It's never certain that
ANYONE is going to Hell,' she said more firmly, feeling that here
at least she was on sure ground.

'What!' said Mr Warburton, halting in mock surprise.  'Surely you
don't mean to say that there's hope for me yet?'

'Of course there is.  It's only those horrid Predestination people
who pretend that you go to Hell whether you repent or not.  You
don't think the Church of England are Calvinists, do you?'

'I suppose there's always the chance of getting off on a plea of
Invincible Ignorance,' said Mr Warburton reflectively; and then,
more confidently:  'Do you know, Dorothy, I've a sort of feeling
that even now, after knowing me two years, you've still half an
idea you can make a convert of me.  A lost sheep--brand plucked
from the burning, and all that.  I believe you still hope against
hope that one of these days my eyes will be opened and you'll meet
me at Holy Communion at seven o'clock on some damned cold winter
morning.  Don't you?'

'Well--' said Dorothy, again uncomfortably.  She did, in fact,
entertain some such hope about Mr Warburton, though he was not
exactly a promising case for conversion.  It was not in her nature
to see a fellow being in a state of unbelief without making some
effort to reclaim him.  What hours she had spent, at different
times, earnestly debating with vague village atheists who could not
produce a single intelligible reason for their unbelief!  'Yes,'
she admitted finally, not particularly wanting to make the
admission, but not wanting to prevaricate.

Mr Warburton laughed delightedly.

'You've a hopeful nature,' he said.  'But you aren't afraid, by any
chance, that I might convert YOU?  "The dog it was that died", you
may remember.'

At this Dorothy merely smiled.  'Don't let him see he's shocking
you'--that was always her maxim when she was talking to Mr
Warburton.  They had been arguing in this manner, without coming to
any kind of conclusion, for the past hour, and might have gone on
for the rest of the night if Dorothy had been willing to stay; for
Mr Warburton delighted in teasing her about her religious beliefs.
He had that fatal cleverness that so often goes with unbelief, and
in their arguments, though Dorothy was always RIGHT, she was not
always victorious.  They were sitting, or rather Dorothy was
sitting and Mr Warburton was standing, in a large agreeable room,
giving on a moonlit lawn, that Mr Warburton called his 'studio'--
not that there was any sign of work ever having been done in it.
To Dorothy's great disappointment, the celebrated Mr Bewley had not
turned up.  (As a matter of fact, neither Mr Bewley, nor his wife,
nor his novel entitled Fishpools and Concubines, actually existed.
Mr Warburton had invented all three of them on the spur of the
moment, as a pretext for inviting Dorothy to his house, well
knowing that she would never come unchaperoned.)  Dorothy had felt
rather uneasy on finding that Mr Warburton was alone.  It had
occurred to her, indeed she had felt perfectly certain, that it
would be wiser to go home at once; but she had stayed, chiefly
because she was horribly tired and the leather armchair into which
Mr Warburton had thrust her the moment she entered the house was
too comfortable to leave.  Now, however, her conscience was
pricking her.  It DIDN'T DO to stay too late at his house--people
would talk if they heard of it.  Besides, there was a multitude of
jobs that she ought to be doing and that she had neglected in order
to come here.  She was so little used to idleness that even an hour
spent in mere talking seemed to her vaguely sinful.

She made an effort, and straightened herself in the too-comfortable
chair.  'I think, if you don't mind, it's really time I was getting
home,' she said.

'Talking of Invincible Ignorance,' went on Mr Warburton, taking no
notice of Dorothy's remark, 'I forget whether I ever told you that
once when I was standing outside the World's End pub in Chelsea,
waiting for a taxi, a damned ugly little Salvation Army lassie came
up to me and said--without any kind of introduction, you know--
"What will you say at the Judgement Seat?" I said, "I am reserving
my defence."  Rather neat, I think, don't you?'

Dorothy did not answer.  Her conscience had given her another and
harder jab--she had remembered those wretched, unmade jackboots,
and the fact that at least one of them had got to be made tonight.
She was, however, unbearably tired.  She had had an exhausting
afternoon, starting off with ten miles or so bicycling to and fro
in the sun, delivering the parish magazine, and continuing with the
Mothers' Union tea in the hot little wooden-walled room behind the
parish hall.  The Mothers met every Wednesday afternoon to have tea
and do some charitable sewing while Dorothy read aloud to them.
(At present she was reading Gene Stratton Porter's A Girl of the
Limberlost.)  It was nearly always upon Dorothy that jobs of that
kind devolved, because the phalanx of devoted women (the church
fowls, they are called) who do the dirty work of most parishes had
dwindled at Knype Hill to four or five at most.  The only helper on
whom Dorothy could count at all regularly was Miss Foote, a tall,
rabbit-faced, dithering virgin of thirty-five, who meant well but
made a mess of everything and was in a perpetual state of flurry.
Mr Warburton used to say that she reminded him of a comet--'a
ridiculous blunt-nosed creature rushing round on an eccentric orbit
and always a little behind time'.  You could trust Miss Foote with
the church decorations, but not with the Mothers or the Sunday
School, because, though a regular churchgoer, her orthodoxy was
suspect.  She had confided to Dorothy that she could worship God
best under the blue dome of the sky.  After tea Dorothy had dashed
up to the church to put fresh flowers on the altar, and then she
had typed out her father's sermon--her typewriter was a rickety
pre-Boer War 'invisible', on which you couldn't average eight
hundred words an hour--and after supper she had weeded the pea rows
until the light failed and her back seemed to be breaking.  With
one thing and another, she was even more tired than usual.

'I really MUST be getting home,' she repeated more firmly.  'I'm
sure it's getting fearfully late.'

'Home?' said Mr Warburton.  'Nonsense!  The evening's hardly begun.'

He was walking up and down the room again, with his hands in his
coat pockets, having thrown away his cigar.  The spectre of the
unmade jackboots stalked back into Dorothy's mind.  She would, she
suddenly decided, make two jackboots tonight instead of only one,
as a penance for the hour she had wasted.  She was just beginning
to make a mental sketch of the way she would cut out the pieces of
brown paper for the insteps, when she noticed that Mr Warburton had
halted behind her chair.

'What time is it, do you know?' she said.

'I dare say it might be half past ten.  But people like you and me
don't talk of such vulgar subjects as the time.'

'If it's half past ten, then I really must be going,' said Dorothy.
I've got a whole lot of work to do before I go to bed.'

'Work!  At this time of night?  Impossible!'

'Yes, I have.  I've got to make a pair of jackboots.'

'You've got to make a pair of WHAT?' said Mr Warburton.

'Of jackboots.  For the play the schoolchildren are acting.  We
make them out of glue and brown paper.'

'Glue and brown paper!  Good God!' murmured Mr Warburton.  He went
on, chiefly to cover the fact that he was drawing nearer to
Dorothy's chair:  'What a life you lead!  Messing about with glue
and brown paper in the middle of the night!  I must say, there are
times when I feel just a little glad that I'm not a clergyman's
daughter.'

'I think--' began Dorothy.

But at the same moment Mr Warburton, invisible behind her chair,
had lowered his hands and taken her gently by the shoulders.
Dorothy immediately wriggled herself in an effort to get free of
him; but Mr Warburton pressed her back into her place.

'Keep still,' he said peaceably.

'Let me go!' exclaimed Dorothy.

Mr Warburton ran his right hand caressingly down her upper arm.
There was something very revealing, very characteristic in the way
he did it; it was the lingering, appraising touch of a man to whom
a woman's body is valuable precisely in the same way as though it
were something to eat.

'You really have extraordinary nice arms,' he said.  'How on earth
have you managed to remain unmarried all these years?'

'Let me go at once!' repeated Dorothy, beginning to struggle again.

'But I don't particularly want to let you go,' objected Mr
Warburton.

'PLEASE don't stroke my arm like that!  I don't like it!'

'What a curious child you are!  Why don't you like it?'

'I tell you I don't like it!'

'Now don't go and turn round,' said Mr Warburton mildly.  'You
don't seem to realize how tactful it was on my part to approach you
from behind your back.  If you turn round you'll see that I'm old
enough to be your father, and hideously bald into the bargain.  But
if you'll only keep still and not look at me you can imagine I'm
Ivor Novello.'

Dorothy caught sight of the hand that was caressing her--a large,
pink, very masculine hand, with thick fingers and a fleece of gold
hairs upon the back.  She turned very pale; the expression of her
face altered from mere annoyance to aversion and dread.  She made a
violent effort, wrenched herself free, and stood up, facing him.

'I DO wish you wouldn't do that!' she said, half in anger and half
in distress.

'What is the matter with you?' said Mr Warburton.

He had stood upright, in his normal pose, entirely unconcerned, and
he looked at her with a touch of curiosity.  Her face had changed.
It was not only that she had turned pale; there was a withdrawn,
half-frightened look in her eyes--almost as though, for the moment,
she were looking at him with the eyes of a stranger.  He perceived
that he had wounded her in some way which he did not understand,
and which perhaps she did not want him to understand.

'What is the matter with you?' he repeated.

'WHY must you do that every time you meet me?'

'"Every time I meet you" is an exaggeration,' said Mr Warburton.
'It's really very seldom that I get the opportunity.  But if you
really and truly don't like it--'

'Of course I don't like it!  You know I don't like it!'

'Well, well!  Then let's say no more about it,' said Mr Warburton
generously.  'Sit down, and we'll change the subject.'

He was totally devoid of shame.  It was perhaps his most outstanding
characteristic.  Having attempted to seduce her, and failed, he was
quite willing to go on with the conversation as though nothing
whatever had happened.

'I'm going home at once,' said Dorothy.  'I can't stay here any
longer.'

'Oh nonsense!  Sit down and forget about it.  We'll talk of moral
theology, or cathedral architecture, or the Girl Guides' cooking
classes, or anything you choose.  Think how bored I shall be all
alone if you go home at this hour.'

But Dorothy persisted, and there was an argument.  Even if it had
not been his intention to make love to her--and whatever he might
promise he would certainly begin again in a few minutes if she did
not go--Mr Warburton would have pressed her to stay, for, like all
thoroughly idle people, he had a horror of going to bed and no
conception of the value of time.  He would, if you let him, keep
you talking till three or four in the morning.  Even when Dorothy
finally escaped, he walked beside her down the moonlit drive, still
talking voluminously and with such perfect good humour that she
found it impossible to be angry with him any longer.

'I'm leaving first thing tomorrow,' he told her as they reached the
gate.  'I'm going to take the car to town and pick up the kids--the
BASTARDS, you know--and we're leaving for France the next day.  I'm
not certain where we shall go after that; eastern Europe, perhaps.
Prague, Vienna, Bucharest.'

'How nice,' said Dorothy.

Mr Warburton, with an adroitness surprising in so large and stout a
man, had manoeuvred himself between Dorothy and the gate.

'I shall be away six months or more,' he said.  'And of course I
needn't ask, before so long a parting, whether you want to kiss me
good-bye?'

Before she knew what he was doing he had put his arm about her and
drawn her against him.  She drew back--too late; he kissed her on
the cheek--would have kissed her on the mouth if she had not turned
her head away in time.  She struggled in his arms, violently and
for a moment helplessly.

'Oh, let me go!' she cried.  'DO let me go!'

'I believe I pointed out before,' said Mr Warburton, holding her
easily against him, 'that I don't want to let you go.'

'But we're standing right in front of Mrs Semprill's window!
She'll see us absolutely for certain!'

'Oh, good God!  So she will!' said Mr Warburton.  'I was forgetting.'

Impressed by this argument, as he would not have been by any other,
he let Dorothy go.  She promptly put the gate between Mr Warburton
and herself.  He, meanwhile, was scrutinizing Mrs Semprill's
windows.

'I can't see a light anywhere,' he said finally.  'With any luck
the blasted hag hasn't seen us.'

'Good-bye,' said Dorothy briefly.  'This time I really MUST go.
Remember me to the children.'

With this she made off as fast as she could go without actually
running, to get out of his reach before he should attempt to kiss
her again.

Even as she did so a sound checked her for an instant--the
unmistakable bang of a window shutting, somewhere in Mrs Semprill's
house.  Could Mrs Semprill have been watching them after all?  But
(reflected Dorothy) of COURSE she had been watching them!  What
else could you expect?  You could hardly imagine Mrs Semprill
missing such a scene as that.  And if she HAD been watching them,
undoubtedly the story would be all over the town tomorrow morning,
and it would lose nothing in the telling.  But this thought,
sinister though it was, did no more than flight momentarily through
Dorothy's mind as she hurried down the road.

When she was well out of sight of Mr Warburton's house she stopped,
took out her handkerchief and scrubbed the place on her cheek where
he had kissed her.  She scrubbed it vigorously enough to bring the
blood into her cheek.  It was not until she had quite rubbed out
the imaginary stain which his lips had left there that she walked
on again.

What he had done had upset her.  Even now her heart was knocking
and fluttering uncomfortably.  I can't BEAR that kind of thing! she
repeated to herself several times over.  And unfortunately this was
no more than the literal truth; she really could not bear it.  To
be kissed or fondled by a man--to feel heavy male arms about her
and thick male lips bearing down upon her own--was terrifying and
repulsive to her.  Even in memory or imagination it made her wince.
It was her especial secret, the especial, incurable disability that
she carried through life.

If only they would leave you ALONE! she thought as she walked
onwards a little more slowly.  That was how she put it to herself
habitually--'If only they would leave you ALONE!'  For it was not
that in other ways she disliked men.  On the contrary, she liked
them better than women.  Part of Mr Warburton's hold over her was
in the fact that he was a man and had the careless good humour and
the intellectual largeness that women so seldom have.  But why
couldn't they leave you ALONE?  Why did they always have to kiss
you and maul you about?  They were dreadful when they kissed you--
dreadful and a little disgusting, like some large, furry beast that
rubs itself against you, all too friendly and yet liable to turn
dangerous at any moment.  And beyond their kissing and mauling
there lay always the suggestion of those other, monstrous things
('ALL THAT' was her name for them) of which she could hardly even
bear to think.

Of course, she had had her share, and rather more than her share,
of casual attention from men.  She was just pretty enough, and just
plain enough, to be the kind of girl that men habitually pester.
For when a man wants a little casual amusement, he usually picks
out a girl who is not TOO pretty.  Pretty girls (so he reasons) are
spoilt and therefore capricious; but plain girls are easy game.
And even if you are a clergyman's daughter, even if you live in a
town like Knype Hill and spend almost your entire life in parish
work, you don't altogether escape pursuit.  Dorothy was all too
used to it--all too used to the fattish middle-aged men, with their
fishily hopeful eyes, who slowed down their cars when you passed
them on the road, or who manoeuvred an introduction and then began
pinching your elbow about ten minutes afterwards.  Men of all
descriptions.  Even a clergyman, on one occasion--a bishop's
chaplain, he was. . . .

But the trouble was that it was not better, but oh! infinitely
worse when they were the right kind of man and the advances they
made you were honourable.  Her mind slipped backwards five years,
to Francis Moon, curate in those days at St Wedekind's in
Millborough.  Dear Francis!  How gladly would she have married him
if only it had not been for ALL THAT!  Over and over again he had
asked her to marry him, and of course she had had to say No; and,
equally of course, he had never known why.  Impossible to tell him
why.  And then he had gone away, and only a year later had died so
irrelevantly of pneumonia.  She whispered a prayer for his soul,
momentarily forgetting that her father did not really approve of
prayers for the dead, and then, with an effort, pushed the memory
aside.  Ah, better not to think of it again!  It hurt her in her
breast to think of it.

She could never marry, she had decided long ago upon that.  Even
when she was a child she had known it.  Nothing would ever overcome
her horror of ALL THAT--at the very thought of it something within
her seemed to shrink and freeze.  And of course, in a sense she did
not want to overcome it.  For, like all abnormal people, she was
not fully aware that she was abnormal.

And yet, though her sexual coldness seemed to her natural and
inevitable, she knew well enough how it was that it had begun.  She
could remember, as clearly as though it were yesterday, certain
dreadful scenes between her father and her mother--scenes that she
had witnessed when she was no more than nine years old.  They had
left a deep, secret wound in her mind.  And then a little later she
had been frightened by some old steel engravings of nymphs pursued
by satyrs.  To her childish mind there was something inexplicably,
horribly sinister in those horned, semi-human creatures that lurked
in thickets and behind large trees, ready to come bounding forth in
sudden swift pursuit.  For a whole year of her childhood she had
actually been afraid to walk through woods alone, for fear of
satyrs.  She had grown out of the fear, of course, but not out of
the feeling that was associated with it.  The satyr had remained
with her as a symbol.  Perhaps she would never grow out of it, that
special feeling of dread, of hopeless flight from something more
than rationally dreadful--the stamp of hooves in the lonely wood,
the lean, furry thighs of the satyr.  It was a thing not to be
altered, not to be argued away.  It is, moreover, a thing too
common nowadays, among educated women, to occasion any kind of
surprise.

Most of Dorothy's agitation had disappeared by the time she reached
the rectory.  The thoughts of satyrs and Mr Warburton, of Francis
Moon and her foredoomed sterility, which had been going to and fro
in her mind, faded out of it and were replaced by the accusing
image of a jackboot.  She remembered that she had the best part of
two hours' work to do before going to bed tonight.  The house was
in darkness.  She went round to the back and slipped in on tiptoe
by the scullery door, for fear of waking her father, who was
probably asleep already.

As she felt her way through the dark passage to the conservatory,
she suddenly decided that she had gone wrong in going to Mr
Warburton's house tonight.  She would, she resolved, never go there
again, even when she was certain that somebody else would be there
as well.  Moreover, she would do penance tomorrow for having gone
there tonight.  Having lighted the lamp, before doing anything else
she found her 'memo list', which was already written out for
tomorrow, and pencilled a capital P against 'breakfast', P stood
for penance--no bacon again for breakfast tomorrow.  Then she
lighted the oilstove under the glue-pot.

The light of the lamp fell yellow upon her sewing-machine and upon
the pile of half-finished clothes on the table, reminding her of
the yet greater pile of clothes that were not even begun; reminding
her, also, that she was dreadfully, overwhelmingly tired.  She had
forgotten her tiredness at the moment when Mr Warburton laid his
hands on her shoulders, but now it had come back upon her with
double force.  Moreover, there was a somehow exceptional quality
about her tiredness tonight.  She felt, in an almost literal sense
of the words, washed out.  As she stood beside the table she had a
sudden, very strange feeling as though her mind had been entirely
emptied, so that for several seconds she actually forgot what it
was that she had come into the conservatory to do.

Then she remembered--the jackboots, of course!  Some contemptible
little demon whispered in her ear, 'Why not go straight to bed and
leave the jackboots till tomorrow?'  She uttered a prayer for
strength, and pinched herself.  Come on, Dorothy!  No slacking
please!  Luke ix, 62.  Then, clearing some of the litter off the
table, she got out her scissors, a pencil, and four sheets of brown
paper, and sat down to cut out those troublesome insteps for the
jackboots while the glue was boiling.

When the grandfather clock in her father's study struck midnight
she was still at work.  She had shaped both jackboots by this time,
and was reinforcing them by pasting narrow strips of paper all over
them--a long, messy job.  Every bone in her body was aching, and
her eyes were sticky with sleep.  Indeed, it was only rather dimly
that she remembered what she was doing.  But she worked on,
mechanically pasting strip after strip of paper into place, and
pinching herself every two minutes to counteract the hypnotic sound
of the oilstove singing beneath the glue-pot.




CHAPTER 2



1


Out of a black, dreamless sleep, with the sense of being drawn
upwards through enormous and gradually lightening abysses, Dorothy
awoke to a species of consciousness.

Her eyes were still closed.  By degrees, however, their lids became
less opaque to the light, and then flickered open of their own
accord.  She was looking out upon a street--a shabby, lively street
of small shops and narrow-faced houses, with streams of men, trams,
and cars passing in either direction.

But as yet it could not properly be said that she was LOOKING.  For
the things she saw were not apprehended as men, trams, and cars,
nor as anything in particular; they were not even apprehended as
things moving; not even as THINGS.  She merely SAW, as an animal
sees, without speculation and almost without consciousness.  The
noises of the street--the confused din of voices, the hooting of
horns and the scream of the trams grinding on their gritty rails--
flowed through her head provoking purely physical responses.  She
had no words, nor any conception of the purpose of such things as
words, nor any consciousness of time or place, or of her own body
or even of her own existence.

Nevertheless, by degrees her perceptions became sharper.  The
stream of moving things began to penetrate beyond her eyes and sort
themselves out into separate images in her brain.  She began, still
wordlessly, to observe the shapes of things.  A long-shaped thing
swam past, supported on four other, narrower long-shaped things,
and drawing after it a square-shaped thing balanced on two circles.
Dorothy watched it pass; and suddenly, as though spontaneously, a
word flashed into her mind.  The word was 'horse'.  It faded, but
returned presently in the more complex form:  'THAT IS A HORSE.'
Other words followed--'house', 'street', 'tram', 'car', 'bicycle'--
until in a few minutes she had found a name for almost everything
within sight.  She discovered the words 'man' and 'woman', and,
speculating upon these words, discovered that she knew the
difference between living and inanimate things, and between human
beings and horses, and between men and women.

It was only now, after becoming aware of most of the things about
her, that she became aware of HERSELF.  Hitherto she had been as it
were a pair of eyes with a receptive but purely impersonal brain
behind them.  But now, with a curious little shock, she discovered
her separate and unique existence; she could FEEL herself existing;
it was as though something within her were exclaiming 'I am I!'
Also, in some way she knew that this 'I' had existed and been the
same from remote periods in the past, though it was a past of which
she had no remembrance.

But it was only for a moment that this discovery occupied her.
From the first there was a sense of incompleteness in it, of
something vaguely unsatisfactory.  And it was this: the 'I am I'
which had seemed an answer had itself become a question.  It was no
longer 'I am I', but 'WHO am I'?

WHO WAS SHE?  She turned the question over in her mind, and found
that she had not the dimmest notion of who she was; except that,
watching the people and horses passing, she grasped that she was a
human being and not a horse.  And that the question altered itself
and took this form:  'Am I a man or a woman?'  Again neither
feeling nor memory gave any clue to the answer.  But at that
moment, by accident possibly, her finger-tips brushed against her
body.  She realized more clearly than before that her body existed,
and that it was her own--that it was, in fact, herself.  She began
to explore it with her hands, and her hands encountered breasts.
She was a woman, therefore.  Only women had breasts.  In some way
she knew, without knowing how she knew, that all those women who
passed had breasts beneath their clothes, though she could not see
them.

She now grasped that in order to identify herself she must examine
her own body, beginning with her face; and for some moments she
actually attempted to look at her own face, before realizing that
this was impossible.  She looked down, and saw a shabby black satin
dress, rather long, a pair of flesh-coloured artificial silk
stockings, laddered and dirty, and a pair of very shabby black
satin shoes with high heels.  None of them was in the least
familiar to her.  She examined her hands, and they were both
strange and unstrange.  They were smallish hands, with hard palms,
and very dirty.  After a moment she realized that it was their
dirtiness that made them strange to her.  The hands themselves
seemed natural and appropriate, though she did not recognize them.

After hesitating a few moments longer, she turned to her left and
began to walk slowly along the pavement.  A fragment of knowledge
had come to her, mysteriously, out of the blank past: the existence
of mirrors, their purpose, and the fact that there are often
mirrors in shop windows.  After a moment she came to a cheap little
jeweller's shop in which a strip of mirror, set at an angle,
reflected the faces of people passing.  Dorothy picked her
reflection out from among a dozen others, immediately realizing it
to be her own.  Yet it could not be said that she had recognized
it; she had no memory of ever having seen it till this moment.  It
showed her a woman's youngish face, thin, very blonde, with crow's-
feet round the eyes, and faintly smudged with dirt.  A vulgar black
cloche hat was stuck carelessly on the head, concealing most of the
hair.  The face was quite unfamiliar to her, and yet not strange.
She had not known till this moment what face to expect, but now
that she had seen it she realized that it was the face she might
have expected.  It was appropriate.  It corresponded to something
within her.

As she turned away from the jeweller's mirror, she caught sight of
the words 'Fry's Chocolate' on a shop window opposite, and
discovered that she understood the purpose of writing, and also,
after a momentary effort, that she was able to read.  Her eyes
flitted across the street, taking in and deciphering odd scraps of
print; the names of shops, advertisements, newspaper posters.  She
spelled out the letters of two red and white posters outside a
tobacconist's shop.  One of them read, 'Fresh Rumours about
Rector's Daughter', and the other, 'Rector's Daughter.  Now
believed in Paris'.  Then she looked upwards, and saw in white
lettering on the corner of a house:  'New Kent Road'.  The words
arrested her.  She grasped that she was standing in the New Kent
Road, and--another fragment of her mysterious knowledge--the New
Kent Road was somewhere in London.  So she was in London.

As she made this discovery a peculiar tremor ran through her.  Her
mind was now fully awakened; she grasped, as she had not grasped
before, the strangeness of her situation, and it bewildered and
frightened her.  What could it all MEAN?  What was she doing here?
How had she got here?  What had happened to her?

The answer was not long in coming.  She thought--and it seemed to
her that she understood perfectly well what the words meant:  'Of
course!  I've lost my memory!'

At this moment two youths and a girl who were trudging past, the
youths with clumsy sacking bundles on their backs, stopped and
looked curiously at Dorothy.  They hesitated for a moment, then
walked on, but halted again by a lamp-post five yards away.
Dorothy saw them looking back at her and talking among themselves.
One of the youths was about twenty, narrow-chested, black-haired,
ruddy-cheeked, good-looking in a nosy cockney way, and dressed in
the wreck of a raffishly smart blue suit and a check cap.  The
other was about twenty-six, squat, nimble, and powerful, with a
snub nose, a clear pink skin and huge lips as coarse as sausages,
exposing strong yellow teeth.  He was frankly ragged, and he had a
mat of orange-coloured hair cropped short and growing low on his
head, which gave him a startling resemblance to an orang-outang.
The girl was a silly-looking, plump creature, dressed in clothes
very like Dorothy's own.  Dorothy could hear some of what they were
saying:

'That tart looks ill,' said the girl.

The orange-headed one, who was singing 'Sonny Boy' in a good
baritone voice, stopped singing to answer.  'She ain't ill,' he
said.  'She's on the beach all right, though.  Same as us.'

'She'd do jest nicely for Nobby, wouldn't she?' said the dark-
haired one.

'Oh, YOU!' exclaimed the girl with a shocked-amorous air, pretending
to smack the dark one over the head.

The youths had lowered their bundles and leaned them against the
lamp-post.  All three of them now came rather hesitantly towards
Dorothy, the orange-headed one, whose name seemed to be Nobby,
leading the way as their ambassador.  He moved with a gambolling,
apelike gait, and his grin was so frank and wide that it was
impossible not to smile back at him.  He addressed Dorothy in a
friendly way.

'Hullo, kid!'

'Hullo!'

'You on the beach, kid?'

'On the beach?'

'Well, on the bum?'

'On the bum?'

'Christ! she's batty,' murmured the girl, twitching at the black-
haired one's arm as though to pull him away.

'Well, what I mean to say, kid--have you got any money?'

'I don't know.'

At this all three looked at one another in stupefaction.  For a
moment they probably thought that Dorothy really WAS batty.  But
simultaneously Dorothy, who had earlier discovered a small pocket
in the side of her dress, put her hand into it and felt the outline
of a large coin.

'I believe I've got a penny,' she said.

'A penny!' said the dark youth disgustedly, '--lot of good that is
to us!'

Dorothy drew it out.  It was a half-crown.  An astonishing change
came over the faces of the three others.  Nobby's mouth split open
with delight, he gambolled several steps to and fro like some great
jubilant ape, and then, halting, took Dorothy confidentially by the
arm.

'That's the mulligatawny!' he said.  'We've struck it lucky--and
so've you, kid, believe me.  You're going to bless the day you set
eyes on us lot.  We're going to make your fortune for you, we are.
Now, see here, kid--are you on to go into cahoots with us three?'

'What?' said Dorothy.

'What I mean to say--how about you chumming in with Flo and Charlie
and me?  Partners, see?  Comrades all, shoulder to shoulder.
United we stand, divided we fall.  We put up the brains, you put up
the money.  How about it, kid?  Are you on, or are you off?'

'Shut up, Nobby!' interrupted the girl.  'She don't understand a
word of what you're saying.  Talk to her proper, can't you?'

'That'll do, Flo,' said Nobby equably.  'You keep it shut and leave
the talking to me.  I got a way with the tarts, I have.  Now, you
listen to me, kid--what might your name happen to be, kid?'

Dorothy was within an ace of saying 'I don't know,' but she was
sufficiently on the alert to stop herself in time.  Choosing a
feminine name from the half-dozen that sprang immediately into her
mind, she answered, 'Ellen.'

'Ellen.  That's the mulligatawny.  No surnames when you're on the
bum.  Well now, Ellen dear, you listen to me.  Us three are going
down hopping, see--'

'Hopping?'

''Opping!' put in the dark youth impatiently, as though disgusted
by Dorothy's ignorance.  His voice and manner were rather sullen,
and his accent much baser than Nobby's.  'Pickin' 'ops--dahn in
Kent!  C'n understand that, can't yer?'

'Oh, HOPS!  For beer?'

'That's the mulligatawny!  Coming on fine, she is.  Well, kid, 'z I
was saying, here's us three going down hopping, and got a job
promised us and all--Blessington's farm, Lower Molesworth.  Only
we're just a bit in the mulligatawny, see?  Because we ain't got a
brown between us, and we got to do it on the toby--thirty-five
miles it is--and got to tap for our tommy and skipper at night as
well.  And that's a bit of a mulligatawny, with ladies in the
party.  But now s'pose f'rinstance you was to come along with us,
see?  We c'd take the twopenny tram far as Bromley, and that's
fifteen miles done, and we won't need skipper more'n one night on
the way.  And you can chum in at our bin--four to a bin's the best
picking--and if Blessington's paying twopence a bushel you'll turn
your ten bob a week easy.  What do you say to it, kid?  Your two
and a tanner won't do you much good here in Smoke.  But you go into
partnership with us, and you'll get your kip for a month and
something over--and WE'LL get a lift to Bromley and a bit of scran
as well.'

About a quarter of his speech was intelligible to Dorothy.  She
asked rather at random:

'What is SCRAN?'

'Scran?  Tommy--food.  I can see YOU ain't been long on the beach,
kid.'

'Oh. . . .  Well, you want me to come down hop-picking with you, is
that it?'

'That's it, Ellen my dear.  Are you on, or are you off?'

'All right,' said Dorothy promptly.  'I'll come.'

She made this decision without any misgiving whatever.  It is true
that if she had had time to think over her position, she would
probably have acted differently; in all probability she would have
gone to a police station and asked for assistance.  That would have
been the sensible course to take.  But Nobby and the others had
appeared just at the critical moment, and, helpless as she was, it
seemed quite natural to throw in her lot with the first human being
who presented himself.  Moreover, for some reason which she did not
understand, it reassured her to hear that they were making for
Kent.  Kent, it seemed to her, was the very place to which she
wanted to go.  The others showed no further curiosity, and asked no
uncomfortable questions.  Nobby simply said, 'O.K.  That's the
mulligatawny!' and then gently took Dorothy's half-crown out of her
hand and slid it into his pocket--in case she should lose it, he
explained.  The dark youth--apparently his name was Charlie--said
in his surly, disagreeable way:

'Come on, less get movin'!  It's 'ar-parse two already.  We don't
want to miss that there ---- tram.  Where d'they start from,
Nobby?'

'The Elephant,' said Nobby: 'and we got to catch it before four
o'clock, because they don't give no free rides after four.'

'Come on, then, don't less waste no more time.  Nice job we'll 'ave
of it if we got to 'ike it down to Bromley AND look for a place to
skipper in the ---- dark.  C'm on, Flo.'

'Quick march!' said Nobby, swinging his bundle on to his shoulder.

They set out, without more words said, Dorothy, still bewildered
but feeling much better than she had felt half an hour ago, walked
beside Flo and Charlie, who talked to one another and took no
further notice of her.  From the very first they seemed to hold
themselves a little aloof from Dorothy--willing enough to share her
half-crown, but with no friendly feelings towards her.  Nobby
marched in front, stepping out briskly in spite of his burden, and
singing, with spirited imitations of military music, the well-known
military song of which the only recorded words seem to be:


'"----!" was all the band could play;
"----! ----!"  And the same to you!'



2


This was the twenty-ninth of August.  It was on the night of the
twenty-first that Dorothy had fallen asleep in the conservatory; so
that there had been an interregnum in her life of not quite eight
days.

The thing that had happened to her was commonplace enough--almost
every week one reads in the newspapers of a similar case.  A man
disappears from home, is lost sight of for days or weeks, and
presently fetches up at a police station or in a hospital, with no
notion of who he is or where he has come from.  As a rule it is
impossible to tell how he has spent the intervening time; he has
been wandering, presumably, in some hypnotic or somnambulistic
state in which he has nevertheless been able to pass for normal.
In Dorothy's case only one thing is certain, and that is that she
had been robbed at some time during her travels; for the clothes
she was wearing were not her own, and her gold cross was missing.

At the moment when Nobby accosted her, she was already on the road
to recovery; and if she had been properly cared for, her memory
might have come back to her within a few days or even hours.  A
very small thing would have been enough to accomplish it; a chance
meeting with a friend, a photograph of her home, a few questions
skilfully put.  But as it was, the slight mental stimulus that she
needed was never given.  She was left in the peculiar state in
which she had first found herself--a state in which her mind was
potentially normal, but not quite strung up to the effort of
puzzling out her own identity.

For of course, once she had thrown in her lot with Nobby and the
others, all chance of reflection was gone.  There was no time to
sit down and think the matter over--no time to come to grips with
her difficulty and reason her way to its solution.  In the strange,
dirty sub-world into which she was instantly plunged, even five
minutes of consecutive thought would have been impossible.  The
days passed in ceaseless nightmarish activity.  Indeed, it was very
like a nightmare; a nightmare not of urgent terrors, but of hunger,
squalor, and fatigue, and of alternating heat and cold.  Afterwards,
when she looked back upon that time, days and nights merged
themselves together so that she could never remember with perfect
certainty how many of them there had been.  She only knew that for
some indefinite period she had been perpetually footsore and almost
perpetually hungry.  Hunger and the soreness of her feet were her
clearest memories of that time; and also the cold of the nights, and
a peculiar, blowsy, witless feeling that came of sleeplessness and
constant exposure to the air.

After getting to Bromley they had 'drummed up' on a horrible,
paper-littered rubbish dump, reeking with the refuse of several
slaughter-houses, and then passed a shuddering night, with only
sacks for cover, in long wet grass on the edge of a recreation
ground.  In the morning they had started out, on foot, for the
hopfields.  Even at this early date Dorothy had discovered that the
tale Nobby had told her, about the promise of a job, was totally
untrue.  He had invented it--he confessed this quite light-
heartedly--to induce her to come with them.  Their only chance of
getting a job was to march down into the hop country and apply at
every farm till they found one where pickers were still needed.

They had perhaps thirty-five miles to go, as the crow flies, and
yet at the end of three days they had barely reached the fringe of
the hopfields.  The need of getting food, of course, was what
slowed their progress.  They could have marched the whole distance
in two days or even in a day if they had not been obliged to feed
themselves.  As it was, they had hardly even time to think of
whether they were going in the direction of the hopfields or not;
it was food that dictated all their movements.  Dorothy's half-
crown had melted within a few hours, and after that there was
nothing for it except to beg.  But there came the difficulty.  One
person can beg his food easily enough on the road, and even two can
manage it, but it is a very different matter when there are four
people together.  In such circumstances one can only keep alive if
one hunts for food as persistently and single-mindedly as a wild
beast. Food--that was their sole preoccupation during those three
days--just food, and the endless difficulty of getting it.

From morning to night they were begging.  They wandered enormous
distances, zigzagging right across the country, trailing from
village to village and from house to house, 'tapping' at every
butcher's and every baker's and every likely looking cottage, and
hanging hopefully round picnic parties, and waving--always vainly--
at passing cars, and accosting old gentlemen with the right kind of
face and pitching hard-up stories.  Often they went five miles out
of their way to get a crust of bread or a handful of scraps of
bacon.  All of them begged, Dorothy with the others; she had no
remembered past, no standards of comparison to make her ashamed of
it.  And yet with all their efforts they would have gone empty-
bellied half the time if they had not stolen as well as begged.
At dusk and in the early mornings they pillaged the orchards and
the fields, stealing apples, damsons, pears, cobnuts, autumn
raspberries, and, above all, potatoes; Nobby counted it a sin to
pass a potato field without getting at least a pocketful.  It was
Nobby who did most of the stealing, while the others kept guard.
He was a bold thief; it was his peculiar boast that he would steal
anything that was not tied down, and he would have landed them all
in prison if they had not restrained him sometimes.  Once he even
laid hands on a goose, but the goose set up a fearful clamour, and
Charlie and Dorothy dragged Nobby off just as the owner came out of
doors to see what was the matter.

Each of those first days they walked between twenty and twenty-five
miles.  They trailed across commons and through buried villages
with incredible names, and lost themselves in lanes that led
nowhere, and sprawled exhausted in dry ditches smelling of fennel
and tansies, and sneaked into private woods and 'drummed up' in
thickets where firewood and water were handy, and cooked strange,
squalid meals in the two two-pound snuff-tins that were their only
cooking pots.  Sometimes, when their luck was in, they had
excellent stews of cadged bacon and stolen cauliflowers, sometimes
great insipid gorges of potatoes roasted in the ashes, sometimes
jam made of stolen autumn raspberries which they boiled in one of
the snuff-tins and devoured while it was still scalding hot.  Tea
was the one thing they never ran short of.  Even when there was no
food at all there was always tea, stewed, dark brown and reviving.
It is a thing that can be begged more easily than most.  'Please,
ma'am, could you spare me a pinch of tea?' is a plea that seldom
fails, even with the case-hardened Kentish housewives.

The days were burning hot, the white roads glared and the passing
cars sent stinging dust into their faces.  Often families of hop-
pickers drove past, cheering, in lorries piled sky-high with
furniture, children, dogs, and birdcages.  The nights were always
cold.  There is hardly such a thing as a night in England when it
is really warm after midnight.  Two large sacks were all the
bedding they had between them.  Flo and Charlie had one sack,
Dorothy had the other, and Nobby slept on the bare ground.  The
discomfort was almost as bad as the cold.  If you lay on your back,
your head, with no pillow, lolled backwards so that your neck
seemed to be breaking; if you lay on your side, your hip-bone
pressing against the earth caused you torments.  Even when, towards
the small hours, you managed to fall asleep by fits and starts, the
cold penetrated into your deepest dreams.  Nobby was the only one
who could really stand it.  He could sleep as peacefully in a nest
of sodden grass as in a bed, and his coarse, simian face, with
barely a dozen red-gold hairs glittering on the chin like snippings
of copper wire, never lost its warm, pink colour.  He was one of
those red-haired people who seem to glow with an inner radiance
that warms not only themselves but the surrounding air.

All this strange, comfortless life Dorothy took utterly for
granted--only dimly aware, if at all, that the other, unremembered
life that lay behind her had been in some way different from this.
After only a couple of days she had ceased to wonder any longer
about her queer predicament.  She accepted everything--accepted the
dirt and hunger and fatigue, the endless trailing to and fro, the
hot, dusty days and the sleepless, shivering nights.  She was, in
any case, far too tired to think.  By the afternoon of the second
day they were all desperately, overwhelmingly tired, except Nobby,
whom nothing could tire.  Even the fact that soon after they set
out a nail began to work its way through the sole of his boot
hardly seemed to trouble him.  There were periods of an hour at a
time when Dorothy seemed almost to be sleeping as she walked.  She
had a burden to carry now, for as the two men were already loaded
and Flo steadfastly refused to carry anything, Dorothy had
volunteered to carry the sack that held the stolen potatoes.  They
generally had ten pounds or so of potatoes in reserve.  Dorothy
slung the sack over her shoulder as Nobby and Charlie did with
their bundles, but the string cut into her like a saw and the sack
bumped against her hip and chafed it so that finally it began to
bleed.  Her wretched, flimsy shoes had begun to go to pieces from
the very beginning.  On the second day the heel of her right shoe
came off and left her hobbling; but Nobby, expert in such matters,
advised her to tear the heel off the other shoe and walk
flatfooted.  The result was a fiery pain down her shins when she
walked uphill, and a feeling as though the soles of her feet had
been hammered with an iron bar.

But Flo and Charlie were in a much worse case than she.  They were
not so much exhausted as amazed and scandalized by the distances
they were expected to walk.  Walking twenty miles in a day was a
thing they had never heard of till now.  They were cockneys born
and bred, and though they had had several months of destitution in
London, neither of them had ever been on the road before.  Charlie,
till fairly recently, had been in good employment, and Flo, too,
had had a good home until she had been seduced and turned out of
doors to live on the streets.  They had fallen in with Nobby in
Trafalgar Square and agreed to come hop-picking with him, imagining
that it would be a bit of a lark.  Of course, having been 'on the
beach' a comparatively short time, they looked down on Nobby and
Dorothy.  They valued Nobby's knowledge of the road and his
boldness in thieving, but he was their social inferior--that was
their attitude.  And as for Dorothy, they scarcely even deigned to
look at her after her half-crown came to an end.

Even on the second day their courage was failing.  They lagged
behind, grumbled incessantly, and demanded more than their fair
share of food.  By the third day it was almost impossible to keep
them on the road at all.  They were pining to be back in London,
and had long ceased to care whether they ever got to the hopfields
or not; all they wanted to do was to sprawl in any comfortable
halting place they could find, and, when there was any food left,
devour endless snacks.  After every halt there was a tedious
argument before they could be got to their feet again.

'Come on, blokes!' Nobby would say.  'Pack your peter up, Charlie.
Time we was getting off.'

'Oh, ---- getting off!' Charlie would answer morosely.

'Well, we can't skipper here, can we?  We said we was going to hike
as far as Sevenoaks tonight, didn't we?'

'Oh, ---- Sevenoaks!  Sevenoaks or any other bleeding place--it
don't make any bleeding difference to me.'

'But ---- it!  We want to get a job tomorrow, don't we?  And we got
to get down among the farms 'fore we can start looking for one.'

'Oh, ---- the farms!  I wish I'd never 'eard of a ---- 'op!  I
wasn't brought up to this ---- 'iking and skippering like you was.
I'm fed up; that's what I am ---- fed up.'

'If this is bloody 'opping,' Flo would chime in, 'I've 'ad my
bloody bellyful of it already.'

Nobby gave Dorothy his private opinion that Flo and Charlie would
probably 'jack off' if they got the chance of a lift back to
London.  But as for Nobby, nothing disheartened him or ruffled his
good temper, not even when the nail in his boot was at its worst
and his filthy remnant of a sock was dark with blood.  By the third
day the nail had worn a permanent hole in his foot, and Nobby had
to halt once in a mile to hammer it down.

''Scuse me, kid,' he would say; 'got to attend to my bloody hoof
again.  This nail's a mulligatawny.'

He would search for a round stone, squat in the ditch and carefully
hammer the nail down.

'There!' he would say optimistically, feeling the place with his
thumb.  'THAT b--'s in his grave!'

The epitaph should have been Resurgam, however.  The nail
invariably worked its way up again within a quarter of an hour.

Nobby had tried to make love to Dorothy, of course, and, when she
repulsed him, bore her no grudge.  He had that happy temperament
that is incapable of taking its own reverses very seriously.  He
was always debonair, always singing in a lusty baritone voice--his
three favourite songs were:  'Sonny Boy', ''Twas Christmas Day in
the Workhouse' (to the tune of 'The Church's One Foundation'), and
'"----!" was all the band could play', given with lively renderings
of military music.  He was twenty-six years old and was a widower,
and had been successively a seller of newspapers, a petty thief,
a Borstal boy, a soldier, a burglar, and a tramp.  These facts,
however, you had to piece together for yourself, for he was not
equal to giving a consecutive account of his life.  His conversation
was studded with casual picturesque memories--the six months he had
served in a line regiment before he was invalided out with a damaged
eye, the loathsomeness of the skilly in Holloway, his childhood in
the Deptford gutters, the death of his wife, aged eighteen, in
childbirth, when he was twenty, the horrible suppleness of the
Borstal canes, the dull boom of the nitro- glycerine, blowing in the
safe door at Woodward's boot and shoe factory, where Nobby had
cleared a hundred and twenty-five pounds and spent it in three
weeks.

On the afternoon of the third day they reached the fringe of the
hop country, and began to meet discouraged people, mostly tramps,
trailing back to London with the news that there was nothing doing--
hops were bad and the price was low, and the gypsies and 'home
pickers' had collared all the jobs.  At this Flo and Charlie gave
up hope altogether, but by an adroit mixture of bullying and
persuasion Nobby managed to drive them a few miles farther.  In a
little village called Wale they fell in with an old Irishwoman--
Mrs McElligot was her name--who had just been given a job at a
neighbouring hopfield, and they swapped some of their stolen apples
for a piece of meat she had 'bummed' earlier in the day.  She gave
them some useful hints about hop-picking and about what farms to
try.  They were all sprawling on the village green, tired out,
opposite a little general shop with some newspaper posters outside.

'You'd best go down'n have a try at Chalmers's,' Mrs McElligot
advised them in her base Dublin accent.  'Dat's a bit above five
mile from here.  I've heard tell as Chalmers wants a dozen pickers
still.  I daresay he'd give y'a job if you gets dere early enough.'

'Five miles!  Cripes!  Ain't there none nearer'n that?' grumbled
Charlie.

'Well, dere's Norman's.  I got a job at Norman's meself--I'm
startin' tomorrow mornin'.  But 'twouldn't be no use for you to try
at Norman's.  He ain't takin' on none but home pickers, an' dey say
as he's goin' to let half his hops blow.'

'What's home pickers?' said Nobby.

'Why, dem as has got homes o' deir own.  Eider you got to live in
de neighbourhood, or else de farmer's got to give y'a hut to sleep
in.  Dat's de law nowadays.  In de ole days when you come down
hoppin', you kipped in a stable an' dere was no questions asked.
But dem bloody interferin' gets of a Labour Government brought in a
law to say as no pickers was to be taken on widout de farmer had
proper accommodation for 'em.  So Norman only takes on folks as has
got homes o' deir own.'

'Well, you ain't got a home of your own, have you?'

'No bloody fear!  But Norman t'inks I have.  I kidded'm I was
stayin' in a cottage near by.  Between you an' me, I'm skipperin'
in a cow byre.  'Tain't so bad except for de stink o' de muck, but
you got to be out be five in de mornin', else de cowmen 'ud catch
you.'

'We ain't got no experience of hopping,' Nobby said.  'I wouldn't
know a bloody hop if I saw one.  Best to let on you're an old hand
when you go up for a job, eh?'

'Hell!  Hops don't need no experience.  Tear 'em off an' fling 'em
into de bin.  Dat's all der is to it, wid hops.'

Dorothy was nearly asleep.  She heard the others talking desultorily,
first about hop-picking, then about some story in the newspapers of
a girl who had disappeared from home.  Flo and Charlie had been
reading the posters on the shop-front opposite; and this had revived
them somewhat, because the posters reminded them of London and its
joys.  The missing girl, in whose fate they seemed to be rather
interested, was spoken of as 'The Rector's Daughter'.

'J'a see that one, Flo?' said Charlie, reading a poster aloud with
intense relish:  '"Secret Love Life of Rector's Daughter.
Startling Revelations."  Coo!  Wish I 'ad a penny to 'ave a read of
that!'

'Oh?  What's 't all about, then?'

'What?  Didn't j'a read about it?  Papers 'as bin full of it.
Rector's Daughter this and Rector's Daughter that--wasn't 'alf
smutty, some of it, too.'

'She's bit of hot stuff, the ole Rector's Daughter,' said Nobby
reflectively, lying on his back.  'Wish she was here now!  I'd know
what to do with her, all right, I would.'

''Twas a kid run away from home,' put in Mrs McElligot.  'She was
carryin' on wid a man twenty year older'n herself, an' now she's
disappeared an' dey're searchin' for her high an' low.'

'Jacked off in the middle of the night in a motor-car with no
clo'es on 'cep' 'er nightdress,' said Charlie appreciatively.  'The
'ole village sore 'em go.'

'Dere's some t'ink as he's took her abroad an' sold her to one o'
dem flash cat-houses in Parrus,' added Mrs McElligot.

'No clo'es on 'cep' 'er nightdress?  Dirty tart she must 'a been!'

The conversation might have proceeded to further details, but at
this moment Dorothy interrupted it.  What they were saying had
roused a faint curiosity in her.  She realized that she did not
know the meaning of the word 'Rector'.  She sat up and asked Nobby:

'What is a Rector?'

'Rector?  Why, a sky-pilot--parson bloke.  Bloke that preaches and
gives out the hymns and that in church.  We passed one of 'em
yesterday--riding a green bicycle and had his collar on back to
front.  A priest--clergyman.  YOU know.'

'Oh. . . .  Yes, I think so.'

'Priests!  Bloody ole getsies dey are too, some o' dem,' said Mrs
McElligot reminiscently.

Dorothy was left not much the wiser.  What Nobby had said did
enlighten her a little, but only a very little.  The whole train of
thought connected with 'church' and 'clergyman' was strangely vague
and blurred in her mind.  It was one of the gaps--there was a
number of such gaps--in the mysterious knowledge that she had
brought with her out of the past.

That was their third night on the road.  When it was dark they
slipped into a spinney as usual to 'skipper', and a little after
midnight it began to pelt with rain.  They spent a miserable hour
stumbling to and fro in the darkness, trying to find a place to
shelter, and finally found a hay-stack, where they huddled
themselves on the lee side till it was light enough to see.  Flo
blubbered throughout the night in the most intolerable manner, and
by the morning she was in a state of semi-collapse.  Her silly fat
face, washed clean by rain and tears, looked like a bladder of
lard, if one can imagine a bladder of lard contorted with self-
pity.  Nobby rooted about under the hedge until he had collected an
armful of partially dry sticks, and then managed to get a fire
going and boil some tea as usual.  There was no weather so bad that
Nobby could not produce a can of tea.  He carried, among other
things, some pieces of old motor tyre that would make a flare when
the wood was wet, and he even possessed the art, known only to a
few cognoscenti among tramps, of getting water to boil over a
candle.

Everyone's limbs had stiffened after the horrible night, and Flo
declared herself unable to walk a step farther.  Charlie backed her
up.  So, as the other two refused to move, Dorothy and Nobby went
on to Chalmers's farm, arranging a rendezvous where they should
meet when they had tried their luck.  They got to Chalmers's, five
miles away, found their way through vast orchards to the hop-
fields, and were told that the overseer 'would be along presently'.
So they waited four hours on the edge of the plantation, with the
sun drying their clothes on their backs, watching the hop-pickers
at work.  It was a scene somehow peaceful and alluring.  The hop
bines, tall climbing plants like runner beans enormously magnified,
grew in green leafy lanes, with the hops dangling from them in pale
green bunches like gigantic grapes.  When the wind stirred them
they shook forth a fresh, bitter scent of sulphur and cool beer.
In each lane of bines a family of sunburnt people were shredding
the hops into sacking bins, and singing as they worked; and
presently a hooter sounded and they knocked off to boil cans of tea
over crackling fires of hop bines.  Dorothy envied them greatly.
How happy they looked, sitting round the fires with their cans of
tea and their hunks of bread and bacon, in the smell of hops and
wood smoke!  She pined for such a job--however, for the present
there was nothing doing.  At about one o'clock the overseer arrived
and told them that he had no jobs for them, so they trailed back to
the road, only avenging themselves on Chalmers's farm by stealing a
dozen apples as they went.

When they reached their rendezvous, Flo and Charlie had vanished.
Of course they searched for them, but, equally of course, they knew
very well what had happened.  Indeed, it was perfectly obvious.
Flo had made eyes at some passing lorry driver, who had given the
two of them a lift back to London for the chance of a good cuddle
on the way.  Worse yet, they had stolen both bundles.  Dorothy and
Nobby had not a scrap of food left, not a crust of bread nor a
potato nor a pinch of tea, no bedding, and not even a snuff-tin in
which to cook anything they could cadge or steal--nothing, in fact,
except the clothes they stood up in.

The next thirty-six hours were a bad time--a very bad time.  How
they pined for a job, in their hunger and exhaustion!  But the
chances of getting one seemed to grow smaller and smaller as they
got farther into the hop country.  They made interminable marches
from farm to farm, getting the same answer everywhere--no pickers
needed--and they were so busy marching to and fro that they had not
even time to beg, so that they had nothing to eat except stolen
apples and damsons that tormented their stomachs with their acid
juice and yet left them ravenously hungry.  It did not rain that
night, but it was much colder than before.  Dorothy did not even
attempt to sleep, but spent the night in crouching over the fire
and keeping it alight.  They were hiding in a beech wood, under a
squat, ancient tree that kept the wind away but also wetted them
periodically with sprinklings of chilly dew.  Nobby, stretched on
his back, mouth open, one broad cheek faintly illumined by the
feeble rays of the fire, slept as peacefully as a child.  All night
long a vague wonder, born of sleeplessness and intolerable
discomfort, kept stirring in Dorothy's mind.  Was this the life to
which she had been bred--this life of wandering empty-bellied all
day and shivering at night under dripping trees?  Had it been like
this even in the blank past?  Where had she come from?  Who was
she?  No answer came, and they were on the road at dawn.  By the
evening they had tried at eleven farms in all, and Dorothy's legs
were giving out, and she was so dizzy with fatigue that she found
difficulty in walking straight.

But late in the evening, quite unexpectedly, their luck turned.
They tried at a farm named Cairns's, in the village of Clintock,
and were taken on immediately, with no questions asked.  The
overseer merely looked them up and down, said briefly, 'Right you
are--you'll do.  Start in the morning; bin number 7, set 19,' and
did not even bother to ask their names.  Hop-picking, it seemed,
needed neither character nor experience.

They found their way to the meadow where the pickers' camp was
situated.  In a dreamlike state, between exhaustion and the joy of
having got a job at last, Dorothy found herself walking through a
maze of tin-roofed huts and gypsies' caravans with many-coloured
washing hanging from the windows.  Hordes of children swarmed in
the narrow grass alleys between the huts, and ragged, agreeable-
looking people were cooking meals over innumerable faggot fires.
At the bottom of the field there were some round tin huts, much
inferior to the others, set apart for unmarried people.  An old man
who was toasting cheese at a fire directed Dorothy to one of the
women's huts.

Dorothy pushed open the door of the hut.  It was about twelve feet
across, with unglazed windows which had been boarded up, and it had
no furniture whatever.  There seemed to be nothing in it but an
enormous pile of straw reaching to the roof--in fact, the hut was
almost entirely filled with straw.  To Dorothy's eyes, already
sticky with sleep, the straw looked paradisically comfortable.  She
began to push her way into it, and was checked by a sharp yelp from
beneath her.

"Ere!  What yer doin' of?  Get off of it!  'Oo asked YOU to walk
about on my belly, stoopid?'

Seemingly there were women down among the straw.  Dorothy burrowed
forward more circumspectly, tripped over something, sank into the
straw and in the same instant began to fall asleep.  A rough-
looking woman, partially undressed, popped up like a mermaid from
the strawy sea.

''Ullo, mate!' she said.  'Jest about all in, ain't you, mate?'

'Yes, I'm tired--very tired.'

'Well, you'll bloody freeze in this straw with no bed-clo'es on
you.  Ain't you got a blanket?'

'No.'

''Alf a mo, then.  I got a poke 'ere.'

She dived down into the straw and re-emerged with a hop-poke seven
feet long.  Dorothy was asleep already.  She allowed herself to be
woken up, and inserted herself somehow into the sack, which was so
long that she could get into it head and all; and then she was half
wriggling, half sinking down, deep down, into a nest of straw
warmer and drier than she had conceived possible.  The straw
tickled her nostrils and got into her hair and pricked her even
through the sack, but at that moment no imaginable sleeping place--
not Cleopatra's couch of swan's-down nor the floating bed of Haroun
al Raschid--could have caressed her more voluptuously.



3


It was remarkable how easily, once you had got a job, you settled
down to the routine of hop-picking.  After only a week of it you
ranked as an expert picker, and felt as though you had been picking
hops all your life.

It was exceedingly easy work.  Physically, no doubt, it was
exhausting--it kept you on your feet ten or twelve hours a day, and
you were dropping with sleep by six in the evening--but it needed
no kind of skill.  Quite a third of the pickers in the camp were as
new to the job as Dorothy herself.  Some of them had come down from
London with not the dimmest idea of what hops were like, or how you
picked them, or why.  One man, it was said, on his first morning on
the way to the fields, had asked, 'Where are the spades?'  He
imagined that hops were dug up out of the ground.

Except for Sundays, one day at the hop camp was very like another.
At half past five, at a tap on the wall of your hut, you crawled
out of your sleeping nest and began searching for your shoes, amid
sleepy curses from the women (there were six or seven or possibly
even eight of them) who were buried here and there in the straw.
In that vast pile of straw any clothes that you were so unwise as
to take off always lost themselves immediately.  You grabbed an
armful of straw and another of dried hop bines, and a faggot from
the pile outside, and got the fire going for breakfast.  Dorothy
always cooked Nobby's breakfast as well as her own, and tapped on
the wall of his hut when it was ready, she being better at waking
up in the morning than he.  It was very cold on those September
mornings, the eastern sky was fading slowly from black to cobalt,
and the grass was silvery white with dew.  Your breakfast was
always the same--bacon, tea, and bread fried in the grease of the
bacon.  While you ate it you cooked another exactly similar meal,
to serve for dinner, and then, carrying your dinner-pail, you set
out for the fields, a mile-and-a-half walk through the blue, windy
dawn, with your nose running so in the cold that you had to stop
occasionally and wipe it on your sacking apron.

The hops were divided up into plantations of about an acre, and
each set--forty pickers or thereabouts, under a foreman who was
often a gypsy--picked one plantation at a time.  The bines grew
twelve feet high or more, and they were trained up strings and
slung over horizontal wires, in rows a yard or two apart; in each
row there was a sacking bin like a very deep hammock slung on a
heavy wooden frame.  As soon as you arrived you swung your bin into
position, slit the strings from the next two bines, and tore them
down--huge, tapering strands of foliage, like the plaits of
Rapunzel's hair, that came tumbling down on top of you, showering
you with dew.  You dragged them into place over the bin, and then,
starting at the thick end of the bine, began tearing off the heavy
bunches of hops.  At that hour of the morning you could only pick
slowly and awkwardly.  Your hands were still stiff and the coldness
of the dew numbed them, and the hops were wet and slippery.  The
great difficulty was to pick the hops without picking the leaves
and stalks as well; for the measurer was liable to refuse your hops
if they had too many leaves among them.

The stems of the bines were covered with minute thorns which within
two or three days had torn the skin of your hands to pieces.  In
the morning it was a torment to begin picking when your fingers
were almost too stiff to bend and bleeding in a dozen places; but
the pain wore off when the cuts had reopened and the blood was
flowing freely.  If the hops were good and you picked well, you
could strip a bine in ten minutes, and the best bines yielded half
a bushel of hops.  But the hops varied greatly from one plantation
to another.  In some they were as large as walnuts, and hung in
great leafless bunches which you could rip off with a single twist;
in others they were miserable things no bigger than peas, and grew
so thinly that you had to pick them one at a time.  Some hops were
so bad that you could not pick a bushel of them in an hour.

It was slow work in the early morning, before the hops were dry
enough to handle.  But presently the sun came out, and the lovely,
bitter odour began to stream from the warming hops, and people's
early-morning surliness wore off, and the work got into its stride.
From eight till midday you were picking, picking, picking, in a
sort of passion of work--a passionate eagerness, which grew
stronger and stronger as the morning advanced, to get each bine
done and shift your bin a little farther along the row.  At the
beginning of each plantation all the bins started abreast, but by
degrees the better pickers forged ahead, and some of them had
finished their lane of hops when the others were barely halfway
along; whereupon, if you were far behind, they were allowed to turn
back and finish your row for you, which was called 'stealing your
hops'.  Dorothy and Nobby were always among the last, there being
only two of them--there were four people at most of the bins.  And
Nobby was a clumsy picker, with his great coarse hands; on the
whole, the women picked better than the men.

It was always a neck and neck race between the two bins on either
side of Dorothy and Nobby, bin number 6 and bin number 8.  Bin
number 6 was a family of gypsies--a curly-headed, ear-ringed
father, an old dried-up leather-coloured mother, and two strapping
sons--and bin number 8 was an old East End costerwoman who wore a
broad hat and long black cloak and took snuff out of a papiermache
box with a steamer painted on the lid.  She was always helped by
relays of daughters and granddaughters who came down from London
for two days at a time.  There was quite a troop of children
working with the set, following the bins with baskets and gathering
up the fallen hops while the adults picked.  And the old
costerwoman's tiny, pale granddaughter Rose, and a little gypsy
girl, dark as an Indian, were perpetually slipping off to steal
autumn raspberries and make swings out of hop bines; and the
constant singing round the bins was pierced by shrill cries from
the costerwoman of, 'Go on, Rose, you lazy little cat!  Pick them
'ops up!  I'll warm your a-- for you!' etc., etc.

Quite half the pickers in the set were gypsies--there were not less
than two hundred of them in the camp.  Diddykies, the other pickers
called them.  They were not a bad sort of people, friendly enough,
and they flattered you grossly when they wanted to get anything out
of you; yet they were sly, with the impenetrable slyness of
savages.  In their oafish, Oriental faces there was a look as of
some wild but sluggish animal--a look of dense stupidity existing
side by side with untameable cunning.  Their talk consisted of
about half a dozen remarks which they repeated over and over again
without ever growing tired of them.  The two young gypsies at bin
number 6 would ask Nobby and Dorothy as many as a dozen times a day
the same conundrum:

'What is it the cleverest man in England couldn't do?'

'I don't know.  What?'

'Tickle a gnat's a-- with a telegraph pole.'

At this, never-failing bellows of laughter.  They were all
abysmally ignorant; they informed you with pride that not one of
them could read a single word.  The old curly-headed father, who
had conceived some dim notion that Dorothy was a 'scholard', once
seriously asked her whether he could drive his caravan to New York.

At twelve o'clock a hooter down at the farm signalled to the
pickers to knock off work for an hour, and it was generally a
little before this that the measurer came round to collect the
hops.  At a warning shout from the foreman of ''Ops ready, number
nineteen!' everyone would hasten to pick up the fallen hops, finish
off the tendrils that had been left unpicked here and there, and
clear the leaves out of the bin.  There was an art in that.  It did
not pay to pick too 'clean', for leaves and hops alike all went to
swell the tally.  The old hands, such as the gypsies, were adepts
at knowing just how 'dirty' it was safe to pick.

The measurer would come round, carrying a wicker basket which held
a bushel, and accompanied by the 'bookie,' who entered the pickings
of each bin in a ledger.  The 'bookies' were young men, clerks and
chartered accountants and the like, who took this job as a paying
holiday.  The measurer would scoop the hops out of the bin a bushel
at a time, intoning as he did so, 'One!  Two!  Three!  Four!' and
the pickers would enter the number in their tally books.  Each
bushel they picked earned them twopence, and naturally there were
endless quarrels and accusations of unfairness over the measuring.
Hops are spongy things--you can crush a bushel of them into a quart
pot if you choose; so after each scoop one of the pickers would
lean over into the bin and stir the hops up to make them lie
looser, and then the measurer would hoist the end of the bin and
shake the hops together again.  Some mornings he had orders to
'take them heavy', and would shovel them in so that he got a couple
of bushels at each scoop, whereat there were angry yells of, 'Look
how the b--'s ramming them down!  Why don't you bloody well stamp
on them?' etc.; and the old hands would say darkly that they had
known measurers to be ducked in cowponds on the last day of
picking.  From the bins the hops were put into pokes which
theoretically held a hundredweight; but it took two men to hoist a
full poke when the measurer had been 'taking them heavy'.  You had
an hour for dinner, and you made a fire of hop bines--this was
forbidden, but everyone did it--and heated up your tea and ate your
bacon sandwiches.  After dinner you were picking again till five or
six in the evening, when the measurer came once more to take your
hops, after which you were free to go back to the camp.

Looking back, afterwards, upon her interlude of hop-picking, it was
always the afternoons that Dorothy remembered.  Those long,
laborious hours in the strong sunlight, in the sound of forty
voices singing, in the smell of hops and wood smoke, had a quality
peculiar and unforgettable.  As the afternoon wore on you grew
almost too tired to stand, and the small green hop lice got into
your hair and into your ears and worried you, and your hands, from
the sulphurous juice, were as black as a Negro's except where they
were bleeding.  Yet you were happy, with an unreasonable happiness.
The work took hold of you and absorbed you.  It was stupid work,
mechanical, exhausting, and every day more painful to the hands,
and yet you never wearied of it; when the weather was fine and the
hops were good you had the feeling that you could go on picking for
ever and for ever.  It gave you a physical joy, a warm satisfied
feeling inside you, to stand there hour after hour, tearing off the
heavy clusters and watching the pale green pile grow higher and
higher in your bin, every bushel another twopence in your pocket.
The sun burned down upon you, baking you brown, and the bitter,
never-palling scent, like a wind from oceans of cool beer, flowed
into your nostrils and refreshed you.  When the sun was shining
everybody sang as they worked; the plantations rang with singing.
For some reason all the songs were sad that autumn--songs about
rejected love and fidelity unrewarded, like gutter versions of
Carmen and Manon Lescaut.  There was:


THERE they GO--IN their joy--
'APPY girl--LUCKY boy--
But 'ere am _I-I-I_--
Broken--'A-A-Arted!


And there was:


But I'm dan--cing with tears--in my eyes--
'Cos the girl--in my arms--isn't you-o-ou!


And:


The bells--are ringing--for Sally--
But no-o-ot--for Sally--and me!


The little gypsy girl used to sing over and over again:


We're so misable, all so misable,
Down on Misable Farm!


And though everyone told her that the name of it was Misery Farm,
she persisted in calling it Misable Farm.  The old costerwoman and
her granddaughter Rose had a hop-picking song which went:


'Our lousy 'ops!
Our lousy 'ops!
When the measurer 'e comes round,
Pick 'em up, pick 'em up off the ground!
When 'e comes to measure,
'E never knows where to stop;
Ay, ay, get in the bin
And take the bloody lot!'


'There they go in their joy', and 'The bells are ringing for
Sally', were the especial favourites.  The pickers never grew tired
of singing them; they must have sung both of them several hundred
times over before the season came to an end.  As much a part of the
atmosphere of the hopfields as the bitter scent and the blowsy
sunlight were the tunes of those two songs, ringing through the
leafy lanes of the bines.

When you got back to the camp, at half past six or thereabouts, you
squatted down by the stream that ran past the huts, and washed your
face, probably for the first time that day.  It took you twenty
minutes or so to get the coal-black filth off your hands.  Water
and even soap made no impression on it; only two things would
remove it--one of them was mud, and the other, curiously enough,
was hop juice.  Then you cooked your supper, which was usually
bread and tea and bacon again, unless Nobby had been along to the
village and bought two pennyworth of pieces from the butcher.  It
was always Nobby who did the shopping.  He was the sort of man who
knows how to get four pennyworth of meat from the butcher for
twopence, and, besides, he was expert in tiny economies.  For
instance, he always bought a cottage loaf in preference to any of
the other shapes, because, as he used to point out, a cottage loaf
seems like two loaves when you tear it in half.

Even before you had eaten your supper you were dropping with sleep,
but the huge fires that people used to build between the huts were
too agreeable to leave.  The farm allowed two faggots a day for
each hut, but the pickers plundered as many more as they wanted,
and also great lumps of elm root which kept smouldering till
morning.  On some nights the fires were so enormous that twenty
people could sit round them in comfort, and there was singing far
into the night, and telling of stories and roasting of stolen
apples.  Youths and girls slipped off to the dark lanes together,
and a few bold spirits like Nobby set out with sacks and robbed the
neighbouring orchards, and the children played hide-and-seek in the
dusk and harried the nightjars which haunted the camp and which, in
their cockney ignorance, they imagined to be pheasants.  On
Saturday nights fifty or sixty of the pickers used to get drunk in
the pub and then march down the village street roaring bawdy songs,
to the scandal of the inhabitants, who looked on the hopping season
as decent provincials in Roman Gaul might have looked on the yearly
incursion of the Goths.

When finally you managed to drag yourself away to your nest in the
straw, it was none too warm or comfortable.  After that first
blissful night, Dorothy discovered that straw is wretched stuff to
sleep in.  It is not only prickly, but, unlike hay, it lets in the
draught from every possible direction.  However, you had the chance
to steal an almost unlimited number of hop-pokes from the fields,
and by making herself a sort of cocoon of four hop-pokes, one on
top of the other, she managed to keep warm enough to sleep at any
rate five hours a night.



4


As to what you earned by hop-picking, it was just enough to keep
body and soul together, and no more.

The rate of pay at Cairns's was twopence a bushel, and given good
hops a practised picker can average three bushels an hour.  In
theory, therefore, it would have been possible to earn thirty
shillings by a sixty-hour week.  Actually, no one in the camp came
anywhere near this figure.  The best pickers of all earned thirteen
or fourteen shillings a week, and the worst hardly as much as six
shillings.  Nobby and Dorothy, pooling their hops and dividing the
proceeds, made round about ten shillings a week each.

There were various reasons for this.  To begin with, there was the
badness of the hops in some of the fields.  Again, there were the
delays which wasted an hour or two of every day.  When one
plantation was finished you had to carry your bin to the next,
which might be a mile distant; and then perhaps it would turn out
that there was some mistake, and the set, struggling under their
bins (they weighed a hundredweight), would have to waste another
half-hour in traipsing elsewhere.  Worst of all, there was the
rain.  It was a bad September that year, raining one day in three.
Sometimes for a whole morning or afternoon you shivered miserably
in the shelter of the unstripped bines, with a dripping hop-poke
round your shoulders, waiting for the rain to stop.  It was
impossible to pick when it was raining.  The hops were too slippery
to handle, and if you did pick them it was worse than useless, for
when sodden with water they shrank all to nothing in the bin.
Sometimes you were in the fields all day to earn a shilling or
less.

This did not matter to the majority of the pickers, for quite half
of them were gypsies and accustomed to starvation wages, and most
of the others were respectable East Enders, costermongers and small
shopkeepers and the like, who came hop-picking for a holiday and
were satisfied if they earned enough for their fare both ways and a
bit of fun on Saturday nights.  The farmers knew this and traded on
it.  Indeed, were it not that hop-picking is regarded as a holiday,
the industry would collapse forthwith, for the price of hops is now
so low that no farmer could afford to pay his pickers a living
wage.

Twice a week you could 'sub' up to the amount of half your
earnings.  If you left before the picking was finished (an
inconvenient thing for the farmers) they had the right to pay you
off at the rate of a penny a bushel instead of twopence--that is,
to pocket half of what they owed you.  It was also common knowledge
that towards the end of the season, when all the pickers had a fair
sum owing to them and would not want to sacrifice it by throwing up
their jobs, the farmer would reduce the rate of payment from
twopence a bushel to a penny halfpenny.  Strikes were practically
impossible.  The pickers had no union, and the foremen of the sets,
instead of being paid twopence a bushel like the others, were paid
a weekly wage which stopped automatically if there was a strike;
so naturally they would raise Heaven and earth to prevent one.
Altogether, the farmers had the pickers in a cleft stick; but it
was not the farmers who were to blame--the low price of hops was
the root of the trouble.  Also as Dorothy observed later, very few
of the pickers had more than a dim idea of the amount they earned.
The system of piecework disguised the low rate of payment.

For the first few days, before they could 'sub', Dorothy and Nobby
very nearly starved, and would have starved altogether if the other
pickers had not fed them.  But everyone was extraordinarily kind.
There was a party of people who shared one of the larger huts a
little farther up the row, a flower-seller named Jim Burrows and a
man named Jim Turle who was vermin man at a large London restaurant,
who had married sisters and were close friends, and these people had
taken a liking to Dorothy.  They saw to it that she and Nobby should
not starve.  Every evening during the first few days May Turle, aged
fifteen, would arrive with a saucepan full of stew, which was
presented with studied casualness, lest there should be any hint of
charity about it.  The formula was always the same:

'Please, Ellen, mother says as she was just going to throw this
stew away, and then she thought as p'raps you might like it.  She
ain't got no use for it, she says, and so you'd be doing her a
kindness if you was to take it.'

It was extraordinary what a lot of things the Turles and the
Burrowses were 'just going to throw away' during those first few
days.  On one occasion they even gave Nobby and Dorothy half a
pig's head ready stewed; and besides food they gave them several
cooking pots and a tin plate which could be used as a frying-pan.
Best of all, they asked no uncomfortable questions.  They knew well
enough that there was some mystery in Dorothy's life--'You could
see,' they said, 'as Ellen had COME DOWN IN THE WORLD'--but they
made it a point of honour not to embarrass her by asking questions
about it.  It was not until she had been more than a fortnight at
the camp that Dorothy was even obliged to put herself to the
trouble of inventing a surname.

As soon as Dorothy and Nobby could 'sub', their money troubles were
at an end.  They lived with surprising ease at the rate of one and
sixpence a day for the two of them.  Fourpence of this went on
tobacco for Nobby, and fourpence-halfpenny on a loaf of bread; and
they spent about sevenpence a day on tea, sugar, milk (you could
get milk at the farm at a halfpenny a half-pint), and margarine and
'pieces' of bacon.  But, of course, you never got through the day
without squandering another penny or two.  You were everlastingly
hungry, everlastingly doing sums in farthings to see whether you
could afford a kipper or a doughnut or a pennyworth of potato
chips, and, wretched as the pickers' earnings were, half the
population of Kent seemed to be in conspiracy to tickle their money
out of their pockets.  The local shopkeepers, with four hundred
hop-pickers quartered upon them, made more during the hop season
than all the rest of the year put together, which did not prevent
them from looking down on the pickers as cockney dirt.  In the
afternoon the farm hands would come round the bins selling apples
and pears at seven a penny, and London hawkers would come with
baskets of doughnuts or water ices or 'halfpenny lollies'.  At
night the camp was thronged by hawkers who drove down from London
with vans of horrifyingly cheap groceries, fish and chips, jellied
eels, shrimps, shop-soiled cakes, and gaunt, glassy-eyed rabbits
which had lain two years on the ice and were being sold off at
ninepence a time.

For the most part it was a filthy diet upon which the hop-pickers
lived--inevitably so, for even if you had the money to buy proper
food, there was no time to cook it except on Sundays.  Probably it
was only the abundance of stolen apples that prevented the camp
from being ravaged by scurvy.  There was constant, systematic
thieving of apples; practically everyone in the camp either stole
them or shared them.  There were even parties of young men
(employed, so it was said, by London fruit-costers) who bicycled
down from London every week-end for the purpose of raiding the
orchards.  As for Nobby, he had reduced fruit-stealing to a
science.  Within a week he had collected a gang of youths who
looked up to him as a hero because he was a real burglar and had
been in jail four times, and every night they would set out at dusk
with sacks and come back with as much as two hundredweight of
fruit.  There were vast orchards near the hopfields, and the
apples, especially the beautiful little Golden Russets, were lying
in piles under the trees, rotting, because the farmers could not
sell them.  It was a sin not to rake them, Nobby said.  On two
occasions he and his gang even stole a chicken.  How they managed
to do it without waking the neighbourhood was a mystery; but it
appeared that Nobby knew some dodge of slipping a sack over a
chicken's head, so that it 'ceas'd upon the midnight with no
pain'--or at any rate, with no noise.

In this manner a week and then a fortnight went by, and Dorothy was
no nearer to solving the problem of her own identity.  Indeed, she
was further from it than ever, for except at odd moments the
subject had almost vanished from her mind.  More and more she had
come to take her curious situation for granted, to abandon all
thoughts of either yesterday or tomorrow.  That was the natural
effect of life in the hopfields; it narrowed the range of your
consciousness to the passing minute.  You could not struggle with
nebulous mental problems when you were everlastingly sleepy and
everlastingly occupied--for when you were not at work in the fields
you were either cooking, or fetching things from the village, or
coaxing a fire out of wet sticks, or trudging to and fro with cans
of water.  (There was only one water tap in the camp, and that was
two hundred yards from Dorothy's hut, and the unspeakable earth
latrine was at the same distance.)  It was a life that wore you
out, used up every ounce of your energy, and kept you profoundly,
unquestionably happy.  In the literal sense of the word, it
stupefied you.  The long days in the fields, the coarse food and
insufficient sleep, the smell of hops and wood smoke, lulled you
into an almost beastlike heaviness.  Your wits seemed to thicken,
just as your skin did, in the rain and sunshine and perpetual fresh
air.

On Sundays, of course, there was no work in the fields; but Sunday
morning was a busy time, for it was then that people cooked their
principal meal of the week, and did their laundering and mending.
All over the camp, while the jangle of bells from the village
church came down the wind, mingling with the thin strains of 'O God
our Help' from the ill-attended open-air service held by St
Somebody's Mission to Hop-pickers, huge faggot fires were blazing,
and water boiling in buckets and tin cans and saucepans and
anything else that people could lay their hands on, and ragged
washing fluttering from the roofs of all the huts.  On the first
Sunday Dorothy borrowed a basin from the Turles and washed first
her hair, then her underclothes and Nobby's shirt.  Her underclothes
were in a shocking state.  How long she had worn them she did not
know, but certainly not less than ten days, and they had been slept
in all that while.  Her stockings had hardly any feet left to them,
and as for her shoes, they only held together because of the mud
that caked them.

After she had set the washing to dry she cooked the dinner, and
they dined opulently off half a stewed chicken (stolen), boiled
potatoes (stolen), stewed apples (stolen), and tea out of real tea-
cups with handles on them, borrowed from Mrs Burrows.  And after
dinner, the whole afternoon, Dorothy sat against the sunny side of
the hut, with a dry hop-poke across her knees to hold her dress
down, alternately dozing and reawakening.  Two-thirds of the people
in the camp were doing exactly the same thing; just dozing in the
sun, and waking to gaze at nothing, like cows.  It was all you felt
equal to, after a week of heavy work.

About three o'clock, as she sat there on the verge of sleep, Nobby
sauntered by, bare to the waist--his shirt was drying--with a copy
of a Sunday newspaper that he had succeeded in borrowing.  It was
Pippin's Weekly, the dirtiest of the five dirty Sunday newspapers.
He dropped it in Dorothy's lap as he passed.

'Have a read of that, kid,' he said generously.

Dorothy took Pippin's Weekly and laid it across her knees, feeling
herself far too sleepy to read.  A huge headline stared her in the
face:  'PASSION DRAMA IN COUNTRY RECTORY.'  And then there were
some more headlines, and something in leaded type, and an inset
photograph of a girl's face.  For the space of five seconds or
thereabouts Dorothy was actually gazing at a blackish, smudgy, but
quite recognizable portrait of herself.

There was a column or so of print beneath the photograph.  As a
matter of fact, most of the newspapers had dropped the 'Rector's
Daughter' mystery by this time, for it was more than a fortnight
old and stale news.  But Pippin's Weekly cared little whether its
news was new so long as it was spicy, and that week's crop of rapes
and murders had been a poor one.  They were giving the 'Rector's
Daughter' one final boost--giving her, in fact, the place of honour
at the top left-hand corner of the front page.

Dorothy gazed inertly at the photograph.  A girl's face, looking
out at her from beds of black unappetizing print--it conveyed
absolutely nothing to her mind.  She re-read mechanically the
words, 'PASSION DRAMA IN COUNTRY RECTORY', without either
understanding them or feeling the slightest interest in them.  She
was, she discovered, totally unequal to the effort of reading; even
the effort of looking at the photographs was too much for her.
Heavy sleep was weighing down her head.  Her eyes, in the act of
closing, flitted across the page to a photograph that was either of
Lord Snowden or of the man who wouldn't wear a truss, and then, in
the same instant, she fell asleep, with Pippin's Weekly across her
knees.

It was not uncomfortable against the corrugated iron wall of the
hut, and she hardly stirred till six o'clock, when Nobby woke her
up to tell her that he had got tea ready; whereat Dorothy put
Pippin's Weekly thriftily away (it would come in for lighting the
fire), without looking at it again.  So for the moment the chance
of solving her problem passed by.  And the problem might have
remained unsolved even for months longer, had not a disagreeable
accident, a week later, frightened her out of the contented and
unreflecting state in which she was living.



5


The following Sunday night two policemen suddenly descended upon
the camp and arrested Nobby and two others for theft.

It happened all in a moment, and Nobby could not have escaped
even if he had been warned beforehand, for the countryside was
pullulating with special constables.  There are vast numbers of
special constables in Kent.  They are sworn in every autumn--a sort
of militia to deal with the marauding tribes of hop-pickers.  The
farmers had been growing tired of the orchard-robbing, and had
decided to make an example, in terrorem.

Of course there was a tremendous uproar in the camp.  Dorothy came
out of her hut to discover what was the matter, and saw a firelit
ring of people towards which everyone was running.  She ran after
them, and a horrid chill went through her, because it seemed to her
that she knew already what it was that had happened.  She managed
to wriggle her way to the front of the crowd, and saw the very
thing that she had been fearing.

There stood Nobby, in the grip of an enormous policeman, and
another policeman was holding two frightened youths by the arms.
One of them, a wretched child hardly sixteen years old, was crying
bitterly.  Mr Cairns, a stiff-built man with grey whiskers, and two
farm hands, were keeping guard over the stolen property that had
been dug out of the straw of Nobby's hut.  Exhibit A, a pile of
apples; Exhibit B, some blood-stained chicken feathers.  Nobby
caught sight of Dorothy among the crowd, grinned at her with a
flash of large teeth, and winked.  There was a confused din of
shouting:

'Look at the pore little b-- crying!  Let 'im go!  Bloody shame,
pore little kid like that!  Serve the young bastard right, getting
us all into trouble!  Let 'im go!  Always got to put the blame on
us bloody hop-pickers!  Can't lose a bloody apple without it's us
that's took it.  Let 'im go!  Shut up, can't you?  S'pose they was
YOUR bloody apples?  Wouldn't YOU bloodiwell--' etc., etc., etc.
And then:  'Stand back mate!  'Ere comes the kid's mother.'

A huge Toby jug of a woman, with monstrous breasts and her hair
coming down her back, forced her way through the ring of people and
began roaring first at the policeman and Mr Cairns, then at Nobby,
who had led her son astray.  Finally the farm hands managed to drag
her away.  Through the woman's yells Dorothy could hear Mr Cairns
gruffly interrogating Nobby:

'Now then, young man, just you own up and tell us who you shared
them apples with!  We're going to put a stop to this thieving game,
once and for all.  You own up, and I dessay we'll take it into
consideration.'

Nobby answered, as blithely as ever, 'Consideration, your a--!'

'Don't you get giving me any of your lip, young man!  Or else
you'll catch it all the hotter when you go up before the
magistrate.'

'Catch it hotter, your a--!'

Nobby grinned.  His own wit filled him with delight.  He caught
Dorothy's eye and winked at her once again before being led away.
And that was the last she ever saw of him.

There was further shouting, and when the prisoners were removed a
few dozen men followed them, booing at the policemen and Mr Cairns,
but nobody dared to interfere.  Dorothy meanwhile had crept away;
she did not even stop to find out whether there would be an
opportunity of saying goodbye to Nobby--she was too frightened, too
anxious to escape.  Her knees were trembling uncontrollably.  When
she got back to the hut, the other women were sitting up, talking
excitedly about Nobby's arrest.  She burrowed deep into the straw
and hid herself, to be out of the sound of their voices.  They
continued talking half the night, and of course, because Dorothy
had supposedly been Nobby's 'tart', they kept condoling with her
and plying her with questions.  She did not answer them--pretended
to be asleep.  But there would be, she knew well enough, no sleep
for her that night.

The whole thing had frightened and upset her--but it had frightened
her more than was reasonable or understandable.  For she was in no
kind of danger.  The farm hands did not know that she had shared
the stolen apples--for that matter, nearly everyone in the camp had
shared them--and Nobby would never betray her.  It was not even
that she was greatly concerned for Nobby, who was frankly not
troubled by the prospect of a month in jail.  It was something that
was happening inside her--some change that was taking place in the
atmosphere of her mind.

It seemed to her that she was no longer the same person that she
had been an hour ago.  Within her and without, everything was
changed.  It was as though a bubble in her brain had burst, setting
free thoughts, feelings, fears of which she had forgotten the
existence.  All the dreamlike apathy of the past three weeks was
shattered.  For it was precisely as in a dream that she had been
living--it is the especial condition of a dream that one accepts
everything, questions nothing.  Dirt, rags, vagabondage, begging,
stealing--all had seemed natural to her.  Even the loss of her
memory had seemed natural; at least, she had hardly given it a
thought till this moment.  The question 'WHO AM I?' had faded out
of her mind till sometimes she had forgotten it for hours together.
It was only now that it returned with any real urgency.

For nearly the whole of a miserable night that question went to and
fro in her brain.  But it was not so much the question itself that
troubled her as the knowledge that it was about to be answered.
Her memory was coming back to her, that was certain, and some ugly
shock was coming with it.  She actually feared the moment when she
should discover her own identity.  Something that she did not want
to face was waiting just below the surface of her consciousness.

At half past five she got up and groped for her shoes as usual.
She went outside, got the fire going, and stuck the can of water
among the hot embers to boil.  Just as she did so a memory, seeming
irrelevant, flashed across her mind.  It was of that halt on the
village green at Wale, a fortnight ago--the time when they had met
the old Irishwoman, Mrs McElligot.  Very vividly she remembered the
scene.  Herself lying exhausted on the grass, with her arm over her
face; and Nobby and Mrs McElligot talking across her supine body;
and Charlie, with succulent relish, reading out the poster, 'Secret
Love Life of Rector's Daughter'; and herself, mystified but not
deeply interested, sitting up and asking, 'What is a Rector?'

At that a deadly chill, like a hand of ice, fastened about her
heart.  She got up and hurried, almost ran back to the hut, then
burrowed down to the place where her sacks lay and felt in the
straw beneath them.  In that vast mound of straw all your loose
possessions got lost and gradually worked their way to the bottom.
But after searching for some minutes, and getting herself well
cursed by several women who were still half asleep, Dorothy found
what she was looking for.  It was the copy of Pippin's Weekly which
Nobby had given her a week ago.  She took it outside, knelt down,
and spread it out in the light of the fire.

It was on the front page--a photograph, and three big headlines.
Yes!  There it was!


PASSION DRAMA IN COUNTRY RECTORY

PARSON'S DAUGHTER AND ELDERLY SEDUCER

WHITE-HAIRED FATHER PROSTRATE WITH GRIEF

(Pippin's Weekly Special)

'I would sooner have seen her in her grave!' was the heartbroken
cry of the Rev. Charles Hare, Rector of Knype Hill, Suffolk, on
learning of his twenty-eight-year-old daughter's elopement with an
elderly bachelor named Warburton, described as an artist.

Miss Hare, who left the town on the night of the twenty-first of
August, is still missing, and all attempts to trace her have
failed.  [In leaded type] Rumour, as yet unconfirmed, states that
she was recently seen with a male companion in a hotel of evil
repute in Vienna.


Readers of Pippin's Weekly will recall that the elopement took
place in dramatic circumstances.  A little before midnight on the
twenty-first of August, Mrs Evelina Semprill, a widowed lady who
inhabits the house next door to Mr Warburton's, happened by chance
to look out of her bedroom window and saw Mr Warburton standing at
his front gate in conversation with a young woman.  As it was a
clear moonlight night, Mrs Semprill was able to distinguish this
young woman as Miss Hare, the Rector's daughter.  The pair remained
at the gate for several minutes, and before going indoors they
exchanged embraces which Mrs Semprill describes as being of a
passionate nature.  About half an hour later they reappeared in Mr
Warburton's car, which was backed out of the front gate, and drove
off in the direction of the Ipswich road.  Miss Hare was dressed in
scanty attire, and appeared to be under the influence of alcohol.

It is now learned that for some time past Miss Hare had been in the
habit of making clandestine visits to Mr Warburton's house.  Mrs
Semprill, who could only with great difficulty be persuaded to
speak upon so painful a subject, has further revealed--


Dorothy crumpled Pippin's Weekly violently between her hands and
thrust it into the fire, upsetting the can of water.  There was a
cloud of ashes and sulphurous smoke, and almost in the same instant
Dorothy pulled the paper out of the fire unburnt.  No use funking
it--better to learn the worst.  She read on, with a horrible
fascination.  It was not a nice kind of story to read about
yourself.  For it was strange, but she had no longer any shadow of
doubt that this girl of whom she was reading was herself.  She
examined the photograph.  It was a blurred, nebulous thing, but
quite unmistakable.  Besides, she had no need of the photograph to
remind her.  She could remember everything--every circumstance of
her life, up to that evening when she had come home tired out from
Mr Warburton's house, and, presumably, fallen asleep in the
conservatory.  It was all so clear in her mind that it was almost
incredible that she had ever forgotten it.

She ate no breakfast that day, and did not think to prepare
anything for the midday meal; but when the time came, from force of
habit, she set out for the hopfields with the other pickers.  With
difficulty, being alone, she dragged the heavy bin into position,
pulled the next bine down and began picking.  But after a few
minutes she found that it was quite impossible; even the mechanical
labour of picking was beyond her.  That horrible, lying story in
Pippin's Weekly had so unstrung her that it was impossible even for
an instant to focus her mind upon anything else.  Its lickerish
phrases were going over and over in her head.  'Embraces of a
passionate nature'--'in scanty attire'--'under the influence of
alcohol'--as each one came back into her memory it brought with it
such a pang that she wanted to cry out as though in physical pain.

After a while she stopped even pretending to pick, let the bine
fall across her bin, and sat down against one of the posts that
supported the wires.  The other pickers observed her plight, and
were sympathetic.  Ellen was a bit cut up, they said.  What else
could you expect, after her bloke had been knocked off?  (Everyone
in the camp, of course, had taken it for granted that Nobby was
Dorothy's lover.)  They advised her to go down to the farm and
report sick.  And towards twelve o'clock, when the measurer was
due, everyone in the set came across with a hatful of hops and
dropped it into her bin.

When the measurer arrived he found Dorothy still sitting on the
ground.  Beneath her dirt and sunburn she was very pale; her face
looked haggard, and much older than before.  Her bin was twenty
yards behind the rest of the set, and there were less than three
bushels of hops in it.

'What's the game?' he demanded.  'You ill?'

'No.'

'Well, why ain't you bin pickin', then?  What you think this is--
toff's picnic?  You don't come up 'ere to sit about on the ground,
you know.'

'You cheese it and don't get nagging of 'er!' shouted the old
cockney costerwoman suddenly.  'Can't the pore girl 'ave a bit of
rest and peace if she wants it?  Ain't 'er bloke in the clink
thanks to you and your bloody nosing pals of coppers?  She's got
enough to worry 'er 'thout being ---- about by every bloody
copper's nark in Kent!'

'That'll be enough from you, Ma!' said the measurer gruffly, but he
looked more sympathetic on hearing that it was Dorothy's lover who
had been arrested on the previous night.  When the costerwoman had
got her kettle boiling she called Dorothy to her bin and gave her a
cup of strong tea and a hunk of bread and cheese; and after the
dinner interval another picker who had no partner was sent up to
share Dorothy's bin.  He was a small, weazened old tramp named
Deafie.  Dorothy felt somewhat better after the tea.  Encouraged by
Deafie's example--for he was an excellent picker--she managed to do
her fair share of work during the afternoon.

She had thought things over, and was less distracted than before.
The phrases in Pippin's Weekly still made her wince with shame, but
she was equal now to facing the situation.  She understood well
enough what had happened to her, and what had led to Mrs Semprill's
libel.  Mrs Semprill had seen them together at the gate and had
seen Mr Warburton kissing her; and after that, when they were both
missing from Knype Hill, it was only too natural--natural for Mrs
Semprill, that is--to infer that they had eloped together.  As for
the picturesque details, she had invented them later.  Or HAD she
invented them?  That was the one thing you could never be certain
of with Mrs Semprill--whether she told her lies consciously and
deliberately AS lies, or whether, in her strange and disgusting
mind, she somehow succeeded in believing them.

Well, anyway, the harm was done--no use worrying about it any
longer.  Meanwhile, there was the question of getting back to Knype
Hill.  She would have to send for some clothes, and she would need
two pounds for her train fare home.  Home!  The word sent a pang
through her heart.  Home, after weeks of dirt and hunger!  How she
longed for it, now that she remembered it!

But--!

A chilly little doubt raised its head.  There was one aspect of the
matter that she had not thought of till this moment.  COULD she,
after all, go home?  Dared she?

Could she face Knype Hill after everything that had happened?  That
was the question.  When you have figured on the front page of
Pippin's Weekly--'in scanty attire'--'under the influence of
alcohol'--ah, don't let's think of it again!  But when you have
been plastered all over with horrible, dishonouring libels, can you
go back to a town of two thousand inhabitants where everybody knows
everybody else's private history and talks about it all day long?

She did not know--could not decide.  At one moment it seemed to her
that the story of her elopement was so palpably absurd that no one
could possibly have believed it.  Mr Warburton, for instance, could
contradict it--most certainly would contradict it, for every
possible reason.  But the next moment she remembered that Mr
Warburton had gone abroad, and unless this affair had got into the
continental newspapers, he might not even have heard of it; and
then she quailed again.  She knew what it means to have to live
down a scandal in a small country town.  The glances and furtive
nudges when you passed!  The prying eyes following you down the
street from behind curtained windows!  The knots of youths on the
corners round Blifil-Gordon's factory, lewdly discussing you!

'George!  Say, George!  J'a see that bit of stuff over there?  With
fair 'air?'

'What, the skinny one?  Yes.  'Oo's she?'

'Rector's daughter, she is.  Miss 'Are.  But, say!  What you think
she done two years ago?  Done a bunk with a bloke old enough to bin
'er father.  Regular properly went on the razzle with 'im in Paris!
Never think it to look at 'er, would you?'

'GO on!'

'She did!  Straight, she did.  It was in the papers and all.  Only
'e give 'er the chuck three weeks afterwards, and she come back
'ome again as bold as brass.  Nerve, eh?'

Yes, it would take some living down.  For years, for a decade it
might be, they would be talking about her like that.  And the worst
of it was that the story in Pippin's Weekly was probably a mere
bowdlerized vestige of what Mrs Semprill had been saying in the
town.  Naturally, Pippin's Weekly had not wanted to commit itself
too far.  But was there anything that would ever restrain Mrs
Semprill?  Only the limits of her imagination--and they were almost
as wide as the sky.

One thing, however, reassured Dorothy, and that was the thought
that her father, at any rate, would do his best to shield her.  Of
course, there would be others as well.  It was not as though she
were friendless.  The church congregation, at least, knew her and
trusted her, and the Mothers' Union and the Girl Guides and the
women on her visiting list would never believe such stories about
her.  But it was her father who mattered most.  Almost any
situation is bearable if you have a home to go back to and a family
who will stand by you.  With courage, and her father's support, she
might face things out.  By the evening she had decided that it
would be perfectly all right to go back to Knype Hill, though no
doubt it would be disagreeable at first, and when work was over for
the day she 'subbed' a shilling, and went down to the general shop
in the village and bought a penny packet of notepaper.  Back in the
camp, sitting on the grass by the fire--no tables or chairs in the
camp, of course--she began to write with a stump of pencil:


Dearest Father,--I can't tell you how glad I am, after everything
that has happened, to be able to write to you again.  And I do hope
you have not been too anxious about me or too worried by those
horrible stories in the newspapers.  I don't know what you must
have thought when I suddenly disappeared like that and you didn't
hear from me for nearly a month.  But you see--'


How strange the pencil felt in her torn and stiffened fingers!  She
could only write a large, sprawling hand like that of a child.  But
she wrote a long letter, explaining everything, and asking him to
send her some clothes and two pounds for her fare home.  Also, she
asked him to write to her under an assumed name she gave him--Ellen
Millborough, after Millborough in Suffolk.  It seemed a queer thing
to have to do, to use a false name; dishonest--criminal, almost.
But she dared not risk its being known in the village, and perhaps
in the camp as well, that she was Dorothy Hare, the notorious
'Rector's Daughter'.



6


Once her mind was made up, Dorothy was pining to escape from the
hop camp.  On the following day she could hardly bring herself to
go on with the stupid work of picking, and the discomforts and bad
food were intolerable now that she had memories to compare them
with.  She would have taken to flight immediately if only she had
had enough money to get her home.  The instant her father's letter
with the two pounds arrived, she would say good-bye to the Turles
and take the train for home, and breathe a sigh of relief to get
there, in spite of the ugly scandals that had got to be faced.

On the third day after writing she went down the village post
office and asked for her letter.  The postmistress, a woman with
the face of a dachshund and a bitter contempt for all hop-pickers,
told her frostily that no letter had come.  Dorothy was
disappointed.  A pity--it must have been held up in the post.
However, it didn't matter; tomorrow would be soon enough--only
another day to wait.

The next evening she went again, quite certain that it would have
arrived this time.  Still no letter.  This time a misgiving
assailed her; and on the fifth evening, when there was yet again no
letter, the misgiving changed into a horrible panic.  She bought
another packet of notepaper and wrote an enormous letter, using up
the whole four sheets, explaining over and over again what had
happened and imploring her father not to leave her in such
suspense.  Having posted it, she made up her mind that she would
let a whole week go by before calling at the post office again.

This was Saturday.  By Wednesday her resolve had broken down.  When
the hooter sounded for the midday interval she left her bin and
hurried down to the post office--it was a mile and a half away, and
it meant missing her dinner.  Having got there she went shame-
facedly up to the counter, almost afraid to speak.  The dog-faced
postmistress was sitting in her brass-barred cage at the end of the
counter, ticking figures in a long shaped account book.  She gave
Dorothy a brief nosy glance and went on with her work, taking no
notice of her.

Something painful was happening in Dorothy's diaphragm.  She was
finding it difficult to breathe, 'Are there any letters for me?'
she managed to say at last.

'Name?' said the postmistress, ticking away.

'Ellen Millborough.'

The postmistress turned her long dachshund nose over her shoulder
for an instant and glanced at the M partition of the Poste Restante
letter-box.

'No,' she said, turning back to her account book.

In some manner Dorothy got herself outside and began to walk back
towards the hopfields, then halted.  A deadly feeling of emptiness
at the pit of her stomach, caused partly by hunger, made her too
weak to walk.

Her father's silence could mean only one thing.  He believed Mrs
Semprill's story--believed that she, Dorothy, had run away from
home in disgraceful circumstances and then told lies to excuse
herself.  He was too angry and too disgusted to write to her.  All
he wanted was to get rid of her, drop all communication with her;
get her out of sight and out of mind, as a mere scandal to be
covered up and forgotten.

She could not go home after this.  She dared not.  Now that she had
seen what her father's attitude was, it had opened her eyes to the
rashness of the thing she had been contemplating.  Of COURSE she
could not go home!  To slink back in disgrace, to bring shame on
her father's house by coming there--ah, impossible, utterly
impossible!  How could she even have thought of it?

What then?  There was nothing for it but to go right away--right
away to some place that was big enough to hide in.  London,
perhaps.  Somewhere where nobody knew her and the mere sight of her
face or mention of her name would not drag into the light a string
of dirty memories.

As she stood there the sound of bells floated towards her, from the
village church round the bend of the road, where the ringers were
amusing themselves by ringing 'Abide with Me', as one picks out a
tune with one finger on the piano.  But presently 'Abide with Me'
gave way to the familiar Sunday-morning jangle.  'Oh do leave my
wife alone!  She is so drunk she can't get home!'--the same peal
that the bells of St Athelstan's had been used to ring three years
ago before they were unswung.  The sound planted a spear of
homesickness in Dorothy's heart, bringing back to her with
momentary vividness a medley of remembered things--the smell of the
glue-pot in the conservatory when she was making costumes for the
school play, and the chatter of starlings outside her bedroom
window, interrupting her prayers before Holy Communion, and Mrs
Pither's doleful voice chronicling the pains in the backs of her
legs, and the worries of the collapsing belfry and the shop-debts
and the bindweed in the peas--all the multitudinous, urgent details
of a life that had alternated between work and prayer.

Prayer!  For a very short time, a minute perhaps, the thought
arrested her.  Prayer--in those days it had been the very source
and centre of her life.  In trouble or in happiness, it was to
prayer that she had turned.  And she realized--the first time that
it had crossed her mind--that she had not uttered a prayer since
leaving home, not even since her memory had come back to her.
Moreover, she was aware that she had no longer the smallest impulse
to pray.  Mechanically, she began a whispered prayer, and stopped
almost instantly; the words were empty and futile.  Prayer, which
had been the mainstay of her life, had no meaning for her any
longer.  She recorded this fact as she walked slowly up the road,
and she recorded it briefly, almost casually, as though it had been
something seen in passing--a flower in the ditch or a bird crossing
the road--something noticed and then dismissed.  She had not even
the time to reflect upon what it might mean.  It was shouldered out
of her mind by more momentous things.

It was of the future that she had got to be thinking now.  She was
already fairly clear in her mind as to what she must do.  When the
hop-picking was at an end she must go up to London, write to her
father for money and her clothes--for however angry he might be,
she could not believe that he intended to leave her utterly in the
lurch--and then start looking for a job.  It was the measure of her
ignorance that those dreaded words 'looking for a job' sounded
hardly at all dreadful in her ears.  She knew herself strong and
willing--knew that there were plenty of jobs that she was capable
of doing.  She could be a nursery governess, for instance--no,
better, a housemaid or a parlourmaid.  There were not many things
in a house that she could not do better than most servants;
besides, the more menial her job, the easier it would be to keep
her past history secret.

At any rate, her father's house was closed to her, that was
certain.  From now on she had got to fend for herself.  On this
decision, with only a very dim idea of what it meant, she quickened
her pace and got back to the fields in time for the afternoon
shift.

The hop-picking season had not much longer to run.  In a week or
thereabouts Cairns's would be closing down, and the cockneys would
take the hoppers' train to London, and the gypsies would catch
their horses, pack their caravans, and march northward to
Lincolnshire, to scramble for jobs in the potato fields.  As for
the cockneys, they had had their bellyful of hop-picking by this
time.  They were pining to be back in dear old London, with
Woolworths and the fried-fish shop round the corner, and no more
sleeping in straw and frying bacon in tin lids with your eyes
weeping from wood smoke.  Hopping was a holiday, but the kind of
holiday that you were glad to see the last of.  You came down
cheering, but you went home cheering louder still and swearing that
you would never go hopping again--until next August, when you had
forgotten the cold nights and the bad pay and the damage to your
hands, and remembered only the blowsy afternoons in the sun and the
boozing of stone pots of beer round the red camp fires at night.

The mornings were growing bleak and Novemberish; grey skies, the
first leaves falling, and finches and starlings already flocking
for the winter.  Dorothy had written yet again to her father,
asking for money and some clothes; he had left her letter
unanswered, nor had anybody else written to her.  Indeed, there was
no one except her father who knew her present address; but somehow
she had hoped that Mr Warburton might write.  Her courage almost
failed her now, especially at nights in the wretched straw, when
she lay awake thinking of the vague and menacing future.  She
picked her hops with a sort of desperation, a sort of frenzy of
energy, more aware each day that every handful of hops meant
another fraction of a farthing between herself and starvation.
Deafie, her bin-mate, like herself, was picking against time, for
it was the last money he would earn till next year's hopping season
came round.  The figure they aimed at was five shillings a day--
thirty bushels--between the two of them, but there was no day when
they quite attained it.

Deafie was a queer old man and a poor companion after Nobby, but
not a bad sort.  He was a ship's steward by profession, but a tramp
of many years' standing, as deaf as a post and therefore something
of a Mr F.'s aunt in conversation.  He was also an exhibitionist,
but quite harmless.  For hours together he used to sing a little
song that went 'With my willy willy--WITH my willy willy', and
though he could not hear what he was singing it seemed to cause him
some kind of pleasure.  He had the hairiest ears Dorothy had ever
seen.  There were tufts like miniature Dundreary whiskers growing
out of each of his ears.  Every year Deafie came hop-picking at
Cairns's farm, saved up a pound, and then spent a paradisiac week
in a lodging-house in Newington Butts before going back to the
road.  This was the only week in the year when he slept in what
could be called, except by courtesy, a bed.

The picking came to an end on 28 September.  There were several
fields still unpicked, but they were poor hops and at the last
moment Mr Cairns decided to 'let them blow'.  Set number 19
finished their last field at two in the afternoon, and the little
gypsy foreman swarmed up the poles and retrieved the derelict
bunches, and the measurer carted the last hops away.  As he
disappeared there was a sudden shout of 'Put 'em in the bins!' and
Dorothy saw six men bearing down upon her with a fiendish
expression on their faces, and all the women in the set scattering
and running.  Before she could collect her wits to escape the men
had seized her, laid her at full length in a bin and swung her
violently from side to side.  Then she was dragged out and kissed
by a young gypsy smelling of onions.  She struggled at first, but
she saw the same thing being done to the other women in the set, so
she submitted.  It appeared that putting the women in the bins was
an invariable custom on the last day of picking.  There were great
doings in the camp that night, and not much sleep for anybody.
Long after midnight Dorothy found herself moving with a ring of
people about a mighty fire, one hand clasped by a rosy butcher-boy
and the other by a very drunk old woman in a Scotch bonnet out of a
cracker, to the tune of 'Auld Lang Syne'.

In the morning they went up to the farm to draw their money, and
Dorothy drew one pound and fourpence, and earned another fivepence
by adding up their tally books for people who could not read or
write.  The cockney pickers paid you a penny for this job; the
gypsies paid you only in flattery.  Then Dorothy set out for West
Ackworth station, four miles away, together with the Turles, Mr
Turle carrying the tin trunk, Mrs Turle carrying the baby, the
other children carrying various odds and ends, and Dorothy wheeling
the perambulator which held the Turles' entire stock of crockery,
and which had two circular wheels and two elliptical.

They got to the station about midday, the hoppers' train was due to
start at one, and it arrived at two and started at a quarter past
three.  After a journey of incredible slowness, zigzagging all over
Kent to pick up a dozen hop-pickers here and half a dozen there,
going back on its tracks over and over again and backing into
sidings to let other trains pass--taking, in fact, six hours to do
thirty-five miles--it landed them in London a little after nine at
night.



7


Dorothy slept that night with the Turles.  They had grown so fond
of her that they would have given her shelter for a week or a
fortnight if she had been willing to impose on their hospitality.
Their two rooms (they lived in a tenement house not far from Tower
Bridge Road) were a tight fit for seven people including children,
but they made her a bed of sorts on the floor out of two rag mats,
an old cushion and an overcoat.

In the morning she said good-bye to the Turles and thanked them
for all their kindness towards her, and then went straight to
Bermondsey public baths and washed off the accumulated dirt of five
weeks.  After that she set out to look for a lodging, having in her
possession sixteen and eightpence in cash, and the clothes she
stood up in.  She had darned and cleaned her clothes as best she
could, and being black they did not show the dirt quite as badly as
they might have done.  From the knees down she was now passably
respectable.  On the last day of picking a 'home picker' in the
next set, named Mrs Killfrew, had presented her with a good pair
of shoes that had been her daughter's, and a pair of woollen
stockings.

It was not until the evening that Dorothy managed to find herself a
room.  For something like ten hours she was wandering up and down,
from Bermondsey into Southwark, from Southwark into Lambeth,
through labyrinthine streets where snotty-nosed children played at
hop-scotch on pavements horrible with banana skins and decaying
cabbage leaves.  At every house she tried it was the same story--
the landlady refused point-blank to take her in.  One after another
a succession of hostile women, standing in their doorways as
defensively as though she had been a motor bandit or a government
inspector, looked her up and down, said briefly, 'We don't TAKE
single girls,' and shut the door in her face.  She did not know it,
of course, but the very look of her was enough to rouse any
respectable landlady's suspicions.  Her stained and ragged clothes
they might possibly have put up with; but the fact that she had no
luggage damned her from the start.  A single girl with no luggage
is invariably a bad lot--this is the first and greatest of the
apophthegms of the London landlady.

At about seven o'clock, too tired to stand on her feet any longer,
she ventured into a filthy, flyblown little cafe near the Old Vic
theatre and asked for a cup of tea.  The proprietress, getting into
conversation with her and learning that she wanted a room, advised
her to 'try at Mary's, in Wellings Court, jest orff the Cut'.
'Mary', it appeared, was not particular and would let a room to
anybody who could pay.  Her proper name was Mrs Sawyer, but the
boys all called her Mary.

Dorothy found Wellings Court with some difficulty.  You went along
Lambeth Cut till you got to a Jew clothes-shop called Knockout
Trousers Ltd, then you turned up a narrow alley, and then turned to
your left again up another alley so narrow that its grimy plaster
walls almost brushed you as you went.  In the plaster, persevering
boys had cut the word ---- innumerable times and too deeply to be
erased.  At the far end of the alley you found yourself in a small
court where four tall narrow houses with iron staircases stood
facing one another.

Dorothy made inquiries and found 'Mary' in a subterranean den
beneath one of the houses.  She was a drabby old creature with
remarkably thin hair and face so emaciated that it looked like a
rouged and powdered skull.  Her voice was cracked, shrewish, and
nevertheless ineffably dreary.  She asked Dorothy no questions, and
indeed scarcely even looked at her, but simply demanded ten
shillings and then said in her ugly voice:

'Twenty-nine.  Third floor.  Go up be the back stairs.'

Apparently the back stairs were those inside the house.  Dorothy
went up the dark, spiral staircase, between sweating walls, in a
smell of old overcoats, dishwater and slops.  As she reached the
second floor there was a loud squeal of laughter, and two rowdy-
looking girls came out of one of the rooms and stared at her for a
moment.  They looked young, their faces being quite hidden under
rouge and pink powder, and their lips painted scarlet as geranium
petals.  But amid the pink powder their china-blue eyes were tired
and old; and that was somehow horrible, because it reminded you of
a girl's mask with an old woman's face behind it.  The taller of
the two greeted Dorothy.

''Ullo, dearie!'

'Hullo!'

'You new 'ere?  Which room you kipping in?'

'Number twenty-nine.'

'God, ain't that a bloody dungeon to put you in!  You going out
tonight?'

'No, I don't think so,' said Dorothy, privately a little astonished
at the question.  'I'm too tired.'

'Thought you wasn't, when I saw you 'adn't dolled up.  But, say!
dearie, you ain't on the beach, are you?  Not spoiling the ship for
a 'aporth of tar?  Because f'rinstance if you want the lend of a
lipstick, you only got to say the word.  We're all chums 'ere, you
know.'

'Oh. . . .  No, thank you,' said Dorothy, taken aback.

'Oh, well!  Time Doris and me was moving.  Got a 'portant business
engagement in Leicester Square.'  Here she nudged the other girl
with her hip, and both of them sniggered in a silly mirthless
manner.  'But, say!' added the taller girl confidentially, 'ain't
it a bloody treat to 'ave a good night's kip all alone once in a
way?  Wish _I_ could.  All on your Jack Jones with no bloody great
man's feet shoving you about.  'S all right when you can afford it,
eh?'

'Yes,' said Dorothy, feeling that this answer was expected of her,
and with only a very vague notion of what the other was talking
about.

'Well, ta ta, dearie!  Sleep tight.  And jes' look out for the
smash and grab raiders 'bout 'ar-parse one!'

When the two girls had skipped downstairs with another of their
meaningless squeals of laughter, Dorothy found her way to room
number 29 and opened the door.  A cold, evil smell met her.  The
room measured about eight feet each way, and was very dark.  The
furniture was simple.  In the middle of the room, a narrow iron
bedstead with a ragged coverlet and greyish sheets; against the
wall, a packing case with a tin basin and an empty whisky bottle
intended for water; tacked over the bed, a photograph of Bebe
Daniels torn out of Film Fun.

The sheets were not only dirty, but damp.  Dorothy got into the
bed, but she had only undressed to her chemise, or what was left of
her chemise, her underclothes by this time being almost entirely in
ruins; she could not bring herself to lay her bare body between
those nauseous sheets.  And once in bed, though she was aching from
head to foot with fatigue, she could not sleep.  She was unnerved
and full of forebodings.  The atmosphere of this vile place brought
home to her more vividly than before the fact that she was helpless
and friendless and had only six shillings between herself and the
streets.  Moreover, as the night wore on the house grew noisier and
noisier.  The walls were so thin that you could hear everything
that was happening.  There were bursts of shrill idiotic laughter,
hoarse male voices singing, a gramophone drawling out limericks,
noisy kisses, strange deathlike groans, and once or twice the
violent rattling of an iron bed.  Towards midnight the noises began
to form themselves into a rhythm in Dorothy's brain, and she fell
lightly and unrestfully asleep.  She was woken about a minute
later, as it seemed, by her door being flung open, and two dimly
seen female shapes rushed in, tore every scrap of clothing from her
bed except the sheets, and rushed out again.  There was a chronic
shortage of blankets at 'Mary's', and the only way of getting
enough of them was to rob somebody else's bed.  Hence the term
'smash and grab raiders'.

In the morning, half an hour before opening time, Dorothy went to
the nearest public library to look at the advertisements in the
newspapers.  Already a score of vaguely mangy-looking people were
prowling up and down, and the number swelled by ones and twos till
there were no less than sixty.  Presently the doors of the library
opened, and in they all surged, racing for a board at the other end
of the reading-room where the 'Situations Vacant' columns from
various newspapers had been cut out and pinned up.  And in the wake
of the job-hunters came poor old bundles of rags, men and women
both, who had spent the night in the streets and came to the
library to sleep.  They came shambling in behind the others,
flopped down with grunts of relief at the nearest table, and pulled
the nearest periodical towards them; it might be the Free Church
Messenger, it might be the Vegetarian Sentinel--it didn't matter
what it was, but you couldn't stay in the library unless you
pretended to be reading.  They opened their papers, and in the same
instant fell asleep, with their chins on their breasts.  And the
attendant walked round prodding them in turn like a stoker poking a
succession of fires, and they grunted and woke up as he prodded
them, and then fell asleep again the instant he had passed.

Meanwhile a battle was raging round the advertisement board,
everybody struggling to get to the front.  Two young men in blue
overalls came running up behind the others, and one of them put his
head down and fought his way through the crowd as though it had
been a football scrum.  In a moment he was at the board.  He turned
to his companion: ''Ere we are, Joe--I got it!  "Mechanics wanted--
Locke's Garage, Camden Town."  C'm on out of it!'  He fought his
way out again, and both of them scooted for the door.  They were
going to Camden Town as fast as their legs would carry them.  And
at this moment, in every public library in London, mechanics out of
work were reading that identical notice and starting on the race
for the job, which in all probability had already been given to
someone who could afford to buy a paper for himself and had seen
the notice at six in the morning.

Dorothy managed to get to the board at last, and made a note of
some of the addresses where 'cook generals' were wanted.  There
were plenty to choose from--indeed, half the ladies in London
seemed to be crying out for strong capable general servants.  With
a list of twenty addresses in her pocket, and having had a
breakfast of bread and margarine and tea which cost her threepence,
Dorothy set out to look for a job, not unhopefully.

She was too ignorant as yet to know that her chances of finding
work unaided were practically nil; but the next four days gradually
enlightened her.  During those four days she applied for eighteen
jobs, and sent written applications for four others.  She trudged
enormous distances all through the southern suburbs: Clapham,
Brixton, Dulwich, Penge, Sydenham, Beckenham, Norwood--even as far
as Croydon on one occasion.  She was haled into neat suburban
drawing-rooms and interviewed by women of every conceivable type--
large, chubby, bullying women, thin, acid, catty women, alert
frigid women in gold pince-nez, vague rambling women who looked as
though they practised vegetarianism or attended spiritualist
seances.  And one and all, fat or thin, chilly or motherly, they
reacted to her in precisely the same way.  They simply looked her
over, heard her speak, stared inquisitively, asked her a dozen
embarrassing and impertinent questions, and then turned her down.

Any experienced person could have told her how it would be.  In her
circumstances it was not to be expected that anyone would take the
risk of employing her.  Her ragged clothes and her lack of
references were against her, and her educated accent, which she did
not know how to disguise, wrecked whatever chances she might have
had.  The tramps and cockney hop-pickers had not noticed her
accent, but the suburban housewives noticed it quickly enough, and
it scared them in just the same way as the fact that she had no
luggage had scared the landladies.  The moment they had heard her
speak, and spotted her for a gentlewoman, the game was up.  She
grew quite used to the startled, mystified look that came over
their faces as soon as she opened her mouth--the prying, feminine
glance from her face to her damaged hands, and from those to the
darns in her skirt.  Some of the women asked her outright what a
girl of her class was doing seeking work as a servant.  They
sniffed, no doubt, that she had 'been in trouble'--that is, had an
illegitimate baby--and after probing her with their questions they
got rid of her as quickly as possible.

As soon as she had an address to give Dorothy had written to her
father, and when on the third day no answer came, she wrote again,
despairingly this time--it was her fifth letter, and four had gone
unanswered--telling him that she must starve if he did not send her
money at once.  There was just time for her to get an answer before
her week at 'Mary's' was up and she was thrown out for not paying
her rent.

Meanwhile, she continued the useless search for work, while her
money dwindled at the rate of a shilling a day--a sum just
sufficient to keep her alive while leaving her chronically hungry.
She had almost given up the hope that her father would do anything
to help her.  And strangely enough her first panic had died down,
as she grew hungrier and the chances of getting a job grew remoter,
into a species of miserable apathy.  She suffered, but she was not
greatly afraid.  The sub-world into which she was descending seemed
less terrible now that it was nearer.

The autumn weather, though fine, was growing colder.  Each day the
sun, fighting his losing battle against the winter, struggled a
little later through the mist to dye the house-fronts with pale
aquarelle colours.  Dorothy was in the streets all day, or in the
public library, only going back to 'Mary's' to sleep, and then
taking the precaution of dragging her bed across the door.  She had
grasped by this time that 'Mary's' was--not actually a brothel, for
there is hardly such a thing in London, but a well-known refuge of
prostitutes.  It was for that reason that you paid ten shillings a
week for a kennel not worth five.  Old 'Mary' (she was not the
proprietress of the house, merely the manageress) had been a
prostitute herself in her day, and looked it.  Living in such a
place damned you even in the eyes of Lambeth Cut.  Women sniffed
when you passed them, men took an offensive interest in you.  The
Jew on the corner, the owner of Knockout Trousers Ltd, was the
worst of all.  He was a solid young man of about thirty, with
bulging red cheeks and curly black hair like astrakhan.  For twelve
hours a day he stood on the pavement roaring with brazen lungs that
you couldn't get a cheaper pair of trousers in London, and
obstructing the passers-by.  You had only to halt for a fraction of
a second, and he seized you by the arm and bundled you inside the
shop by main force.  Once he got you there his manner became
positively threatening.  If you said anything disparaging about his
trousers he offered to fight, and weak-minded people bought pairs
of trousers in sheer physical terror.  But busy though he was, he
kept a sharp eye open for the 'birds', as he called them; and
Dorothy appeared to fascinate him beyond all other 'birds'.  He had
grasped that she was not a prostitute, but living at 'Mary's', she
must--so he reasoned--be on the very verge of becoming one.  The
thought made his mouth water.  When he saw her coming down the
alley he would post himself at the corner, with his massive chest
well displayed and one black lecherous eye turned inquiringly upon
her ('Are you ready to begin yet?' his eye seemed to be saying),
and, as she passed, give her a discreet pinch on the backside.

On the last morning of her week at 'Mary's', Dorothy went downstairs
and looked, with only a faint flicker of hope, at the slate in the
hallway where the names of people for whom there were letters were
chalked up.  There was no letter for 'Ellen Millborough'.  That
settled it; there was nothing left to do except to walk out into the
street.  It did not occur to her to do as every other woman in the
house would have done--that is, pitch a hard-up tale and try to
cadge another night's lodging rent free.  She simply walked out of
the house, and had not even the nerve to tell 'Mary' that she was
going.

She had no plan, absolutely no plan whatever.  Except for half an
hour at noon when she went out to spend threepence out of her last
fourpence on bread and margarine and tea, she passed the entire day
in the public library, reading weekly papers.  In the morning she
read the Barber's Record, and in the afternoon Cage Birds.  They
were the only papers she could get hold of, for there were always
so many idlers in the library that you had to scramble to get hold
of a paper at all.  She read them from cover to cover, even the
advertisements.  She pored for hours together over such
technicalities as How to strop French Razors, Why the Electric
Hairbrush is Unhygienic, Do Budgies thrive on Rapeseed?  It was the
only occupation that she felt equal to.  She was in a strange
lethargic state in which it was easier to interest herself in How
to strop French Razors than in her own desperate plight.  All fear
had left her.  Of the future she was utterly unable to think; even
so far ahead as tonight she could barely see.  There was a night in
the streets ahead of her, that was all she knew, and even about
that she only vaguely cared.  Meanwhile there were Cage Birds and
the Barber's Record; and they were, strangely, absorbingly
interesting.

At nine o'clock the attendant came round with a long hooked pole
and turned out the gaslights, the library was closed.  Dorothy
turned to the left, up the Waterloo Road, towards the river.  On
the iron footbridge she halted for a moment.  The night wind was
blowing.  Deep banks of mist, like dunes, were rising from the
river, and, as the wind caught them, swirling north-eastward across
the town.  A swirl of mist enveloped Dorothy, penetrating her thin
clothes and making her shudder with a sudden foretaste of the
night's cold.  She walked on and arrived, by the process of
gravitation that draws all roofless people to the same spot, at
Trafalgar Square.




CHAPTER 3



1


[SCENE:  Trafalgar Square.  Dimly visible through the mist, a dozen
people, Dorothy among them, are grouped about one of the benches
near the north parapet.]

CHARLIE [singing]:  'Ail Mary, 'ail Mary, 'a-il Ma-ary--[Big Ben
strikes ten.]

SNOUTER [mimicking the noise]:  Ding dong, ding dong!  Shut your
---- noise, can't you?  Seven more hours of it on this ---- square
before we get the chance of a setdown and a bit of sleep!  Cripes!

MR TALLBOYS [to himself]:  Non sum qualis eram boni sub regno
Edwardi!  In the days of my innocence, before the Devil carried me
up into a high place and dropped me into the Sunday newspapers--
that is to say when I was Rector of Little Fawley-cum-Dewsbury. . . .

DEAFIE [singing]:  With my willy willy, WITH my willy willy--

MRS WAYNE:  Ah, dearie, as soon as I set eyes on you I knew as you
was a lady born and bred.  You and me've known what it is to come
down in the world, haven't we, dearie?  It ain't the same for us as
what it is for some of these others here.

CHARLIE [singing]:  'Ail Mary, 'ail Mary, 'a-il Ma-ary, full of
grace!

MRS BENDIGO:  Calls himself a bloody husband, does he?  Four pound
a week in Covent Garden and 'is wife doing a starry in the bloody
Square!  Husband!

MR TALLBOYS [to himself]:  Happy days, happy days!  My ivied church
under the sheltering hillside--my red-tiled Rectory slumbering
among Elizabethan yews!  My library, my vinery, my cook, house-
parlourmaid and groom-gardener!  My cash in the bank, my name in
Crockford!  My black suit of irreproachable cut, my collar back to
front, my watered silk cassock in the church precincts. . . .

MRS WAYNE:  Of course the one thing I DO thank God for, dearie, is
that my poor dear mother never lived to see this day.  Because if
she ever HAD of lived to see the day when her eldest daughter--as
was brought up, mind you, with no expense spared and milk straight
from the cow. . . .

MRS BENDIGO:  HUSBAND!

GINGER:  Come on, less 'ave a drum of tea while we got the chance.
Last we'll get tonight--coffee shop shuts at 'ar-parse ten.

THE KIKE:  Oh Jesus!  This bloody cold's gonna kill me!  I ain't
got nothing on under my trousers.  Oh Je-e-e-EEZE!

CHARLIE [singing]:  'Ail Mary, 'ail Mary--

SNOUTER:  Fourpence!  Fourpence for six ---- hours on the bum!  And
that there nosing sod with the wooden leg queering our pitch at
every boozer between Aldgate and the Mile End Road.  With 'is ----
wooden leg and 'is war medals as 'e bought in Lambeth Cut!
Bastard!

DEAFIE [singing]:  With my willy willy, WITH my willy willy--

MRS BENDIGO:  Well, I told the bastard what I thought of 'im,
anyway.  'Call yourself a man?' I says.  'I've seen things like you
kep' in a bottle at the 'orspital,' I says. . . .

MR TALLBOYS [to himself]:  Happy days, happy days!  Roast beef and
bobbing villagers, and the peace of God that passeth all
understanding!  Sunday mornings in my oaken stall, cool flower
scent and frou-frou of surplices mingling in the sweet corpse-laden
air!  Summer evenings when the late sun slanted through my study
window--I pensive, boozed with tea, in fragrant wreaths of
Cavendish, thumbing drowsily some half-calf volume--Poetical Works
of William Shenstone, Esq., Percy's Reliques of Ancient English
Poetry, J. Lempriere, D.D., professor of immoral theology . . .

GINGER:  Come on, 'oo's for that drum of riddleme-ree?  We got the
milk and we got the tea.  Question is, 'oo's got any bleeding
sugar?

DOROTHY:  This cold, this cold!  It seems to go right through you!
Surely it won't be like this all night?

MRS BENDIGO:  Oh, cheese it!  I 'ate these snivelling tarts.

CHARLIE:  Ain't it going to be a proper perisher, too?  Look at the
perishing river mist creeping up that there column.  Freeze the
fish-hooks off of ole Nelson before morning.

MRS WAYNE:  Of course, at the time that I'm speaking of we still
had our little tobacco and sweetstuff business on the corner,
you'll understand. . . .

THE KIKE:  Oh Je-e-e-EEZE!  Lend's that overcoat of yours, Ginger.
I'm bloody freezing!

SNOUTER:  ---- double-crossing bastard!  P'raps I won't bash 'is
navel in when I get a 'old of 'im!

CHARLIE:  Fortunes o' war, boy, fortunes o' war.  Perishing Square
tonight--rumpsteak and kip on feathers tomorrow.  What else d'you
expect on perishing Thursday?

MRS BENDIGO:  Shove up, Daddy, shove up!  Think I want your lousy
old 'ed on my shoulder--me a married woman?

MR TALLBOYS [to himself]:  For preaching, chanting, and intoning I
was unrivalled.  My Lift up your Hearts' was renowned throughout
the diocese.  All styles I could do you, High Church, Low Church,
Broad Church and No Church.  Throaty Anglo-Cat Warblings, straight
from the shoulder muscular Anglican, or the adenoidal Low Church
whine in which still lurk the Houyhnhnm-notes of neighing chapel
elders. . . .

DEAFIE [singing]:  WITH my willy willy--

GINGER:  Take your 'ands off that bleeding overcoat, Kikie.  You
don't get no clo'es of mine while you got the chats on you.

CHARLIE [singing]:

As pants the 'art for cooling streams,
When 'eated in the chase--

MRS MCELLIGOT [in her sleep]:  Was 'at you, Michael dear?

MRS BENDIGO:  It's my belief as the sneaking bastard 'ad another
wife living when 'e married me.

MR TALLBOYS [from the roof of his mouth, stage curate-wise,
reminiscently]:  If any of you know cause of just impediment
why these two persons should not be joined together in holy
matrimony . . .

THE KIKE:  A pal!  A bloody pal!  And won't lend his bloody
overcoat!

MRS WAYNE:  Well, now as you've mentioned it, I must admit as I
never WAS one to refuse a nice cup of tea.  I know that when our
poor dear mother was alive, pot after pot we used to . . .

NOSY WATSON [to himself, angrily]:  Sod! . . .  Gee'd into it
and then a stretch all round. . . .  Never even done the bloody
job. . . .  Sod!

DEAFIE [singing]:  WITH my willy willy--

MRS MCELLIGOT [half asleep]:  DEAR Michael. . . .  He was real
loving, Michael was.  Tender an' true. . . .  Never looked at
another man since dat evenin' when I met'm outside Kronk's
slaughter-house an' he gimme de two pound o' sausage as he'd
bummed off de International Stores for his own supper. . . .

MRS BENDIGO:  Well, I suppose we'll get that bloody tea this time
tomorrow.

MR TALLBOYS [chanting, reminiscently]:  By the waters of Babylon we
sat down and wept, when we remembered thee, O Zion! . . .

DOROTHY:  Oh, this cold, this cold!

SNOUTER:  Well, I don't do no more ---- starries this side of
Christmas.  I'll 'ave my kip tomorrow if I 'ave to cut it out of
their bowels.

NOSY WATSON:  Detective, is he?  Smith of the Flying Squad!  Flying
Judas more likely!  All they can bloody do--copping the old
offenders what no beak won't give a fair chance.

GINGER:  Well, I'm off for the fiddlede-dee.  'Oo's got a couple of
clods for the water?

MRS MCELLIGOT [waking]:  Oh dear, oh dear!  If my back ain't fair
broke!  Oh holy Jesus, if dis bench don't catch you across de
kidneys!  An' dere was me dreamin' I was warm in kip wid a nice cup
a' tea an' two o' buttered toast waitin' by me bedside.  Well, dere
goes me last wink o' sleep till I gets into Lambeth public lib'ry
tomorrow.

DADDY [his head emerging from within his overcoat like a tortoise's
from within its shell]:  Wassat you said, boy?  Paying money for
water!  How long've you bin on the road, you ignorant young scut?
Money for bloody water?  Bum it, boy, bum it!  Don't buy what you
can bum and don't bum what you can steal.  That's my word--fifty
year on the road, man and boy.  [Retires within his coat.]

MR TALLBOYS [chanting]:  O all ye works of the Lord--

DEAFIE [singing]:  WITH my willy willy--

CHARLIE:  'Oo was it copped you, Nosy?

THE KIKE:  Oh Je-e-e-EEZE!

MRS BENDIGO:  Shove up, shove up!  Seems to me some folks think
they've took a mortgage on this bloody seat.

MR TALLBOYS [chanting]:  O all ye works of the Lord, curse ye the
Lord, curse Him and vilify Him for ever!

MRS MCELLIGOT:  What I always says is, it's always us poor bloody
Catholics dat's down in de bloody dumps.

NOSY WATSON:  Smithy.  Flying Squad--flying sod!  Give us the plans
of the house and everything, and then had a van full of coppers
waiting and nipped the lot of us.  I wrote it up in the Black
Maria:

'Detective Smith knows how to gee;
Tell him he's a ---- from me.'

SNOUTER:  'Ere, what about our ---- tea?  Go on, Kikie, you're a
young 'un; shut that ---- noise and take the drums.  Don't you pay
nothing.  Worm it out of the old tart.  Snivel.  Do the doleful.

MR TALLBOYS [chanting]:  O all ye children of men, curse ye the
Lord, curse Him and vilify Him for ever!

CHARLIE:  What, is Smithy crooked too?

MRS BENDIGO:  I tell you what, girls, I tell you what gets ME down,
and that's to think of my bloody husband snoring under four
blankets and me freezing in this bloody Square.  That's what _I_
can't stomach.  The unnatural sod!

GINGER [singing]:  THERE they go--IN their joy--Don't take that
there drum with the cold sausage in it, Kikie.

NOSY WATSON:  Crooked?  CROOKED?  Why, a corkscrew 'ud look like a
bloody bradawl beside of him!  There isn't one of them double ----
sons of whores in the Flying Squad but 'ud sell his grandmother to
the knackers for two pound ten and then sit on her gravestone
eating potato crisps.  The geeing, narking toe rag!

CHARLIE:  Perishing tough.  'Ow many convictions you got?

GINGER [singing]:

THERE they go--IN their joy--
'APpy girl--LUcky boy--

NOSY WATSON:  Fourteen.  You don't stand no chance with that lot
against you.

MRS WAYNE:  What, don't he keep you, then?

MRS BENDIGO:  No, I'm married to this one, sod 'im!

CHARLIE:  I got perishing nine myself.

MR TALLBOYS [chanting]:  O Ananias, Azarias and Misael, curse ye
the Lord, curse Him and vilify Him for ever!

GINGER [singing]:

THERE they go--IN their joy--
'APpy girl--LUcky boy--
But 'ere am _I-I-I_--
Broken--'A-A-AARted!

God, I ain't 'ad a dig in the grave for three days.  'Ow long since
you washed your face, Snouter?

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Oh dear, oh dear!  If dat boy don't come soon wid
de tea me insides'll dry up like a bloody kippered herring.

CHARLIE:  YOU can't sing, none of you.  Ought to 'ear Snouter and
me 'long towards Christmas time when we pipe up 'Good King
Wenceslas' outside the boozers.  'Ymns, too.  Blokes in the bar
weep their perishing eyes out to 'ear us.  'Member when we tapped
twice at the same 'ouse by mistake, Snouter?  Old tart fair tore
the innards out of us.

MR TALLBOYS [marching up and down behind an imaginary drum and
singing]:

All things vile and damnable,
All creatures great and small--

[Big Ben strikes half past ten.]

SNOUTER [mimicking the clock]:  Ding dong, ding dong!  Six and a
---- half hours of it!  Cripes!

GINGER:  Kikie and me knocked off four of them safety-razor blades
in Woolworth's 's afternoon.  I'll 'ave a dig in the bleeding
fountains tomorrow if I can bum a bit of soap.

DEAFIE:  When I was a stooard in the P. & O., we used to meet them
black Indians two days out at sea, in them there great canoes as
they call catamarans, catching sea-turtles the size of dinner
tables.

MRS WAYNE:  Did yoo used to be a clergyman, then, sir?

MR TALLBOYS [halting]:  After the order of Melchizedec.  There is
no question of 'used to be', Madam.  Once a priest always a priest.
Hoc est corpus hocus-pocus.  Even though unfrocked--un-Crocked, we
call it--and dog-collar publicly torn off by the bishop of the
diocese.

GINGER [singing]:  THERE they go--IN their joy--Thank Christ!  'Ere
comes Kikie.  Now for the consultation-free!

MRS BENDIGO:  Not before it's bloody needed.

CHARLIE:  'Ow come they give you the sack, mate?  Usual story?
Choirgirls in the family way?

MRS MCELLIGOT:  You've took your time, ain't you, young man?  But
come on, let's have a sup of it before me tongue falls out o' me
bloody mouth.

MRS BENDIGO:  Shove up, Daddy!  You're sitting on my packet of
bloody sugar.

MR TALLBOYS:  Girls is a euphemism.  Only the usual flannel-
bloomered hunters of the unmarried clergy.  Church hens--altar-
dressers and brass-polishers--spinsters growing bony and desperate.
There is a demon that enters into them at thirty-five.

THE KIKE:  The old bitch wouldn't give me the hot water.  Had to
tap a toff in the street and pay a penny for it.

SNOUTER:  ---- likely story!  Bin swigging it on the way more
likely.

DADDY [emerging from his overcoat]:  Drum o' tea, eh?  I could sup
a drum o' tea.  [Belches slightly.]

CHARLIE:  When their bubs get like perishing razor stops?  _I_
know.

NOSY WATSON:  Tea--bloody catlap.  Better'n that cocoa in the stir,
though.  Lend's your cup, matie.

GINGER:  Jest wait'll I knock a 'ole in this tin of milk.  Shy us a
money or your life, someone.

MRS BENDIGO:  Easy with that bloody sugar!  'Oo paid for it, I sh'd
like to know?

MR TALLBOYS:  When their bubs get like razor stops.  I thank thee
for that humour.  Pippin's Weekly made quite a feature of the case.
'Missing Canon's Sub Rosa Romance.  Intimate Revelations.'  And
also an Open Letter in John Bull:  'To a Skunk in Shepherd's
Clothing'.  A pity--I was marked out for preferment.  [To Dorothy]
Gaiters in the family, if you understand me.  You would not think,
would you, that the time has been when this unworthy backside
dented the plush cushions of a cathedral stall?

CHARLIE:  'Ere comes Florry.  Thought she'd be along soon as we got
the tea going.  Got a nose like a perishing vulture for tea, that
girl 'as.

SNOUTER:  Ay, always on the tap.  [Singing]

Tap, tap, tappety tap,
I'm a perfec' devil at that--

MRS MCELLIGOT:  De poor kid, she ain't got no sense.  Why don't she
go up to Piccadilly Circus where she'd get her five bob reg'lar?
She won't do herself no good bummin' round de Square wid a set of
miserable ole Tobies.

DOROTHY:  Is that milk all right?

GINGER:  All right?  [Applies his mouth to one of the holes in the
tin and blows.  A sticky greyish stream dribbles from the other.]

CHARLIE:  What luck, Florry?  'Ow 'bout that perishing toff as I
see you get off with just now?

DOROTHY:  It's got 'Not fit for babies' on it.

MRS BENDIGO:  Well, you ain't a bloody baby, are you?  You can drop
your Buckingham Palace manners, 'ere, dearie.

FLORRY:  Stood me a coffee and a fag--mingy bastard!  That tea you
got there, Ginger?  You always WAS my favourite, Ginger dear.

MRS WAYNE:  There's jest thirteen of us.

MR TALLBOYS:  As we are not going to have any dinner you need not
disturb yourself.

GINGER:  What-o, ladies and gents!  Tea is served.  Cups forward,
please!

THE KIKE:  Oh Jeez!  You ain't filled my bloody cup half full!

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Well, here's luck to us all, an' a better bloody
kip tomorrow.  I'd ha' took shelter in one o' dem dere churches
meself, only de b--s won't let you in if so be as dey t'ink you got
de chats on you.  [Drinks.]

MRS WAYNE:  Well, I can't say as this is exactly the way as I've
been ACCUSTOMED to drinking a cup of tea--but still--[Drinks.]

CHARLIE:  Perishing good cup of tea.  [Drinks.]

DEAFIE:  And there was flocks of them there green parakeets in the
coco-nut palms, too.  [Drinks.]

MR TALLBOYS:

What potions have I drunk of siren tears,
Distilled from limbecs foul as Hell within!

[Drinks.]

SNOUTER:  Last we'll get till five in the ---- morning.  [Drinks.]

[Florry produces a broken shop-made cigarette from her stocking,
and cadges a match.  The men, except Daddy, Deafie, and Mr
Tallboys, roll cigarettes from picked-up fag-ends.  The red ends
glow through the misty twilight, like a crooked constellation, as
the smokers sprawl on the bench, the ground, or the slope of the
parapet.]

MRS WAYNE:  Well, there now!  A nice cup of tea do seem to warm you
up, don't it, now?  Not but what I don't feel it a bit different,
as you might say, not having no nice clean table-cloth like I've
been accustomed to, and the beautiful china tea service as our
mother used to have; and always, of course, the very best tea as
money could buy--real Pekoe Points at two and nine a pound. . . .

GINGER [singing]:

THERE they go--IN their joy--
'APPY girl--LUCKY boy--

MR TALLBOYS [singing, to the tune of 'Deutschland, Deutschland uber
alles']:  Keep the aspidistra flying--

CHARLIE:  'Ow long you two kids been in Smoke?

SNOUTER:  I'm going to give them boozers such a doing tomorrow as
they won't know if theyr'e on their 'eads or their ---- 'eels.
I'll 'ave my 'alf dollar if I 'ave to 'old them upside down and
---- shake 'em.

GINGER:  Three days.  We come down from York--skippering 'alf the
way.  God, wasn't it jest about bleeding nine carat gold, too!

FLORRY:  Got any more tea there, Ginger dear?  Well, so long,
folks.  See you all at Wilkins's tomorrow morning.

MRS BENDIGO:  Thieving little tart!  Swallers 'er tea and then
jacks off without so much as a thank you.  Can't waste a bloody
moment.

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Cold?  Ay, I b'lieve you.  Skipperin' in de long
grass wid no blanket an' de bloody dew fit to drown you, an' den
can't get your bloody fire going' in de mornin', an' got to tap de
milkman 'fore you can make yourself a drum o' tea.  I've had some'v
it when me and Michael was on de toby.

MRS BENDIGO:  Even go with blackies and Chinamen she will, the
dirty little cow.

DOROTHY:  How much does she get each time?

SNOUTER:  Tanner.

DOROTHY:  SIXPENCE?

CHARLIE:  Bet your life.  Do it for a perishing fag along towards
morning.

MRS MCELLIGOT:  I never took less'n a shilling, never.

GINGER:  Kikie and me skippered in a boneyard one night.  Woke up
in the morning and found I was lying on a bleeding gravestone.

THE KIKE:  She ain't half got the crabs on her, too.

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Michael an' me skippered in a pigsty once.  We was
just a-creepin' in, when, 'Holy Mary!' says Michael, 'dere's a pig
in here!'  'Pig be ----!' I says, 'he'll keep us warm anyway.'  So
in we goes, an' dere was an old sow lay on her side snorin' like a
traction engine.  I creeps up agen her an' puts me arms round her,
an' begod she kept me warm all night.  I've skippered worse.

DEAFIE [singing]:  WITH my willy willy--

CHARLIE:  Don't ole Deafie keep it up?  Sets up a kind of a 'umming
inside of 'im, 'e says.

DADDY:  When I was a boy we didn't live on this 'ere bread and marg
and tea and suchlike trash.  Good solid tommy we 'ad in them days.
Beef stoo.  Black pudden.  Bacon dumpling.  Pig's 'ead.  Fed like a
fighting-cock on a tanner a day.  And now fifty year I've 'ad of it
on the toby.  Spud-grabbing, pea-picking, lambing, turnip-topping--
everythink.  And sleeping in wet straw and not once in a year you
don't fill your guts right full.  Well--!  [Retires within his coat.]

MRS MCELLIGOT:  But he was real bold, Michael was.  He'd go in
anywhere.  Many's de time we've broke into an empty house an kipped
in de best bed.  'Other people got homes,' he'd say.  'Why shouln't
we have'm too!'

GINGER [singing]:  But I'm dan--cing with tears--in my eyes--

MR TALLBOYS [to himself]:  Absumet haeres Caecuba dignior!  To
think that there were twenty-one bottles of Clos St Jacques 1911 in
my cellar still, that night when the baby was born and I left for
London on the milk train! . . .

MRS WAYNE:  And as for the WREATHS we 'as sent us when our mother
died--well, you wouldn't believe!  'Uge, they was. . . .

MRS BENDIGO:  If I 'ad my time over again I'd marry for bloody
money.

GINGER [singing]:

But I'm dan--cing with tears--in my eyes--
'Cos the girl--in my arms--isn't you-o-ou!

NOSY WATSON:  Some of you lot think you got a bloody lot to howl
about, don't you?  What about a poor sod like me?  You wasn't
narked into the stir when you was eighteen year old, was you?

THE KIKE:  Oh Je-e-eEEZE!

CHARLIE:  Ginger, you can't sing no more'n a perishing tomcat with
the guts-ache.  Just you listen to me.  I'll give y'a treat.
[Singing]:  Jesu, lover OF my soul--

MR TALLBOYS [to himself]:  Et ego in Crockford. . . .  With Bishops
and Archbishops and with all the Company of Heaven. . . .

NOSY WATSON:  D'you know how I got in the stir the first time?
Narked by my own sister--yes, my own bloody sister!  My sister's a
cow if ever there was one.  She got married to a religious maniac--
he's so bloody religious that she's got fifteen kids now--well, it
was him put her up to narking me.  But I got back on 'em, _I_ can
tell you.  First thing, I done when I come out of the stir, I buys
a hammer and goes round to my sister's house, and smashed her piano
to bloody matchwood.  'There!' I says, 'that's what you get for
narking ME!  You nosing mare!' I says.

DOROTHY:  This cold, this cold!  I don't know whether my feet are
there or not.

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Bloody tea don't warm you for long, do it?  I'm
fair froze myself.

MR TALLBOYS [to himself]:  My curate days, my curate days!  My
fancywork bazaars and morris-dancers in aid of on the village
green, my lectures to the Mothers' Union-missionary work in Western
China with fourteen magic lantern slides!  My Boys' Cricket Club,
teetotallers only, my Confirmation classes--purity lecture once
monthly in the Parish Hall--my Boy Scout orgies!  The Wolf Cubs
will deliver the Grand Howl.  Household Hints for the Parish
Magazine, 'Discarded fountain-pen fillers can be used as enemas for
canaries. . . .'

CHARLIE [singing]:  Jesu, lover OF my soul--

GINGER:  'Ere comes the bleeding flattie!  Get up off the ground,
all of you.  [Daddy emerges from his overcoat.]

THE POLICEMAN [shaking the sleepers on the next bench]:  Now then,
wake up, wake up!  Rouse up, you!  Got to go home if you want to
sleep.  This isn't a common lodging house.  Get up, there!  [etc.,
etc.]

MRS BENDIGO:  It's that nosy young sod as wants promotion.
Wouldn't let you bloody breathe if 'e 'ad 'is way.

CHARLIE [singing]:

Jesu, lover of my soul,
Let me TO Thy bosom fly--

THE POLICEMAN:  Now then, YOU!  What you think THIS is?  Baptist
prayer meeting?  [To the Kike]  Up you get, and look sharp about
it!

CHARLIE:  I can't 'elp it, sergeant.  It's my toonful nature.  It
comes out of me natural-like.

THE POLICEMAN [shaking Mrs Bendigo]:  Wake up, mother, wake up!

MRS BENDIGO:  Mother?  MOTHER, is it?  Well, if I am a mother,
thank God I ain't got a bloody son like you!  And I'll tell you
another little secret, constable.  Next time I want a man's fat
'ands feeling round the back of my neck, I won't ask YOU to do it.
I'll 'ave someone with a bit more sex-appeal.

THE POLICEMAN:  Now then, now then!  No call to get abusive, you
know.  We got our orders to carry out.  [Exit majestically.]

SNOUTER [sotto voce]:  ---- off, you ---- son of a ----!

CHARLIE [singing]:

While the gathering waters roll,
While the tempest still is 'igh!

Sung bass in the choir my last two years in Dartmoor, I did.

MRS BENDIGO:  I'll bloody mother 'im!  [Shouting after the
policeman]  'I!  Why don't you get after them bloody cat burglars
'stead of coming nosing round a respectable married woman?

GINGER:  Kip down, blokes.  'E's jacked.  [Daddy retires within his
coat.]

NOSY WATSON:  Wassit like in Dartmoor now?  D'they give you jam
now?

MRS WAYNE:  Of course, you can see as they couldn't reely allow
people to sleep in the streets--I mean, it wouldn't be quite nice--
and then you've got to remember as it'd be encouraging of all the
people as haven't got homes of their own--the kind of riff-raff, if
you take my meaning. . . .

MR TALLBOYS [to himself]:  Happy days, happy days!  Outings with
the Girl Guides in Epping Forest--hired brake and sleek roan
horses, and I on the box in my grey flannel suit, speckled straw
hat, and discreet layman's necktie.  Buns and ginger pop under the
green elms.  Twenty Girl Guides pious yet susceptible frisking in
the breast-high bracken, and I a happy curate sporting among them,
in loco parentis pinching the girls' backsides. . . .

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Well, you may talk about kippin' down, but begod
dere won't be much sleep for my poor ole bloody bones tonight.  I
can't skipper it now de way me and Michael used to.

CHARLIE:  Not jam.  Gets cheese, though, twice a week.

THE KIKE:  Oh Jeez!  I can't stand it no longer.  I going down to
the M.A.B.

[Dorothy stands up, and then, her knees having stiffened with the
cold, almost falls.]

GINGER:  Only send you to the bleeding Labour Home.  What you say
we all go up to Covent Garden tomorrow morning?  Bum a few pears if
we get there early enough.

CHARLIE:  I've 'ad my perishing bellyful of Dartmoor, b'lieve me.
Forty on us went through 'ell for getting off with the ole women
down on the allotments.  Ole trots seventy years old they was--
spud-grabbers.  Didn't we cop it just!  Bread and water, chained to
the wall--perishing near murdered us.

MRS BENDIGO:  No fear!  Not while my bloody husband's there.  One
black eye in a week's enough for me, thank you.

MR TALLBOYS [chanting, reminiscently]:  As for our harps, we hanged
them up, upon the willow trees of Babylon! . . .

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Hold up, kiddie!  Stamp your feet an' get de blood
back into 'm.  I'll take y'a walk up to Paul's in a coupla minutes.

DEAFIE [singing]:  WITH my willy willy--

[Big Ben strikes eleven.]

SNOUTER:  Six more--hours!  Cripes!

[An hour passes.  Big Ben stops striking.  The mist thins and the
cold increases.  A grubby-faced moon is seen sneaking among the
clouds of the southern sky.  A dozen hardened old men remain on the
benches, and still contrive to sleep, doubled up and hidden in
their greatcoats.  Occasionally they groan in their sleep.  The
others set out in all directions, intending to walk all night and
so keep their blood flowing, but nearly all of them have drifted
back to the Square by midnight.  A new policeman comes on duty.
He strolls through the Square at intervals of half an hour,
scrutinizing the faces of the sleepers but letting them alone when
he has made sure that they are only asleep and not dead.  Round
each bench revolves a knot of people who take it in turns to sit
down and are driven to their feet by the cold after a few minutes.
Ginger and Charlie fill two drums at the fountains and set out in
the desperate hope of boiling some tea over the navvies' clinker
fire in Chandos Street; but a policeman is warming himself at the
fire, and orders them away.  The Kike suddenly vanishes, probably
to beg a bed at the M.A.B.  Towards one o'clock a rumour goes round
that a lady is distributing hot coffee, ham sandwiches, and packets
of cigarettes under Charing Cross Bridge; there is a rush to the
spot, but the rumour turns out to be unfounded.  As the Square
fills again the ceaseless changing of places upon the benches
quickens until it is a game of musical chairs.  Sitting down, with
one's hands under one's armpits, it is possible to get into a kind
of sleep, or doze, for two or three minutes on end.  In this state,
enormous ages seem to pass.  One sinks into a complex, troubling
dreams which leave one conscious of one's surroundings and of the
bitter cold.  The night is growing clearer and colder every minute.
There is a chorus of varying sound--groans, curses, bursts of
laughter, and singing, and through them all the uncontrollable
chattering of teeth.]

MR TALLBOYS [chanting]:  I am poured out like water, and all my
bones are out of joint! . . .

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Ellen an' me bin wanderin' round de City dis two
hours.  Begod it's like a bloody tomb wid dem great lamps glarin'
down on you an' not a soul stirren' excep' de flatties strollin'
two an' two.

SNOUTER:  Five past ---- one and I ain't 'ad a bite since dinner!
Course it 'ad to 'appen to us on a ---- night like this!

MR TALLBOYS:  A drinking night I should have called it.  But every
man to his taste.  [Chanting]  'My strength is dried like a
potsherd, and my tongue cleaveth to my gums!' . . .

CHARLIE:  Say, what you think?  Nosy and me done a smash jest now.
Nosy sees a tobacconist's show-case full of them fancy boxes of
Gold Flake, and 'e says, 'By cripes I'm going to 'ave some of them
fags if they give me a perishing stretch for it!' 'e says.  So 'e
wraps 'is scarf round 'is 'and, and we waits till there's a
perishing great van passing as'll drown the noise, and then Nosy
lets fly--biff!  We nipped a dozen packets of fags, and then I bet
you didn't see our a--s for dust.  And when we gets round the
corner and opens them, there wasn't no perishing fags inside!
Perishing dummy boxes.  I 'ad to laugh.

DOROTHY:  My knees are giving way.  I can't stand up much longer.

MRS BENDIGO:  Oh, the sod, the sod!  To turn a woman out of doors
on a night like bloody this!  You wait'll I get 'im drunk o'
Saturday night and 'e can't 'it back.  I'll mash 'im to bloody shin
of beef, I will.  'E'll look like two pennorth of pieces after I've
swiped 'im with the bloody flat-iron.

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Here, make room'n let de kid sit down.  Press up
agen ole Daddy, dear.  Put his arm round you.  He's chatty, but
he'll keep you warm.

GINGER [double marking time]:  Stamp your feet on the ground--only
bleeding thing to do.  Strike up a song, someone, and less all
stamp our bleeding feet in time to it.

DADDY [waking and emerging]:  Wassat?  [Still half asleep, he lets
his head fall back, with mouth open and Adam's apple protruding
from his withered throat like the blade of a tomahawk.]

MRS BENDIGO:  There's women what if they'd stood what I'VE stood,
they'd ave put spirits of salts in 'is cup of bloody tea.

MR TALLBOYS [beating an imaginary drum and singing]:  Onward,
heathen so-oldiers--

MRS WAYNE:  Well, reely now!  If any of us'd ever of thought, in
the dear old days when we used to sit round our own Silkstone coal
fire, with the kettle on the hob and a nice dish of toasted
crumpets from the baker's over the way. . . .

[The chattering of her teeth silences her.]

CHARLIE:  No perishing church trap now, matie.  I'll give y'a bit
of smut--something as we can perishing dance to.  You listen t'me.

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Don't you get talkin' about crumpets, Missis.  Me
bloody belly's rubbin' agen me backbone already.

[Charlie draws himself up, clears his throat, and in an enormous
voice roars out a song entitled 'Rollicking Bill the Sailor'.  A
laugh that is partly a shudder bursts from the people on the bench.
They sing the song through again, with increasing volume of noise,
stamping and clapping in time.  Those sitting down, packed elbow to
elbow, sway grotesquely from side to side, working their feet as
though stamping on the pedals of a harmonium.  Even Mrs Wayne joins
in after a moment, laughing in spite of herself.  They are all
laughing, though with chattering teeth.  Mr Tallboys marches up and
down behind his vast swag belly, pretending to carry a banner or
crozier in front of him.  The night is now quite clear, and an icy
wind comes shuddering at intervals through the Square.  The
stamping and clapping rise to a kind of frenzy as the people feel
the deadly cold penetrate to their bones.  Then the policeman is
seen wandering into the Square from the eastern end, and the
singing ceases abruptly.]

CHARLIE:  There!  You can't say as a bit of music don't warm you
up.

MRS BENDIGO:  This bloody wind!  And I ain't even got any drawers
on, the bastard kicked me out in such a 'urry.

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Well, glory be to Jesus, 'twon't be long before dat
dere church in de Gray's Inn Road opens up for de winter.  Dey
gives you a roof over your head of a night, 't any rate.

THE POLICEMAN:  Now then, now THEN!  D'you think this is the time
of night to begin singing like a blooming bear garden?  I shall
have to send you back to your homes if you can't keep quiet.

SNOUTER [sotto voce]:  You ---- son of a ----!

GINGER:  Yes--they lets you kip on the bleeding stone floor with
three newspaper posters 'stead of blankets.  Might as well be in
the Square and 'ave done with it.  God, I wish I was in the
bleeding spike.

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Still, you gets a cup of Horlicks an' two slices.
I bin glad to kip dere often enough.

MR TALLBOYS [chanting]:  I was glad when they said unto me, We will
go into the house of the Lord! . . .

DOROTHY [starting up]:  Oh, this cold, this cold!  I don't know
whether it's worse when you're sitting down or when you're standing
up.  Oh, how can you all stand it?  Surely you don't have to do
this every night of your lives?

MRS WAYNE:  You mustn't think, dearie, as there isn't SOME of us
wasn't brought up respectable.

CHARLIE [singing]:  Cheer up, cully, you'll soon be dead!  Brrh!
Perishing Jesus!  Ain't my fish-hooks blue!  [Double marks time and
beats his arms against his sides.]

DOROTHY:  Oh, but how can you stand it?  How can you go on like
this, night after night, year after year?  It's not possible that
people can live so!  It's so absurd that one wouldn't believe it if
one didn't know it was true.  It's impossible!

SNOUTER:  ---- possible if you ask me.

MR TALLBOYS [stage curate-wise]:  With God, all things are possible.

[Dorothy sinks back on to the bench, her knees still being
unsteady.]

CHARLIE:  Well, it's jest on 'ar-parse one.  Either we got to get
moving, or else make a pyramid on that perishing bench.  Unless we
want to perishing turn up our toes.  'Oo's for a little
constitootional up to the Tower of London?

MRS MCELLIGOT:  'Twon't be me dat'll walk another step tonight.  Me
bloody legs've given out on me.

GINGER:  What-o for the pyramid!  This is a bit too bleeding nine-
day-old for me.  Less scrum into that bench--beg pardon, Ma!

DADDY [sleepily]:  Wassa game?  Can't a man get a bit of kip but
what you must come worriting 'in and shaking of 'im?

CHARLIE:  That's the stuff!  Shove in!  Shift yourself, Daddy, and
make room for my little sit-me-down.  Get one atop of each other.
That's right.  Never mind the chats.  Jam all together like
pilchards in a perishing tin.

MRS WAYNE:  Here!  I didn't ask you to sit on my lap, young man!

GINGER:  Sir on mine, then, mother--'sall the same.  What-o!  First
bit of stuff I've 'ad my arm round since Easter.

[They pile themselves in a monstrous shapeless clot, men and women
clinging indiscriminately together, like a bunch of toads at
spawning time.  There is a writhing movement as the heap settles
down, and a sour stench of clothes diffuses itself.  Only Mr
Tallboys remains marching up and down.]

MR TALLBOYS [declaiming]:  O ye nights and days, ye light and
darkness, ye lightnings and clouds, curse ye the Lord!

[Deafie, someone having sat on his diaphragm, utters a strange,
unreproducible sound.]

MRS BENDIGO:  Get off my bad leg, can't you?  What you think I am?
Bloody drawing-room sofa?

CHARLIE:  Don't ole Daddy stink when you get up agen 'im?

GINGER:  Bleeding Bank 'oliday for the chats this'll be.

DOROTHY:  Oh, God, God!

MR TALLBOYS [halting]:  Why call on God, you puling deathbed
penitent?  Stick to your guns and call on the Devil as I do.
Hail to thee, Lucifer, Prince of the Air!  [Singing to the tune
of 'Holy, holy holy']:  Incubi and Succubi, falling down before
Thee! . . .

MRS BENDIGO:  Oh, shut up, you blarsphemous old sod!  'E's too
bloody fat to feel the cold, that's what's wrong with 'im.

CHARLIE:  Nice soft be'ind you got, Ma.  Keep an eye out for the
perishing flattie, Ginger.

MR TALLBOYS:  Malecidite, omnia opera!  The Black Mass!  Why not?
Once a priest always a priest.  Hand me a chunk of toke and I will
work the miracle.  Sulphur candles, Lord's Prayer backwards,
crucifix upside down.  [To Dorothy]  If we had a black he-goat you
would come in useful.

[The animal heat of the piled bodies had already made itself felt.
A drowsiness is descending upon everyone.]

MRS WAYNE:  You mustn't think as I'm ACCUSTOMED to sitting on a
gentleman's knee, you know . . .

MRS MCELLIGOT [drowsily]:  It took my sacraments reg'lar till de
bloody priest wouldn't give me absolution along o' my Michael.  De
ole get, de ole getsie! . . .

MR TALLBOYS [striking an attitude]:  Per aquam sacratam quam nunc
spargo, signumque crucis quod nunc facio. . . .

GINGER:  'Oo's got a fill of 'ard-up?  I've smoked by last bleeding
fag-end.

MR TALLBOYS [as at the altar]:  Dearly beloved brethren we are
gathered together in the sight of God for the solemnization of
unholy blasphemy.  He has afflicted us with dirt and cold, with
hunger and solitude, with the pox and the itch, with the headlouse
and the crablouse.  Our food is damp crusts and slimy meat-scraps
handed out in packets from hotel doorways.  Our pleasure is stewed
tea and sawdust cakes bolted in reeking cellars, bar-rinsing sand
spittle of common ale, the embrace of toothless hags.  Our destiny
is the pauper's grave, twenty-feet deep in deal coffins, the kip-
house of underground.  It is very meet, right and our bounden duty
at all times and in all places to curse Him and revile Him.
Therefore with Demons and Archdemons [etc., etc., etc.].

MRS MCELLIGOT [drowsily]:  By holy Jesus, I'm half asleep right
now, only some b--'s lyin' across my legs and crushin' 'em.

MR TALLBOYS:  Amen.  Evil from us deliver, but temptation into not
us lead [etc., etc., etc.].

[As he reaches the first word of the prayer he tears the
consecrated bread across.  The blood runs out of it.  There is a
rolling sound, as of thunder, and the landscape changes.  Dorothy's
feet are very cold.  Monstrous winged shapes of Demons and
Archdemons are dimly visible, moving to and fro.  Something, beak
or claw, closes upon Dorothy's shoulder, reminding her that her
feet and hands are aching with cold.]

THE POLICEMAN [shaking Dorothy by the shoulder]:  Wake up, now,
wake up, wake up!  Haven't you got an overcoat?  You're as white as
death.  Don't you know better than to let yourself sprawl about in
the cold like that?

[Dorothy finds that she is stiff with cold.  The sky is now quite
clear, with gritty little stars twinkling like electric lamps
enormously remote.  The pyramid has unrolled itself.]

MRS MCELLIGOT:  De poor kid, she ain't used to roughin' it de way
us others are.

GINGER [beating his arms]:  Brr!  Woo!  'Taters in the bleeding
mould!

MRS WAYNE:  She's a lady born and bred.

THE POLICEMAN:  Is that so?--See here, Miss, you best come down to
the M.A.B. with me.  They'll give you a bed all right.  Anyone can
see with half an eye as you're a cut above these others here.

MRS BENDIGO:  Thank you, constable, THANK you!  'Ear that, girls?
'A cut above us,' 'e says.  Nice, ain't it?  [To the policeman]
Proper bloody Ascot swell yourself, ain't you?

DOROTHY:  No, no!  Leave me, I'd rather stay here.

THE POLICEMAN:  Well, please yourself.  You looked real bad just
now.  I'll be along later and take a look at you.  [Moves off
doubtfully.]

CHARLIE:  Wait'll the perisher's round the corner and then pile up
agen.  Only perishing way we'll keep warm.

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Come on, kid.  Get underneath an' let'm warm you.

SNOUTER:  Ten minutes to ---- two.  Can't last for ever, I s'pose.

MR TALLBOYS [chanting]:  I am poured out like water, and all my
bones are out of joint.  My heart also in the midst of my body is
like unto melting wax! . . .

[Once more the people pile themselves on the bench.  But the
temperature is now not many degrees above freezing-point, and the
wind is blowing more cuttingly.  The people wriggle their wind-
nipped faces into the heap like sucking pigs struggling for their
mother's teats.  One's interludes of sleep shrink to a few seconds,
and one's dreams grow more monstrous, troubling, and undreamlike.
There are times when the nine people are talking almost normally,
times when they can even laugh at their situation, and times when
they press themselves together in a kind of frenzy, with deep
groans of pain.  Mr Tallboys suddenly becomes exhausted and his
monologue degenerates into a stream of nonsense.  He drops his vast
bulk on top of the others, almost suffocating them.  The heap rolls
apart.  Some remain on the bench, some slide to the ground and
collapse against the parapet or against the others' knees.  The
policeman enters the Square and orders those on the ground to their
feet.  They get up, and collapse again the moment he is gone.
There is no sound from the ten people save of snores that are
partly groans.  Their heads nod like those of joined porcelain
Chinamen as they fall asleep and reawake as rhythmically as the
ticking of a clock.  Three strikes somewhere.  A voice yells like a
trumpet from the eastern end of the Square:  'Boys!  Up you get!
The noospapers is come!']

CHARLIE [starting from his sleep]:  The perishing papers!  C'm on,
Ginger!  Run like Hell!

[They run, or shamble, as fast as they can to the corner of the
Square, where three youths are distributing surplus posters given
away in charity by the morning newspapers.  Charlie and Ginger come
back with a thick wad of posters.  The five largest men now jam
themselves together on the bench, Deafie and the four women sitting
across their knees; then, with infinite difficulty (as it has to be
done from the inside), they wrap themselves in a monstrous cocoon
of paper, several sheets thick, tucking the loose ends into their
necks or breasts or between their shoulders and the back of the
bench.  Finally nothing is uncovered save their heads and the lower
part of their legs.  For their heads they fashion hoods of paper.
The paper constantly comes loose and lets in cold shafts of wind,
but it is now possible to sleep for as much as five minutes
consecutively.  At this time--between three and five in the
morning--it is customary with the police not to disturb the Square
sleepers.  A measure of warmth steals through everyone and extends
even to their feet.  There is some furtive fondling of the women
under cover of the paper.  Dorothy is too far gone to care.

By a quarter past four the paper is all crumpled and torn to
nothing, and it is far too cold to remain sitting down.  The people
get up, swear, find their legs somewhat rested, and begin to slouch
to and fro in couples, frequently halting from mere lassitude.
Every belly is now contorted with hunger.  Ginger's tin of
condensed milk is torn open and the contents devoured, everyone
dipping their fingers into it and licking them.  Those who have no
money at all leave the Square for the Green Park, where they will
be undisturbed till seven.  Those who can command even a halfpenny
make for Wilkins's cafe not far from the Charing Cross Road.  It is
known that the cafe will not open till five o'clock; nevertheless,
a crowd is waiting outside the door by twenty to five.]

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Got your halfpenny, dearie?  Dey won't let more'n
four of us in on one cup o'tea, de stingy ole gets!

MR TALLBOYS [singing]:  The roseate hu-ues of early da-awn--

GINGER:  God, that bit of sleep we 'ad under the newspapers done me
some good.  [Singing]  But I'm dan-cing with tears--in my eyes--

CHARLIE:  Oh, boys, boys!  Look through that perishing window, will
you?  Look at the 'eat steaming down the window pane!  Look at the
tea-urns jest on the boil, and them great piles of 'ot toast and
'am sandwiches, and them there sausages sizzling in the pan!  Don't
it make your belly turn perishing summersaults to see 'em?

DOROTHY:  I've got a penny.  I can't get a cup of tea for that,
can I?

SNOUTER:  ---- lot of sausages we'll get this morning with
fourpence between us.  'Alf a cup of tea and a ---- doughnut more
likely.  There's a breakfus' for you!

MRS MCELLIGOT:  You don't need buy a cup o' tea all to yourself.
I got a halfpenny an' so's Daddy, an' we'll put'm to your penny an'
have a cup between de t'ree of us.  He's got sores on his lip, but
Hell! who cares?  Drink near de handle an' dere's no harm done.

[A quarter to five strikes.]

MRS BENDIGO:  I'd bet a dollar my ole man's got a bit of 'addock to
'is breakfast.  I 'ope it bloody chokes 'im.

GINGER [singing]:  But I'm dan-cing with tears--in my eyes--

MR TALLBOYS [singing]:  Early in the morning my song shall rise to
Thee!

MRS MCELLIGOT:  You gets a bit o' kip in dis place, dat's one
comfort.  Dey lets you sleep wid your head on de table till seven
o'clock.  It's a bloody godsend to us Square Tobies.

CHARLIE [slavering like a dog]:  Sausages!  Perishing sausages!
Welsh rabbit!  'Ot dripping toast!  And a rump-steak two inches
thick with chips and a pint of Ole Burton!  Oh, perishing Jesus!

[He bounds forward, pushes his way through the crowd and rattles
the handle of the glass door.  The whole crowd of people, about
forty strong, surge forward and attempt to storm the door, which is
stoutly held within by Mr Wilkins, the proprietor of the cafe.  He
menaces them through the glass.  Some press their breasts and faces
against the window as though warming themselves.  With a whoop and
a rush Florry and four other girls, comparatively fresh from having
spent part of the night in bed, debouch from a neighbouring alley,
accompanied by a gang of youths in blue suits.  They hurl
themselves upon the rear of the crowd with such momentum that the
door is almost broken.  Mr Wilkins pulls it furiously open and
shoves the leaders back.  A fume of sausages, kippers, coffee, and
hot bread streams into the outer cold.]

YOUTHS VOICES FROM THE REAR:  Why can't he ---- open before five?
We're starving for our ---- tea!  Ram the ---- door in!  [etc.,
etc.]

MR WILKINS:  Get out!  Get out, the lot of you!  Or by God not one
of you comes in this morning!

GIRLS' VOICES FROM THE REAR:  Mis-ter Wil-kins!  Mis-ter Wil-kins!
BE a sport and let us in!  I'll give y'a kiss all free for nothing.
BE a sport now!  [etc., etc.]

MR WILKINS:  Get on out of it!  We don't open before five, and you
know it.  [Slams the door.]

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Oh, holy Jesus, if dis ain't de longest ten minutes
o' de whole bloody night!  Well, I'll give me poor ole legs a rest,
anyway.  [Squats on her heels coal-miner-fashion.  Many others do
the same.]

GINGER:  'Oo's got a 'alfpenny?  I'm ripe to go fifty-fifty on a
doughnut.

YOUTHS' VOICES [imitating military music, then singing]:

'----!' was all the band could play;
'----! ----'  And the same to you!

DOROTHY [to Mrs McElligot]:  Look at us all!  Just look at us!
What clothes!  What faces!

MRS BENDIGO:  You're no Greta Garbo yourself, if you don't mind my
mentioning it.

MRS WAYNE:  Well, now, the time DO seem to pass slowly when you're
waiting for a nice cup of tea, don't it now?

MR TALLBOYS [chanting]:  For our soul is brought low, even unto the
dust: our belly cleaveth unto the ground!

CHARLIE:  Kippers!  Perishing piles of 'em!  I can smell 'em
through the perishing glass.

GINGER [singing]:

But I'm dan-cing with tears--in my eyes--
'Cos the girl--in my arms--isn't you-o-ou!

[Much time passes.  Five strikes.  Intolerable ages seem to pass.
Then the door is suddenly wrenched open and the people stampede in
to fight for the corner seats.  Almost swooning in the hot air,
they fling themselves down and sprawl across the tables, drinking
in the heat and the smell of food through all their pores.]

MR WILKINS:  Now then, all!  You know the rules, I s'pose.  No
hokey-pokey this morning!  Sleep till seven if you like, but if I
see any man asleep after that, out he goes on his neck.  Get busy
with that tea, girls!

A DEAFENING CHORUS Of YELLS:  Two teas 'ere!  Large tea and a
doughnut between us four!  Kippers!  Mis-ter Wil-kins!  'Ow much
them sausages?  Two slices!  Mis-ter Wil-kins!  Got any fag papers?
Kipp-ers!  [etc., etc.]

MR WILKINS:  Shut up, shut up!  Stop that hollering or I don't
serve any of you.

MRS MCELLIGOT:  D'you feel de blood runnin' back into your toes,
dearie?

MRS WAYNE:  He do speak rough to you, don't he?  Not what I'd call
a reely gentlemanly kind of man.

SNOUTER:  This is ---- starvation Corner, this is.  Cripes!
Couldn't I do a couple of them sausages!

THE TARTS [in chorus]:  Kippers 'ere!  'Urry up with them kippers!
Mis-ter Wilkins!  Kippers all round!  AND a doughnut!

CHARLIE:  Not 'alf!  Got to fill up on the smell of 'em this
morning.  Sooner be 'ere than on the perishing Square, ALL the
same.

GINGER:  'Ere, Deafie!  You've 'ad your 'alf!  Gimme me that
bleeding cup.

MR TALLBOYS [chanting]:  Then was our mouth filled with laughter,
and our tongue with joy! . . .

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Begod I'm half asleep already.  It's de heat o' de
room as does it.

MR WILKINS:  Stop that singing there!  You know the rules.

THE TARTS [in chorus]:  Kipp-ers!

SNOUTER:  ---- doughnuts!  Cold prog!  It turns my belly sick.

DADDY:  Even the tea they give you ain't no more than water with a
bit of dust in it.  [Belches.]

CHARLIE:  Bes' thing--'ave a bit of shut-eye and forget about it.
Dream about perishing cut off the joint and two veg.  Less get our
'eads on the table and pack up comfortable.

MRS MCELLIGOT:  Lean up agen me shoulder, dearie.  I've got more
flesh on me bones'n what you have.

GINGER:  I'd give a tanner for a bleeding fag, if I 'ad a bleeding
tanner.

CHARLIE:  Pack up.  Get your 'ead agenst mine, Snouter.  That's
right.  Jesus, won't I perishing sleep!

[A dish of smoking kippers is borne past to the tarts' table.]

SNOUTER [drowsily]:  More ---- kippers.  Wonder 'ow many times
she's bin on 'er back to pay for that lot.

MRS MCELLIGOT [half-asleep]:  'Twas a pity, 'twas a real pity, when
Michael went off on his jack an' left me wid de bloody baby an'
all. . . .

MRS BENDIGO [furiously, following the dish of kippers with accusing
finger]:  Look at that, girls!  Look at that!  Kippers!  Don't it
make you bloody wild?  We don't get kippers for breakfast, do we,
girls?  Bloody tarts swallering down kippers as fast as they can
turn 'em out of the pan, and us 'ere with a cup of tea between four
of us and lucky to get that!  Kippers!

MR TALLBOYS [stage curate-wise]:  The wages of sin is kippers.

GINGER:  Don't breathe in my face, Deafie.  I can't bleeding stand
it.

CHARLIE [in his sleep]:  Charles-Wisdom-drunk-and-incapable-drunk?-
yes-six-shillings-move-on-NEXT!

DOROTHY [on Mrs McElligot's bosom]:  Oh, joy, joy!

[They are asleep.]



2


And so it goes on.

Dorothy endured this life for ten days--to be exact, nine days and
ten nights.  It was hard to see what else she could do.  Her
father, seemingly, had abandoned her altogether, and though she had
friends in London who would readily have helped her, she did not
feel that she could face them after what had happened, or what was
supposed to have happened.  And she dared not apply to organized
charity because it would almost certainly lead to the discovery of
her name, and hence, perhaps, to a fresh hullabaloo about the
'Rector's Daughter'.

So she stayed in London, and became one of that curious tribe, rare
but never quite extinct--the tribe of women who are penniless and
homeless, but who make such desperate efforts to hide it that they
very nearly succeed; women who wash their faces at drinking
fountains in the cold of the dawn, and carefully uncrumple their
clothes after sleepless nights, and carry themselves with an air
of reserve and decency, so that only their faces, pale beneath
sunburn, tell you for certain that they are destitute.  It was not
in her to become a hardened beggar like most of the people about
her.  Her first twenty-four hours on the Square she spent without
any food whatever, except for the cup of tea that she had had
overnight and a third of a cup more that she had had at Wilkins's
cafe in the morning.  But in the evening, made desperate by hunger
and the others' example, she walked up to a strange woman, mastered
her voice with an effort, and said:  'Please, Madam, could you give
me twopence?  I have had nothing to eat since yesterday.'  The
woman stared, but she opened her purse and gave Dorothy threepence.
Dorothy did not know it, but her educated accent, which had made it
impossible to get work as a servant, was an invaluable asset to her
as a beggar.

After that she found that it was really very easy to beg the daily
shilling or so that was needed to keep her alive.  And yet she
never begged--it seemed to her that actually she could not do it--
except when hunger was past bearing or when she had got to lay in
the precious penny that was the passport to Wilkins's cafe in the
morning.  With Nobby, on the way to the hopfields, she had begged
without fear or scruple.  But it had been different then; she had
not known what she was doing.  Now, it was only under the spur of
actual hunger that she could screw her courage to the point, and
ask for a few coppers from some woman whose face looked friendly.
It was always women that she begged from, of course.  She did once
try begging from a man--but only once.

For the rest, she grew used to the life that she was leading--used
to the enormous sleepless nights, the cold, the dirt, the boredom,
and the horrible communism of the Square.  After a day or two she
had ceased to feel even a flicker of surprise at her situation.
She had come, like everyone about her, to accept this monstrous
existence almost as though it were normal.  The dazed, witless
feeling that she had known on the way to the hopfields had come
back upon her more strongly than before.  It is the common effect
of sleeplessness and still more of exposure.  To live continuously
in the open air, never going under a roof for more than an hour or
two, blurs your perceptions like a strong light glaring in your
eyes or a noise drumming in your ears.  You act and plan and
suffer, and yet all the while it is as though everything were a
little out of focus, a little unreal.  The world, inner and outer,
grows dimmer till it reaches almost the vagueness of a dream.

Meanwhile, the police were getting to know her by sight.  On the
Square people are perpetually coming and going, more or less
unnoticed.  They arrive from nowhere with their drums and their
bundles, camp for a few days and nights, and then disappear as
mysteriously as they come.  If you stay for more than a week or
thereabouts, the police will mark you down as an habitual beggar,
and they will arrest you sooner or later.  It is impossible for
them to enforce the begging laws at all regularly, but from time to
time they make a sudden raid and capture two or three of the people
they have had their eye on.  And so it happened in Dorothy's case.

One evening she was 'knocked off', in company with Mrs McElligot
and another woman whose name she did not know.  They had been
careless and begged off a nasty old lady with a face like a horse,
who had promptly walked up to the nearest policeman and given them
in charge.

Dorothy did not mind very much.  Everything was dreamlike now--the
face of the nasty old lady, eagerly accusing them, and the walk to
the station with a young policeman's gentle, almost deferential
hand on her arm; and then the white-tiled cell, with the fatherly
sergeant handing her a cup of tea through the grille and telling
her that the magistrate wouldn't be too hard on her if she pleaded
guilty.  In the cell next door Mrs McElligot stormed at the
sergeant, called him a bloody get, and then spent half the night in
bewailing her fate.  But Dorothy had no feeling save vague relief
at being in so clean and warm a place.  She crept immediately on to
the plank bed that was fixed like a shelf to the wall, too tired
even to pull the blankets about her, and slept for ten hours
without stirring.  It was only on the following morning that she
began to grasp the reality of her situation, as the Black Maria
rolled briskly up to Old Street Police Court, to the tune of
'Adeste fideles' shouted by five drunks inside.




CHAPTER 4



1


Dorothy had wronged her father in supposing that he was willing to
let her starve to death in the street.  He had, as a matter of
fact, made efforts to get in touch with her, though in a roundabout
and not very helpful way.

His first emotion on learning of Dorothy's disappearance had been
rage pure and simple.  At about eight in the morning, when he was
beginning to wonder what had become of his shaving water, Ellen had
come into his bedroom and announced in a vaguely panic-stricken
tone:

'Please, Sir, Miss Dorothy ain't in the house, Sir.  I can't find
her nowhere!'

'What?' said the Rector.

'She ain't in the house, Sir!  And her bed don't look as if it
hadn't been slept in, neither.  It's my belief as she's GORN, Sir!'

'Gone!' exclaimed the Rector, partly sitting up in bed.  'What do
you mean--GONE?'

'Well, Sir, I believe she's run away from 'ome, Sir!'

'Run away from home!  At THIS hour of the morning?  And what about
my breakfast, pray?'

By the time the Rector got downstairs--unshaven, no hot water
having appeared--Ellen had gone down into the town to make
fruitless inquiries for Dorothy.  An hour passed, and she did not
return.  Whereupon there occurred a frightful, unprecedented thing--
a thing never to be forgotten this side of the grave; the Rector
was obliged to prepare his own breakfast--yes, actually to mess
about with a vulgar black kettle and rashers of Danish bacon--with
his own sacerdotal hands.

After that, of course, his heart was hardened against Dorothy for
ever.  For the rest of the day he was far too busy raging over
unpunctual meals to ask himself WHY she had disappeared and whether
any harm had befallen her.  The point was that the confounded girl
(he said several times 'confounded girl', and came near to saying
something stronger) HAD disappeared, and had upset the whole
household by doing so.  Next day, however, the question became more
urgent, because Mrs Semprill was now publishing the story of the
elopement far and wide.  Of course, the Rector denied it violently,
but in his heart he had a sneaking suspicion that it might be true.
It was the kind of thing, he now decided, that Dorothy WOULD do.  A
girl who would suddenly walk out of the house without even taking
thought for her father's breakfast was capable of anything.

Two days later the newspapers got hold of the story, and a nosy
young reporter came down to Knype Hill and began asking questions.
The Rector made matters worse by angrily refusing to interview the
reporter, so that Mrs Semprill's version was the only one that got
into print.  For about a week, until the papers got tired of
Dorothy's case and dropped her in favour of a plesiosaurus that had
been seen at the mouth of the Thames, the Rector enjoyed a horrible
notoriety.  He could hardly open a newspaper without seeing some
flaming headline about 'Rector's Daughter.  Further Revelations',
or 'Rector's Daughter.  Is she in Vienna?  Reported seen in Low-
class Cabaret'.  Finally there came an article in the Sunday
Spyhole, which began, 'Down in a Suffolk Rectory a broken old man
sits staring at the wall', and which was so absolutely unbearable
that the Rector consulted his solicitor about an action for libel.
However, the solicitor was against it; it might lead to a verdict,
he said, but it would certainly lead to further publicity.  So the
Rector did nothing, and his anger against Dorothy, who had brought
this disgrace upon him, hardened beyond possibility of forgiveness.

After this there came three letters from Dorothy, explaining what
had happened.  Of course the Rector never really believed that
Dorothy had lost her memory.  It was too thin a story altogether.
He believed that she either HAD eloped with Mr Warburton, or had
gone off on some similar escapade and had landed herself penniless
in Kent; at any rate--this he had settled once and for all, and no
argument would ever move him from it--whatever had happened to her
was entirely her own fault.  The first letter he wrote was not to
Dorothy herself but to his cousin Tom, the baronet.  For a man of
the Rector's upbringing it was second nature, in any serious
trouble, to turn to a rich relative for help.  He had not exchanged
a word with his cousin for the last fifteen years, since they had
quarrelled over a little matter of a borrowed fifty pounds; still,
he wrote fairly confidently, asking Sir Thomas to get in touch with
Dorothy if it could be done, and to find her some kind of job in
London.  For of course, after what had happened, there could be no
question of letting her come back to Knype Hill.

Shortly after this there came two despairing letters from Dorothy,
telling him that she was in danger of starvation and imploring him
to send her some money.  The Rector was disturbed.  It occurred to
him--it was the first time in his life that he had seriously
considered such a thing--that it IS possible to starve if you have
no money.  So, after thinking it over for the best part of a week,
he sold out ten pounds' worth of shares and sent a cheque for ten
pounds to his cousin, to be kept for Dorothy till she appeared.  At
the same time he sent a cold letter to Dorothy herself, telling her
that she had better apply to Sir Thomas Hare.  But several more
days passed before this letter was posted, because the Rector had
qualms about addressing a letter to 'Ellen Millborough'--he dimly
imagined that it was against the law to use false names--and, of
course, he had delayed far too long.  Dorothy was already in the
streets when the letter reached 'Mary's'.

Sir Thomas Hare was a widower, a good-hearted, chuckle-headed man
of about sixty-five, with an obtuse rosy face and curling
moustaches.  He dressed by preference in checked overcoats and
curly brimmed bowler hats that were at once dashingly smart and
four decades out of date.  At a first glance he gave the impression
of having carefully disguised himself as a cavalry major of the
'nineties, so that you could hardly look at him without thinking of
devilled bones with a b and s, and the tinkle of hansom bells, and
the Pink 'Un in its great 'Pitcher' days, and Lottie Collins and
'Tarara-BOOM-deay'.  But his chief characteristic was an abysmal
mental vagueness.  He was one of those people who say 'Don't you
know?' and 'What!  What!' and lose themselves in the middle of their
sentences.  When he was puzzled or in difficulties, his moustaches
seemed to bristle forward, giving him the appearance of a well-
meaning but exceptionally brainless prawn.

So far as his own inclinations went Sir Thomas was not in the least
anxious to help his cousins, for Dorothy herself he had never seen,
and the Rector he looked on as a cadging poor relation of the worst
possible type.  But the fact was that he had had just about as much
of this 'Rector's Daughter' business as he could stand.  The
accursed chance that Dorothy's surname was the same as his own had
made his life a misery for the past fortnight, and he foresaw
further and worse scandals if she were left at large any longer.
So, just before leaving London for the pheasant shooting, he sent
for his butler, who was also his confidant and intellectual guide,
and held a council of war.

'Look here, Blyth, dammit,' said Sir Thomas prawnishly (Blyth was
the butler's name), 'I suppose you've seen all this damn' stuff in
the newspapers, hey?  This "Rector's Daughter" stuff?  About this
damned niece of mine.'

Blyth was a small sharp-featured man with a voice that never rose
above a whisper.  It was as nearly silent as a voice can be while
still remaining a voice.  Only by watching his lips as well as
listening closely could you catch the whole of what he said.  In
this case his lips signalled something to the effect that Dorothy
was Sir Thomas's cousin, not his niece.

'What, my cousin, is she?' said Sir Thomas.  'So she is, by Jove!
Well, look here, Blyth, what I mean to say--it's about time we got
hold of the damn' girl and locked her up somewhere.  See what I
mean?  Get hold of her before there's any MORE trouble.  She's
knocking about somewhere in London, I believe.  What's the best way
of getting on her track?  Police?  Private detectives and all that?
D'you think we could manage it?'

Blyth's lips registered disapproval.  It would, he seemed to be
saying, be possible to trace Dorothy without calling in the police
and having a lot of disagreeable publicity.

'Good man!' said Sir Thomas.  'Get to it, then.  Never mind what it
costs.  I'd give fifty quid not to have that "Rector's Daughter"
business over again.  And for God's sake, Blyth,' he added
confidentially, 'once you've got hold of the damn' girl, don't let
her out of your sight.  Bring her back to the house and damn' well
keep her here.  See what I mean?  Keep her under lock and key till
I get back.  Or else God knows what she'll be up to next.'

Sir Thomas, of course, had never seen Dorothy, and it was therefore
excusable that he should have formed his conception of her from the
newspaper reports.

It took Blyth about a week to track Dorothy down.  On the morning
after she came out of the police-court cells (they had fined her
six shillings, and, in default of payment, detained her for twelve
hours: Mrs McElligot, as an old offender, got seven days), Blyth
came up to her, lifted his bowler hat a quarter of an inch from his
head, and inquired noiselessly whether she were not Miss Dorothy
Hare.  At the second attempt Dorothy understood what he was saying,
and admitted that she WAS Miss Dorothy Hare; whereupon Blyth
explained that he was sent by her cousin, who was anxious to help
her, and that she was to come home with him immediately.

Dorothy followed him without more words said.  It seemed queer that
her cousin should take this sudden interest in her, but it was no
queerer than the other things that had been happening lately.  They
took the bus to Hyde Park Corner, Blyth paying the fares, and then
walked to a large, expensive-looking house with shuttered windows,
on the borderland between Knightsbridge and Mayfair.  They went
down some steps, and Blyth produced a key and they went in.  So,
after an absence of something over six weeks, Dorothy returned to
respectable society, by the area door.

She spent three days in the empty house before her cousin came
home.  It was a queer, lonely time.  There were several servants in
the house, but she saw nobody except Blyth, who brought her her
meals and talked to her, noiselessly, with a mixture of deference
and disapproval.  He could not quite make up his mind whether she
was a young lady of family or a rescued Magdalen, and so treated
her as something between the two.  The house had that hushed,
corpselike air peculiar to houses whose master is away, so that you
instinctively went about on tiptoe and kept the blinds over the
windows.  Dorothy did not even dare to enter any of the main rooms.
She spent all the daytime lurking in a dusty, forlorn room at the
top of the house which was a sort of museum of bric-a-brac dating
from 1880 onwards.  Lady Hare, dead these five years, had been an
industrious collector of rubbish, and most of it had been stowed
away in this room when she died.  It was a doubtful point whether
the queerest object in the room was a yellowed photograph of
Dorothy's father, aged eighteen but with respectable side-whiskers,
standing self-consciously beside an 'ordinary' bicycle--this was in
1888; or whether it was a little sandalwood box labelled 'Piece of
Bread touched by Cecil Rhodes at the City and South Africa Banquet,
June 1897'.  The sole books in the room were some grisly school
prizes that had been won by Sir Thomas's children--he had three,
the youngest being the same age as Dorothy.

It was obvious that the servants had orders not to let her go out
of doors.  However, her father's cheque for ten pounds had arrived,
and with some difficulty she induced Blyth to get it cashed, and,
on the third day, went out and bought herself some clothes.  She
bought herself a ready-made tweed coat and skirt and a jersey to go
with them, a hat, and a very cheap frock of artificial printed
silk; also a pair of passable brown shoes, three pairs of lisle
stockings, a nasty, cheap little handbag, and a pair of grey cotton
gloves that would pass for suede at a little distance.  That came
to eight pounds ten, and she dared not spend more.  As for
underclothes, nightdresses, and handkerchiefs, they would have to
wait.  After all, it is the clothes that show that matter.

Sir Thomas arrived on the following day, and never really got over
the surprise that Dorothy's appearance gave him.  He had been
expecting to see some rouged and powdered siren who would plague
him with temptations to which alas! he was no longer capable of
succumbing; and this countrified, spinsterish girl upset all his
calculations.  Certain vague ideas that had been floating about his
mind, of finding her a job as a manicurist or perhaps as a private
secretary to a bookie, floated out of it again.  From time to time
Dorothy caught him studying her with a puzzled, prawnish eye,
obviously wondering how on earth such a girl could ever have
figured in an elopement.  It was very little use, of course,
telling him that she had NOT eloped.  She had given him her version
of the story, and he had accepted it with a chivalrous 'Of course,
m'dear, of course!' and thereafter, in every other sentence,
betrayed the fact that he disbelieved her.

So for a couple of days nothing definite was done.  Dorothy
continued her solitary life in the room upstairs, and Sir Thomas
went to his club for most of his meals, and in the evening there
were discussions of the most unutterable vagueness.  Sir Thomas was
genuinely anxious to find Dorothy a job, but he had great
difficulty in remembering what he was talking about for more than a
few minutes at a time.  'Well, m'dear,' he would start off, 'you'll
understand, of course, that I'm very keen to do what I can for you.
Naturally, being your uncle and all that--what?  What's that?  Not
your uncle?  No, I suppose I'm not, by Jove!  Cousin--that's it;
cousin.  Well, now, m'dear, being your cousin--now, what was I
saying?'  Then, when Dorothy had guided him back to the subject, he
would throw out some such suggestion as, 'Well, now, for instance,
m'dear, how would you like to be companion to an old lady?  Some
dear old girl, don't you know--black mittens and rheumatoid
arthritis.  Die and leave you ten thousand quid and care of the
parrot.  What, what?' which did not get them very much further.
Dorothy repeated a number of times that she would rather be a
housemaid or a parlourmaid, but Sir Thomas would not hear of it.
The very idea awakened in him a class-instinct which he was usually
too vague-minded to remember.  'What!' he would say.  'A dashed
skivvy?  Girl of your upbringing?  No, m'dear--no, no!  Can't do
THAT kind of thing, dash it!'

But in the end everything was arranged, and with surprising ease;
not by Sir Thomas, who was incapable of arranging anything, but by
his solicitor, whom he had suddenly thought of consulting.  And the
solicitor, without even seeing Dorothy, was able to suggest a job
for her.  She could, he said, almost certainly find a job as a
schoolmistress.  Of all jobs, that was the easiest to get.

Sir Thomas came home very pleased with this suggestion, which
struck him as highly suitable.  (Privately, he thought that Dorothy
had just the kind of face that a schoolmistress ought to have.)
But Dorothy was momentarily aghast when she heard of it.

'A schoolmistress!' she said.  'But I couldn't possibly!  I'm sure
no school would give me a job.  There isn't a single subject I can
teach.'

'What?  What's that?  Can't teach?  Oh, dash it!  Of course you
can!  Where's the difficulty?'

'But I don't know enough!  I've never taught anybody anything,
except cooking to the Girl Guides.  You have to be properly
qualified to be a teacher.'

'Oh, nonsense!  Teaching's the easiest job in the world.  Good
thick ruler--rap 'em over the knuckles.  They'll be glad enough
to get hold of a decently brought up young woman to teach the
youngsters their ABC.  That's the line for you, m'dear--
schoolmistress.  You're just cut out for it.'

And sure enough, a schoolmistress Dorothy became.  The invisible
solicitor had made all the arrangements in less than three days.
It appeared that a certain Mrs Creevy, who kept a girls' day school
in the suburb of Southbridge, was in need of an assistant, and was
quite willing to give Dorothy the job.  How it had all been settled
so quickly, and what kind of school it could be that would take on
a total stranger, and unqualified at that, in the middle of the
term, Dorothy could hardly imagine.  She did not know, of course,
that a bribe of five pounds, miscalled a premium, had changed
hands.

So, just ten days after her arrest for begging, Dorothy set out for
Ringwood House Academy, Brough Road, Southbridge, with a small
trunk decently full of clothes and four pounds ten in her purse--
for Sir Thomas had made her a present of ten pounds.  When she
thought of the ease with which this job had been found for her, and
then of the miserable struggles of three weeks ago, the contrast
amazed her.  It brought home to her, as never before, the
mysterious power of money.  In fact, it reminded her of a favourite
saying of Mr Warburton's, that if you took 1 Corinthians, chapter
thirteen, and in every verse wrote 'money' instead of 'charity',
the chapter had ten times as much meaning as before.



2


Southbridge was a repellent suburb ten or a dozen miles from
London.  Brough Road lay somewhere at the heart of it, amid
labyrinths of meanly decent streets, all so indistinguishably
alike, with their ranks of semi-detached houses, their privet and
laurel hedges and plots of ailing shrubs at the crossroads, that
you could lose yourself there almost as easily as in a Brazilian
forest.  Not only the houses themselves, but even their names were
the same over and over again.  Reading the names on the gates as
you came up Brough Road, you were conscious of being haunted by
some half-remembered passage of poetry; and when you paused to
identify it, you realized that it was the first two lines of
Lycidas.

Ringwood House was a dark-looking, semi-detached house of yellow
brick, three storeys high, and its lower windows were hidden from
the road by ragged and dusty laurels.  Above the laurels, on the
front of the house, was a board inscribed in faded gold letters:


RINGWOOD HOUSE ACADEMY FOR GIRLS

Ages 5 to 18

Music and Dancing Taught

Apply within for Prospectus


Edge to edge with this board, on the other half of the house, was
another board which read:


RUSHINGTON GRANGE HIGH SCHOOL FOR BOYS

Ages 6 to 16

Book-keeping and Commercial Arithmetic a Speciality

Apply within for Prospectus


The district pullulated with small private schools; there were four
of them in Brough Road alone.  Mrs Creevy, the Principal of
Ringwood House, and Mr Boulger, the Principal of Rushington Grange,
were in a state of warfare, though their interests in no way
clashed with one another.  Nobody knew what the feud was about, not
even Mrs Creevy or Mr Boulger themselves; it was a feud that they
had inherited from earlier proprietors of the two schools.  In the
mornings after breakfast they would stalk up and down their
respective back gardens, beside the very low wall that separated
them, pretending not to see one another and grinning with hatred.

Dorothy's heart sank at the sight of Ringwood House.  She had not
been expecting anything very magnificent or attractive, but she had
expected something a little better than this mean, gloomy house,
not one of whose windows was lighted, though it was after 8 o'clock
in the evening.  She knocked at the door, and it was opened by a
woman, tall and gaunt-looking in the dark hallway, whom Dorothy
took for a servant, but who was actually Mrs Creevy herself.
Without a word, except to inquire Dorothy's name, the woman led the
way up some dark stairs to a twilit, fireless drawing-room, where
she turned up a pinpoint of gas, revealing a black piano, stuffed
horsehair chairs, and a few yellowed, ghostly photos on the walls.

Mrs Creevy was a woman somewhere in her forties, lean, hard, and
angular, with abrupt decided movements that indicated a strong will
and probably a vicious temper.  Though she was not in the least
dirty or untidy there was something discoloured about her whole
appearance, as though she lived all her life in a bad light; and
the expression of her mouth, sullen and ill-shaped with the lower
lip turned down, recalled that of a toad.  She spoke in a sharp,
commanding voice, with a bad accent and occasional vulgar turns of
speech.  You could tell her at a glance for a person who knew
exactly what she wanted, and would grasp it as ruthlessly as any
machine; not a bully exactly--you could somehow infer from her
appearance that she would not take enough interest in you to want
to bully you--but a person who would make use of you and then throw
you aside with no more compunction than if you had been a worn-out
scrubbing-brush.

Mrs Creevy did not waste any words on greetings.  She motioned
Dorothy to a chair, with the air rather of commanding than of
inviting her to sir down, and then sat down herself, with her hands
clasped on her skinny forearms.

'I hope you and me are going to get on well together, Miss
Millborough,' she began in her penetrating, subhectoring voice.
(On the advice of Sir Thomas's everwise solicitor, Dorothy had
stuck to the name of Ellen Millborough.)  'And I hope I'm not going
to have the same nasty business with you as I had with my last two
assistants.  You say you haven't had an experience of teaching
before this?'

'Not in a school,' said Dorothy--there had been a tarradiddle in
her letter of introduction, to the effect that she had had
experience of 'private teaching'.

Mrs Creevy looked Dorothy over as though wondering whether to
induct her into the inner secrets of school-teaching, and then
appeared to decide against it.

'Well, we shall see,' she said.  'I must say,' she added
complainingly, 'it's not easy to get hold of good hardworking
assistants nowadays.  You give them good wages and good treatment,
and you get no thanks for it.  The last one I had--the one I've
just had to get rid of--Miss Strong, wasn't so bad so far as the
teaching part went; in fact, she was a B.A., and I don't know what
you could have better than a B.A., unless it's an M.A.  You don't
happen to be a B.A. or an M.A., do you, Miss Millborough?'

'No, I'm afraid not,' said Dorothy.

'Well, that's a pity.  It looks so much better on the prospectus if
you've got a few letters after your name.  Well!  Perhaps it
doesn't matter.  I don't suppose many of OUR parents'd know what
B.A.  stands for; and they aren't so keen on showing their
ignorance.  I suppose you can talk French, of course?'

'Well--I've learnt French.'

'Oh, that's all right, then.  Just so as we can put it on the
prospectus.  Well, now, to come back to what I was saying, Miss
Strong was all right as a teacher, but she didn't come up to my
ideas on what I call the MORAL SIDE.  We're very strong on the
moral side at Ringwood House.  It's what counts most with the
parents, you'll find.  And the one before Miss Strong, Miss Brewer--
well, she had what I call a weak nature.  You don't get on with
girls if you've got a weak nature.  The end of it all was that one
morning one little girl crept up to the desk with a box of matches
and set fire to Miss Brewer's skirt.  Of course I wasn't going to
keep her after that.  In fact I had her out of the house the same
afternoon--and I didn't give her any refs either, I can tell you!'

'You mean you expelled the girl who did it?' said Dorothy,
mystified.

'What?  The GIRL?  Not likely!  You don't suppose I'd go and turn
fees away from my door, do you?  I mean I got rid of Miss Brewer,
not the GIRL.  It's no good having teachers who let the girls get
saucy with them.  We've got twenty-one in the class just at
present, and you'll find they need a strong hand to keep them down.'

'You don't teach yourself?' said Dorothy.

'Oh dear, no!' said Mrs Creevy almost contemptuously.  'I've got a
lot too much on my hands to waste my time TEACHING.  There's the
house to look after, and seven of the children stay to dinner--I've
only a daily woman at present.  Besides, it takes me all my time
getting the fees out of the parents.  After all, the fees ARE what
matter, aren't they?'

'Yes.  I suppose so,' said Dorothy.

'Well, we'd better settle about your wages,' continued Mrs Creevy.
'In term time I'll give you your board and lodging and ten
shillings a week; in the holidays it'll just be your board and
lodging.  You can have the use of the copper in the kitchen for
your laundering, and I light the geyser for hot baths every
Saturday night; or at least MOST Saturday nights.  You can't have
the use of this room we're in now, because it's my reception-room,
and I don't want you to go wasting the gas in your bedroom.  But
you can have the use of the morning-room whenever you want it.'

'Thank you,' said Dorothy.

'Well, I should think that'll be about all.  I expect you're
feeling ready for bed.  You'll have had your supper long ago, of
course?'

This was clearly intended to mean that Dorothy was not going to get
any food tonight, so she answered Yes, untruthfully, and the
conversation was at an end.  That was always Mrs Creevy's way--she
never kept you talking an instant longer than was necessary.  Her
conversation was so very definite, so exactly to the point, that it
was not really conversation at all.  Rather, it was the skeleton of
conversation; like the dialogue in a badly written novel where
everyone talks a little too much in character.  But indeed, in the
proper sense of the word she did not TALK; she merely said, in her
brief shrewish way, whatever it was necessary to say, and then got
rid of you as promptly as possible.  She now showed Dorothy along
the passage to her bedroom, and lighted a gas-jet no bigger than an
acorn, revealing a gaunt bedroom with a narrow white-quilted bed, a
rickety wardrobe, one chair and a wash-hand-stand with a frigid
white china basin and ewer.  It was very like the bedrooms in
seaside lodging houses, but it lacked the one thing that gives such
rooms their air of homeliness and decency--the text over the bed.

'This is your room,' Mrs Creevy said; 'and I just hope you'll keep
it a bit tidier than what Miss Strong used to.  And don't go
burning the gas half the night, please, because I can tell what
time you turn it off by the crack under the door.'

With this parting salutation she left Dorothy to herself.  The room
was dismally cold; indeed, the whole house had a damp, chilly
feeling, as though fires were rarely lighted in it.  Dorothy got
into bed as quickly as possible, feeling bed to be the warmest
place.  On top of the wardrobe, when she was putting her clothes
away, she found a cardboard box containing no less than nine empty
whisky bottles--relics, presumably, of Miss Strong's weakness on
the MORAL SIDE.

At eight in the morning Dorothy went downstairs and found Mrs
Creevy already at breakfast in what she called the 'morning-room'.
This was a smallish room adjoining the kitchen, and it had started
life as the scullery; but Mrs Creevy had converted it into the
'morning-room' by the simple process of removing the sink and
copper into the kitchen.  The breakfast table, covered with a cloth
of harsh texture, was very large and forbiddingly bare.  Up at Mrs
Creevy's end were a tray with a very small teapot and two cups, a
plate on which were two leathery fried eggs, and a dish of
marmalade; in the middle, just within Dorothy's reach if she
stretched, was a plate of bread and butter; and beside her plate--
as though it were the only thing she could be trusted with--a cruet
stand with some dried-up, clotted stuff inside the bottles.

'Good morning, Miss Millborough,' said Mrs Creevy.  'It doesn't
matter this morning, as this is the first day, but just remember
another time that I want you down here in time to help me get
breakfast ready.'

'I'm so sorry,' said Dorothy.

'I hope you're fond of fried eggs for your breakfast?' went on Mrs
Creevy.

Dorothy hastened to assure her that she was very fond of fried
eggs.

'Well, that's a good thing, because you'll always have to have the
same as what I have.  So I hope you're not going to be what I call
DAINTY about your food.  I always think,' she added, picking up her
knife and fork, 'that a fried egg tastes a lot better if you cut it
well up before you eat it.'

She sliced the two eggs into thin strips, and then served them in
such a way that Dorothy received about two-thirds of an egg.  With
some difficulty Dorothy spun out her fraction of egg so as to make
half a dozen mouthfuls of it, and then, when she had taken a slice
of bread and butter, she could not help glancing hopefully in the
direction of the dish of marmalade.  But Mrs Creevy was sitting
with her lean left arm--not exactly ROUND the marmalade, but in a
protective position on its left flank, as though she suspected that
Dorothy was going to make an attack upon it.  Dorothy's nerve
failed her, and she had no marmalade that morning--nor, indeed,
for many mornings to come.

Mrs Creevy did not speak again during breakfast, but presently the
sound of feet on the gravel outside, and of squeaky voices in the
schoolroom, announced that the girls were beginning to arrive.
They came in by a side-door that was left open for them.  Mrs
Creevy got up from the table and banged the breakfast things
together on the tray.  She was one of those women who can never
move anything without banging it about; she was as full of thumps
and raps as a poltergeist.  Dorothy carried the tray into the
kitchen, and when she returned Mrs Creevy produced a penny notebook
from a drawer in the dresser and laid it open on the table.

'Just take a look at this,' she said.  'Here's a list of the girls'
names that I've got ready for you.  I shall want you to know the
whole lot of them by this evening.'  She wetted her thumb and
turned over three pages:  'Now, do you see these three lists here?'

'Yes,' said Dorothy.

'Well, you'll just have to learn those three lists by heart, and
make sure you know what girls are on which.  Because I don't want
you to go thinking that all the girls are to be treated alike.
They aren't--not by a long way, they aren't.  Different girls,
different treatment--that's my system.  Now, do you see this lot on
the first page?'

'Yes,' said Dorothy again.

'Well, the parents of that lot are what I call the good payers.
You know what I mean by that?  They're the ones that pay cash on
the nail and no jibbing at an extra half-guinea or so now and
again.  You're not to smack any of that lot, not on ANY account.
This lot over here are the MEDIUM payers.  Their parents do pay up
sooner or later, but you don't get the money out of them without
you worry them for it night and day.  You can smack that lot if
they get saucy, but don't go and leave a mark their parents can
see.  If you'll take MY advice, the best thing with children is to
twist their ears.  Have you ever tried that?'

'No,' said Dorothy.

'Well, I find it answers better than anything.  It doesn't leave a
mark, and the children can't bear it.  Now these three over here
are the BAD payers.  Their fathers are two terms behind already,
and I'm thinking of a solicitor's letter.  I don't care WHAT you do
to that lot--well, short of a police-court case, naturally.  Now,
shall I take you in and start you with the girls?  You'd better
bring that book along with you, and just keep your eye on it all
the time so as there'll be no mistakes.'

They went into the schoolroom.  It was a largish room, with grey-
papered walls that were made yet greyer by the dullness of the
light, for the heavy laurel bushes outside choked the windows, and
no direct ray of the sun ever penetrated into the room.  There was
a teacher's desk by the empty fireplace, and there were a dozen
small double desks, a light blackboard, and, on the mantelpiece, a
black clock that looked like a miniature mausoleum; but there were
no maps, no pictures, nor even, as far as Dorothy could see, any
books.  The sole objects in the room that could be called
ornamental were two sheets of black paper pinned to the walls, with
writing on them in chalk in beautiful copperplate.  On one was
'Speech is Silver.  Silence is Golden', and on the other
'Punctuality is the Politeness of Princes'.

The girls, twenty-one of them, were already sitting at their desks.
They had grown very silent when they heard footsteps approaching,
and as Mrs Creevy came in they seemed to shrink down in their places
like partridge chicks when a hawk is soaring.  For the most part
they were dull-looking, lethargic children with bad complexions, and
adenoids seemed to be remarkably common among them.  The eldest of
them might have been fifteen years old, the youngest was hardly more
than a baby.  The school had no uniform, and one or two of the
children were verging on raggedness.

'Stand up, girls,' said Mrs Creevy as she reached the teacher's
desk.  'We'll start off with the morning prayer.'

The girls stood up, clasped their hands in front of them, and shut
their eyes.  They repeated the prayer in unison, in weak piping
voices, Mrs Creevy leading them, her sharp eyes darting over them
all the while to see that they were attending.

'Almighty and everlasting Father,' they piped, 'we beseech Thee
that our studies this day may be graced by Thy divine guidance.
Make us to conduct ourselves quietly and obediently; look down upon
our school and make it to prosper, so that it may grow in numbers
and be a good example to the neighbourhood and not a disgrace like
some schools of which Thou knowest, O Lord.  Make us, we beseech
Thee, O Lord, industrious, punctual, and ladylike, and worthy in
all possible respects to walk in Thy ways: for Jesus Christ's sake,
our Lord, Amen.'

This prayer was of Mrs Creevy's own composition.  When they had
finished it, the girls repeated the Lord's Prayer, and then sat
down.

'Now, girls,' said Mrs Creevy, 'this is your new teacher, Miss
Millborough.  As you know, Miss Strong had to leave us all of a
sudden after she was taken so bad in the middle of the arithmetic
lesson; and I can tell you I've had a hard week of it looking for a
new teacher.  I had seventy-three applications before I took on
Miss Millborough, and I had to refuse them all because their
qualifications weren't high enough.  Just you remember and tell
your parents that, all of you--seventy-three applications!  Well,
Miss Millborough is going to take you in Latin, French, history,
geography, mathematics, English literature and composition,
spelling, grammar, handwriting, and freehand drawing; and Mr Booth
will take you in chemistry as usual on Thursday afternoons.  Now,
what's the first lesson on your time-table this morning?'

'History, Ma'am,' piped one or two voices.

'Very well.  I expect Miss Millborough'll start off by asking you a
few questions about the history you've been learning.  So just you
do your best, all of you, and let her see that all the trouble
we've taken over you hasn't been wasted.  You'll find they can be
quite a sharp lot of girls when they try, Miss Millborough.'

'I'm sure they are,' said Dorothy.

'Well, I'll be leaving you, then.  And just you behave yourselves,
girls!  Don't you get trying it on with Miss Millborough like you
did with Miss Brewer, because I warn you she won't stand it.  If I
hear any noise coming from this room, there'll be trouble for
somebody.'

She gave a glance round which included Dorothy and indeed suggested
that Dorothy would probably be the 'somebody' referred to, and
departed.

Dorothy faced the class.  She was not afraid of them--she was too
used to dealing with children ever to be afraid of them--but she
did feel a momentary qualm.  The sense of being an impostor (what
teacher has not felt it at times?) was heavy upon her.  It suddenly
occurred to her, what she had only been dimly aware of before, that
she had taken this teaching job under flagrantly false pretences,
without having any kind of qualification for it.  The subject she
was now supposed to be teaching was history, and, like most
'educated' people, she knew virtually no history.  How awful, she
thought, if it turned out that these girls knew more history than
she did!  She said tentatively:

'What period exactly were you doing with Miss Strong?'

Nobody answered.  Dorothy saw the older girls exchanging glances,
as though asking one another whether it was safe to say anything,
and finally deciding not to commit themselves.

'Well, whereabouts had you got to?' she said, wondering whether
perhaps the word 'period' was too much for them.

Again no answer.

'Well, now, surely you remember SOMETHING about it?  Tell me the
names of some of the people you were learning about in your last
history lesson.'

More glances were exchanged, and a very plain little girl in the
front row, in a brown jumper and skirt, with her hair screwed into
two tight pigtails, remarked cloudily, 'It was about the Ancient
Britons.'  At this two other girls took courage, and answered
simultaneously.  One of them said, 'Columbus', and the other
'Napoleon'.

Somehow, after that, Dorothy seemed to see her way more clearly.
It was obvious that instead of being uncomfortably knowledgeable as
she had feared, the class knew as nearly as possible no history at
all.  With this discovery her stage-fright vanished.  She grasped
that before she could do anything else with them it was necessary
to find out what, if anything, these children knew.  So, instead of
following the time-table, she spent the rest of the morning in
questioning the entire class on each subject in turn; when she had
finished with history (and it took about five minutes to get to the
bottom of their historical knowledge) she tried them with geography,
with English grammar, with French, with arithmetic--with everything,
in fact, that they were supposed to have learned.  By twelve o'clock
she had plumbed, though not actually explored, the frightful abysses
of their ignorance.

For they knew nothing, absolutely nothing--nothing, nothing,
nothing, like the Dadaists.  It was appalling that even children
could be so ignorant.  There were only two girls in the class who
knew whether the earth went round the sun or the sun round the
earth, and not a single one of them could tell Dorothy who was the
last king before George V, or who wrote Hamlet, or what was meant
by a vulgar fraction, or which ocean you crossed to get to America,
the Atlantic or the Pacific.  And the big girls of fifteen were not
much better than the tiny infants of eight, except that the former
could at least read consecutively and write neat copperplate.  That
was the one thing that nearly all of the older girls could do--they
could write neatly.  Mrs Creevy had seen to that.  And of course,
here and there in the midst of their ignorance, there were small,
disconnected islets of knowledge; for example, some odd stanzas
from 'pieces of poetry' that they had learned by heart, and a few
Ollendorffian French sentences such as 'Passez-moi le beurre, s'il
vous plait' and 'Le fils du jardinier a perdu son chapeau', which
they appeared to have learned as a parrot learns 'Pretty Poll'.  As
for their arithmetic, it was a little better than the other
subjects.  Most of them knew how to add and subtract, about half of
them had some notion of how to multiply, and there were even three
or four who had struggled as far as long division.  But that was
the utmost limit of their knowledge; and beyond, in every direction,
lay utter, impenetrable night.

Moreover, not only did they know nothing, but they were so unused
to being questioned that it was often difficult to get answers out
of them at all.  It was obvious that whatever they knew they had
learned in an entirely mechanical manner, and they could only gape
in a sort of dull bewilderment when asked to think for themselves.
However, they did not seem unwilling, and evidently they had made
up their minds to be 'good'--children are always 'good' with a new
teacher; and Dorothy persisted, and by degrees the children grew,
or seemed to grow, a shade less lumpish.  She began to pick up,
from the answers they gave her, a fairly accurate notion of what
Miss Strong's regime had been like.

It appeared that, though theoretically they had learned all the
usual school subjects, the only ones that had been at all seriously
taught were handwriting and arithmetic.  Mrs Creevy was particularly
keen on handwriting.  And besides this they had spent great
quantities of time--an hour or two out of every day, it seemed--in
drudging through a dreadful routine called 'copies.'  'Copies' meant
copying things out of textbooks or off the blackboard.  Miss Strong
would write up, for example, some sententious little 'essay' (there
was an essay entitled 'Spring' which recurred in all the older
girls' books, and which began, 'Now, when girlish April is tripping
through the land, when the birds are chanting gaily on the boughs
and the dainty flowerets bursting from their buds', etc., etc.), and
the girls would make fair copies of it in their copybooks; and the
parents, to whom the copybooks were shown from time to time, were no
doubt suitably impressed.  Dorothy began to grasp that everything
that the girls had been taught was in reality aimed at the parents.
Hence the 'copies', the insistence on handwriting, and the parroting
of ready-made French phrases; they were cheap and easy ways of
creating an impression.  Meanwhile, the little girls at the bottom
of the class seemed barely able to read and write, and one of them--
her name was Mavis Williams, and she was a rather sinister-looking
child of eleven, with eyes too far apart--could not even count.  This
child seemed to have done nothing at all during the past term and a
half except to write pothooks.  She had quite a pile of books filled
with pothooks--page after page of pothooks, looping on and on like
the mangrove roots in some tropical swamp.

Dorothy tried not to hurt the children's feelings by exclaiming at
their ignorance, but in her heart she was amazed and horrified.
She had not known that schools of this description still existed in
the civilized world.  The whole atmosphere of the place was so
curiously antiquated--so reminiscent of those dreary little private
schools that you read about in Victorian novels.  As for the few
textbooks that the class possessed, you could hardly look at them
without feeling as though you had stepped back into the mid
nineteenth century.  There were only three textbooks of which each
child had a copy.  One was a shilling arithmetic, pre Great War but
fairly serviceable, and another was a horrid little book called The
Hundred Page History of Britain--a nasty little duodecimo book with
a gritty brown cover, and, for frontispiece, a portrait of Boadicea
with a Union Jack draped over the front of her chariot.  Dorothy
opened this book at random, came to page 91, and read:


After the French Revolution was over, the self-styled Emperor
Napoleon Buonaparte attempted to set up his sway, but though he won
a few victories against continental troops, he soon found that in
the 'thin red line' he had more than met his match.  Conclusions
were tried upon the field of Waterloo, where 50,000 Britons put to
flight 70,000 Frenchmen--for the Prussians, our allies, arrived too
late for the battle.  With a ringing British cheer our men charged
down the slope and the enemy broke and fled.  We now come on to the
great Reform Bill of 1832, the first of those beneficent reforms
which have made British liberty what it is and marked us off from
the less fortunate nations [etc., etc.]. . . .


The date of the book was 1888.  Dorothy, who had never seen a
history book of this description before, examined it with a feeling
approaching horror.  There was also an extraordinary little
'reader', dated 1863.  It consisted mostly of bits out of Fenimore
Cooper, Dr Watts, and Lord Tennyson, and at the end there were the
queerest little 'Nature Notes' with woodcut illustrations.  There
would be a woodcut of an elephant, and underneath in small print:
'The elephant is a sagacious beast.  He rejoices in the shade of
the Palm Trees, and though stronger than six horses he will allow a
little child to lead him.  His food is Bananas.'  And so on to the
Whale, the Zebra, and Porcupine, and the Spotted Camelopard.  There
were also, in the teacher's desk, a copy of Beautiful Joe, a
forlorn book called Peeps at Distant Lands, and a French phrase-
book dated 1891.  It was called All you will need on your Parisian
Trip, and the first phrase given was 'Lace my stays, but not too
tightly'.  In the whole room there was not such a thing as an atlas
or a set of geometrical instruments.

At eleven there was a break of ten minutes, and some of the girls
played dull little games at noughts and crosses or quarrelled over
pencil-cases, and a few who had got over their first shyness
clustered round Dorothy's desk and talked to her.  They told her
some more about Miss Strong and her methods of teaching, and how
she used to twist their ears when they made blots on their
copybooks.  It appeared that Miss Strong had been a very strict
teacher except when she was 'taken bad', which happened about twice
a week.  And when she was taken bad she used to drink some medicine
out of a little brown bottle, and after drinking it she would grow
quite jolly for a while and talk to them about her brother in
Canada.  But on her last day--the time when she was taken so bad
during the arithmetic lesson--the medicine seemed to make her worse
than ever, because she had no sooner drunk it than she began
sinking and fell across a desk, and Mrs Creevy had to carry her out
of the room.

After the break there was another period of three quarters of an
hour, and then school ended for the morning.  Dorothy felt stiff
and tired after three hours in the chilly but stuffy room, and she
would have liked to go out of doors for a breath of fresh air, but
Mrs Creevy had told her beforehand that she must come and help get
dinner ready.  The girls who lived near the school mostly went home
for dinner, but there were seven who had dinner in the 'morning-
room' at tenpence a time.  It was an uncomfortable meal, and passed
in almost complete silence, for the girls were frightened to talk
under Mrs Creevy's eye.  The dinner was stewed scrag end of mutton,
and Mrs Creevy showed extraordinary dexterity in serving the pieces
of lean to the 'good payers' and the pieces of fat to the 'medium
payers'.  As for the three 'bad payers', they ate a shamefaced
lunch out of paper bags in the school-room.

School began again at two o'clock.  Already, after only one
morning's teaching, Dorothy went back to her work with secret
shrinking and dread.  She was beginning to realize what her life
would be like, day after day and week after week, in that sunless
room, trying to drive the rudiments of knowledge into unwilling
brats.  But when she had assembled the girls and called their names
over, one of them, a little peaky child with mouse-coloured hair,
called Laura Firth, came up to her desk and presented her with a
pathetic bunch of browny-yellow chrysanthemums, 'from all of us'.
The girls had taken a liking to Dorothy, and had subscribed
fourpence among themselves, to buy her a bunch of flowers.

Something stirred in Dorothy's heart as she took the ugly flowers.
She looked with more seeing eyes than before at the anaemic faces
and shabby clothes of the children, and was all of a sudden
horribly ashamed to think that in the morning she had looked at
them with indifference, almost with dislike.  Now, a profound pity
took possession of her.  The poor children, the poor children!  How
they had been stunted and maltreated!  And with it all they had
retained the childish gentleness that could make them squander
their few pennies on flowers for their teacher.

She felt quite differently towards her job from that moment
onwards.  A feeling of loyalty and affection had sprung up in her
heart.  This school was HER school; she would work for it and be
proud of it, and make every effort to turn it from a place of
bondage into a place human and decent.  Probably it was very little
that she could do.  She was so inexperienced and unfitted for her
job that she must educate herself before she could even begin to
educate anybody else.  Still, she would do her best; she would do
whatever willingness and energy could do to rescue these children
from the horrible darkness in which they had been kept.



3


During the next few weeks there were two things that occupied
Dorothy to the exclusion of all others.  One, getting her class
into some kind of order; the other, establishing a concordat with
Mrs Creevy.

The second of the two was by a great deal the more difficult.  Mrs
Creevy's house was as vile a house to live in as one could possibly
imagine.  It was always more or less cold, there was not a
comfortable chair in it from top to bottom, and the food was
disgusting.  Teaching is harder work than it looks, and a teacher
needs good food to keep him going.  It was horribly dispiriting to
have to work on a diet of tasteless mutton stews, damp boiled
potatoes full of little black eyeholes, watery rice puddings, bread
and scrape, and weak tea--and never enough even of these.  Mrs
Creevy, who was mean enough to take a pleasure in skimping even her
own food, ate much the same meals as Dorothy, but she always had
the lion's share of them.  Every morning at breakfast the two fried
eggs were sliced up and unequally partitioned, and the dish of
marmalade remained for ever sacrosanct.  Dorothy grew hungrier and
hungrier as the term went on.  On the two evenings a week when she
managed to get out of doors she dipped into her dwindling store of
money and bought slabs of plain chocolate, which she ate in the
deepest secrecy--for Mrs Creevy, though she starved Dorothy more or
less intentionally, would have been mortally offended if she had
known that she bought food for herself.

The worst thing about Dorothy's position was that she had no
privacy and very little time that she could call her own.  Once
school was over for the day her only refuge was the 'morning-room',
where she was under Mrs Creevy's eye, and Mrs Creevy's leading idea
was that Dorothy must never be left in peace for ten minutes
together.  She had taken it into her head, or pretended to do so,
that Dorothy was an idle person who needed keeping up to the mark.
And so it was always, 'Well, Miss Millborough, you don't seem to
have very much to do this evening, do you?  Aren't there some
exercise books that want correcting?  Or why don't you get your
needle and do a bit of sewing?  I'm sure _I_ couldn't bear to just
sit in my chair doing nothing like you do!'  She was for ever
finding household jobs for Dorothy to do, even making her scrub the
schoolroom floor on Saturday mornings when the girls did not come
to school; but this was done out of pure ill nature, for she did
not trust Dorothy to do the work properly, and generally did it
again after her.  One evening Dorothy was unwise enough to bring
back a novel from the public library.  Mrs Creevy flared up at the
very sight of it.  'Well, really, Miss Millborough!  I shouldn't
have thought you'd have had time to READ!' she said bitterly.  She
herself had never read a book right through in her life, and was
proud of it.

Moreover, even when Dorothy was not actually under her eye, Mrs
Creevy had ways of making her presence felt.  She was for ever
prowling in the neighbourhood of the schoolroom, so that Dorothy
never felt quite safe from her intrusion; and when she thought
there was too much noise she would suddenly rap on the wall with
her broom-handle in a way that made the children jump and put them
off their work.  At all hours of the day she was restlessly,
noisily active.  When she was not cooking meals she was banging
about with broom and dustpan, or harrying the charwoman, or
pouncing down upon the schoolroom to 'have a look round' in hopes
of catching Dorothy or the children up to mischief, or 'doing a bit
of gardening'--that is, mutilating with a pair of shears the
unhappy little shrubs that grew amid wastes of gravel in the back
garden.  On only two evenings a week was Dorothy free of her, and
that was when Mrs Creevy sallied forth on forays which she called
'going after the girls'; that is to say, canvassing likely parents.
These evenings Dorothy usually spent in the public library, for
when Mrs Creevy was not at home she expected Dorothy to keep out of
the house, to save fire and gaslight.  On other evenings Mrs Creevy
was busy writing dunning letters to the parents, or letters to the
editor of the local paper, haggling over the price of a dozen
advertisements, or poking about the girls' desks to see that their
exercise books had been properly corrected, or 'doing a bit of
sewing'.  Whenever occupation failed her for even five minutes she
got out her workbox and 'did a bit of sewing'--generally
restitching some bloomers of harsh white linen of which she had
pairs beyond number.  They were the most chilly looking garments
that one could possibly imagine; they seemed to carry upon them, as
no nun's coif or anchorite's hair shirt could ever have done, the
impress of a frozen and awful chastity.  The sight of them set you
wondering about the late Mr Creevy, even to the point of wondering
whether he had ever existed.

Looking with an outsider's eye at Mrs Creevy's manner of life, you
would have said that she had no PLEASURES whatever.  She never did
any of the things that ordinary people do to amuse themselves--
never went to the pictures, never looked at a book, never ate
sweets, never cooked a special dish for dinner or dressed herself
in any kind of finery.  Social life meant absolutely nothing to
her.  She had no friends, was probably incapable of imagining such
a thing as friendship, and hardly ever exchanged a word with a
fellow being except on business.  Of religious belief she had not
the smallest vestige.  Her attitude towards religion, though she
went to the Baptist Chapel every Sunday to impress the parents with
her piety, was a mean anti-clericalism founded on the notion that
the clergy are 'only after your money'.  She seemed a creature
utterly joyless, utterly submerged by the dullness of her
existence.  But in reality it was not so.  There were several
things from which she derived acute and inexhaustible pleasure.

For instance, there was her avarice over money.  It was the leading
interest of her life.  There are two kinds of avaricious person--
the bold, grasping type who will ruin you if he can, but who never
looks twice at twopence, and the petty miser who has not the
enterprise actually to MAKE money, but who will always, as the
saying goes, take a farthing from a dunghill with his teeth.  Mrs
Creevy belonged to the second type.  By ceaseless canvassing and
impudent bluff she had worked her school up to twenty-one pupils,
but she would never get it much further, because she was too mean
to spend money on the necessary equipment and to pay proper wages
to her assistant.  The fees the girls paid, or didn't pay, were
five guineas a term with certain extras, so that, starve and sweat
her assistant as she might, she could hardly hope to make more than
a hundred and fifty pounds a year clear profit.  But she was fairly
satisfied with that.  It meant more to her to save sixpence than to
earn a pound.  So long as she could think of a way of docking
Dorothy's dinner of another potato, or getting her exercise books a
halfpenny a dozen cheaper, or shoving an unauthorized half guinea
on to one of the 'good payers'' bills, she was happy after her
fashion.

And again, in pure, purposeless malignity--in petty acts of spite,
even when there was nothing to be gained by them--she had a hobby
of which she never wearied.  She was one of those people who
experience a kind of spiritual orgasm when they manage to do
somebody else a bad turn.  Her feud with Mr Boulger next door--a
one-sided affair, really, for poor Mr Boulger was not up to Mrs
Creevy's fighting weight--was conducted ruthlessly, with no quarter
given or expected.  So keen was Mrs Creevy's pleasure in scoring
off Mr Boulger that she was even willing to spend money on it
occasionally.  A year ago Mr Boulger had written to the landlord
(each of them was for ever writing to the landlord, complaining
about the other's behaviour), to say that Mrs Creevy's kitchen
chimney smoked into his back windows, and would she please have it
heightened two feet.  The very day the landlord's letter reached
her, Mrs Creevy called in the bricklayers and had the chimney
lowered two feet.  It cost her thirty shillings, but it was worth
it.  After that there had been the long guerrilla campaign of
throwing things over the garden wall during the night, and Mrs
Creevy had finally won with a dustbinful of wet ashes thrown on to
Mr Boulger's bed of tulips.  As it happened, Mrs Creevy won a neat
and bloodless victory soon after Dorothy's arrival.  Discovering by
chance that the roots of Mr Boulger's plum tree had grown under the
wall into her own garden, she promptly injected a whole tin of
weed-killer into them and killed the tree.  This was remarkable as
being the only occasion when Dorothy ever heard Mrs Creevy laugh.

But Dorothy was too busy, at first, to pay much attention to Mrs
Creevy and her nasty characteristics.  She saw quite clearly that
Mrs Creevy was an odious woman and that her own position was
virtually that of a slave; but it did not greatly worry her.  Her
work was too absorbing, too all-important.  In comparison with it,
her own comfort and even her future hardly seemed to matter.

It did not take her more than a couple of days to get her class
into running order.  It was curious, but though she had no
experience of teaching and no preconceived theories about it, yet
from the very first day she found herself, as though by instinct,
rearranging, scheming, innovating.  There was so much that was
crying out to be done.  The first thing, obviously, was to get rid
of the grisly routine of 'copies', and after Dorothy's second day
no more 'copies' were done in the class, in spite of a sniff or two
from Mrs Creevy.  The handwriting lessons, also, were cut down.
Dorothy would have liked to do away with handwriting lessons
altogether so far as the older girls were concerned--it seemed to
her ridiculous that girls of fifteen should waste time in practising
copperplate--but Mrs Creevy would not hear of it.  She seemed to
attach an almost superstitious value to handwriting lessons.  And
the next thing, of course, was to scrap the repulsive Hundred Page
History and the preposterous little 'readers'.  It would have been
worse than useless to ask Mrs Creevy to buy new books for the
children, but on her first Saturday afternoon Dorothy begged leave
to go up to London, was grudgingly given it, and spent two pounds
three shillings out of her precious four pounds ten on a dozen
secondhand copies of a cheap school edition of Shakespeare, a big
second-hand atlas, some volumes of Hans Andersen's stories for the
younger children, a set of geometrical instruments, and two pounds
of plasticine.  With these, and history books out of the public
library, she felt that she could make a start.

She had seen at a glance that what the children most needed, and
what they had never had, was individual attention.  So she began by
dividing them up into three separate classes, and so arranging
things that two lots could be working by themselves while she 'went
through' something with the third.  It was difficult at first,
especially with the younger girls, whose attention wandered as soon
as they were left to themselves, so that you could never really
take your eyes off them.  And yet how wonderfully, how unexpectedly,
nearly all of them improved during those first few weeks!  For the
most part they were not really stupid, only dazed by a dull,
mechanical rigmarole.  For a week, perhaps, they continued
unteachable; and then, quite suddenly, their warped little minds
seemed to spring up and expand like daisies when you move the
garden roller off them.

Quite quickly and easily Dorothy broke them in to the habit of
thinking for themselves.  She got them to make up essays out of
their own heads instead of copying out drivel about the birds
chanting on the boughs and the flowerets bursting from their buds.
She attacked their arithmetic at the foundations and started the
little girls on multiplication and piloted the older ones through
long division to fractions; she even got three of them to the point
where there was talk of starting on decimals.  She taught them the
first rudiments of French grammar in place of 'Passez-moi le
beurre, s'il vous plait' and 'Le fils du jardinier a perdu son
chapeau'.  Finding that not a girl in the class knew what any of
the countries of the world looked like (though several of them knew
that Quito was the capital of Ecuador), she set them to making a
large contour-map of Europe in plasticine, on a piece of three-ply
wood, copying it in scale from the atlas.  The children adored
making the map; they were always clamouring to be allowed to go on
with it.  And she started the whole class, except the six youngest
girls and Mavis Williams, the pothook specialist, on reading
Macbeth.  Not a child among them had ever voluntarily read anything
in her life before, except perhaps the Girl's Own Paper; but they
took readily to Shakespeare, as all children do when he is not made
horrible with parsing and analysing.

History was the hardest thing to teach them.  Dorothy had not
realized till now how hard it is for children who come from poor
homes to have even a conception of what history means.  Every
upper-class person, however ill-informed, grows up with some notion
of history; he can visualize a Roman centurion, a medieval knight,
an eighteenth-century nobleman; the terms Antiquity, Middle Ages,
Renaissance, Industrial Revolution evoke some meaning, even if a
confused one, in his mind.  But these children came from bookless
homes and from parents who would have laughed at the notion that
the past has any meaning for the present.  They had never heard of
Robin Hood, never played at being Cavaliers and Roundheads, never
wondered who built the English churches or what Fid. Def. on a
penny stands for.  There were just two historical characters of
whom all of them, almost without exception, had heard, and those
were Columbus and Napoleon.  Heaven knows why--perhaps Columbus and
Napoleon get into the newspapers a little oftener than most
historical characters.  They seemed to have swelled up in the
children's minds, like Tweedledum and Tweedledee, till they blocked
out the whole landscape of the past.  Asked when motor-cars were
invented, one child, aged ten, vaguely hazarded, 'About a thousand
years ago, by Columbus.'

Some of the older girls, Dorothy discovered, had been through the
Hundred Page History as many as four times, from Boadicea to the
first Jubilee, and forgotten practically every word of it.  Not
that that mattered greatly, for most of it was lies.  She started
the whole class over again at Julius Caesar's invasion, and at
first she tried taking history books out of the public library and
reading them aloud to the children; but that method failed, because
they could understand nothing that was not explained to them in
words of one or two syllables.  So she did what she could in her
own words and with her own inadequate knowledge, making a sort of
paraphrase of what she read and delivering it to the children;
striving all the while to drive into their dull little minds some
picture of the past, and what was always more difficult, some
interest in it.  But one day a brilliant idea struck her.  She
bought a roll of cheap plain wallpaper at an upholsterer's shop,
and set the children to making an historical chart.  They marked
the roll of paper into centuries and years, and stuck scraps that
they cut out of illustrated papers--pictures of knights in armour
and Spanish galleons and printing-presses and railway trains--at
the appropriate places.  Pinned round the walls of the room, the
chart presented, as the scraps grew in number, a sort of panorama
of English history.  The children were even fonder of the chart
than of the contour map.  They always, Dorothy found, showed more
intelligence when it was a question of MAKING something instead of
merely learning.  There was even talk of making a contour map of
the world, four feet by four, in papiermache, if Dorothy could 'get
round' Mrs Creevy to allow the preparation of the papiermache--a
messy process needing buckets of water.

Mrs Creevy watched Dorothy's innovations with a jealous eye, but
she did not interfere actively at first.  She was not going to show
it, of course, but she was secretly amazed and delighted to find
that she had got hold of an assistant who was actually willing to
work.  When she saw Dorothy spending her own money on textbooks for
the children, it gave her the same delicious sensation that she
would have had in bringing off a successful swindle.  She did,
however, sniff and grumble at everything that Dorothy did, and she
wasted a great deal of time by insisting on what she called
'thorough correction' of the girls' exercise books.  But her system
of correction, like everything else in the school curriculum, was
arranged with one eye on the parents.  Periodically the children
took their books home for their parents' inspection, and Mrs Creevy
would never allow anything disparaging to be written in them.
Nothing was to be marked 'bad' or crossed out or too heavily
underlined; instead, in the evenings, Dorothy decorated the books,
under Mrs Creevy's dictation, with more or less applauding comments
in red ink.  'A very creditable performance', and 'Excellent!  You
are making great strides.  Keep it up!' were Mrs Creevy's favourites.
All the children in the school, apparently, were for ever 'making
great strides'; in what direction they were striding was not stated.
The parents, however, seemed willing to swallow an almost unlimited
amount of this kind of thing.

There were times, of course, when Dorothy had trouble with the
girls themselves.  The fact that they were all of different ages
made them difficult to deal with, and though they were fond of her
and were very 'good' with her at first, they would not have been
children at all if they had been invariably 'good'.  Sometimes they
were lazy and sometimes they succumbed to that most damnable vice
of schoolgirls--giggling.  For the first few days Dorothy was
greatly exercised over little Mavis Williams, who was stupider than
one would have believed it possible for any child of eleven to be.
Dorothy could do nothing with her at all.  At the first attempt to
get her to do anything beyond pothooks a look of almost subhuman
blankness would come into her wide-set eyes.  Sometimes, however,
she had talkative fits in which she would ask the most amazing and
unanswerable questions.  For instance, she would open her 'reader',
find one of the illustrations--the sagacious Elephant, perhaps--and
ask Dorothy:

'Please, Miss, wass 'at thing there?'  (She mispronounced her words
in a curious manner.)

'That's an elephant, Mavis.'

'Wass a elephant?'

'An elephant's a kind of wild animal.'

'Wass a animal?'

'Well--a dog's an animal.'

'Wass a dog?'

And so on, more or less indefinitely.  About half-way through the
fourth morning Mavis held up her hand and said with a sly
politeness that ought to have put Dorothy on her guard:

'Please, Miss, may I be 'scused?'

'Yes,' said Dorothy.

One of the bigger girls put up her hand, blushed, and put her hand
down again as though too bashful to speak.  On being prompted by
Dorothy, she said shamefacedly:

'Please, Miss, Miss Strong didn't used to let Mavis go to the
lavatory alone.  She locks herself in and won't come out, and then
Mrs Creevy gets angry, Miss.'

Dorothy dispatched a messenger, but it was too late.  Mavis
remained in latebra pudenda till twelve o'clock.  Afterwards, Mrs
Creevy explained privately to Dorothy that Mavis was a congenital
idiot--or, as she put it, 'not right in the head'.  It was totally
impossible to teach her anything.  Of course, Mrs Creevy didn't
'let on' to Mavis's parents, who believed that their child was only
'backward' and paid their fees regularly.  Mavis was quite easy to
deal with.  You just had to give her a book and a pencil and tell
her to draw pictures and be quiet.  But Mavis, a child of habit,
drew nothing but pothooks--remaining quiet and apparently happy for
hours together, with her tongue hanging out, amid festoons of
pothooks.

But in spite of these minor difficulties, how well everything went
during those first few weeks!  How ominously well, indeed!  About
the tenth of November, after much grumbling about the price of
coal, Mrs Creevy started to allow a fire in the schoolroom.  The
children's wits brightened noticeably when the room was decently
warm.  And there were happy hours, sometimes, when the fire
crackled in the grate, and Mrs Creevy was out of the house, and the
children were working quietly and absorbedly at one of the lessons
that were their favourites.  Best of all was when the two top
classes were reading Macbeth, the girls squeaking breathlessly
through the scenes, and Dorothy pulling them up to make them
pronounce the words properly and to tell them who Bellona's
bridegroom was and how witches rode on broomsticks; and the girls
wanting to know, almost as excitedly as though it had been a
detective story, how Birnam Wood could possible come to Dunsinane
and Macbeth be killed by a man who was not of woman born.  Those
are the times that make teaching worth while--the times when the
children's enthusiasm leaps up, like an answering flame, to meet
your own, and sudden unlooked-for gleams of intelligence reward
your earlier drudgery.  No job is more fascinating than teaching if
you have a free hand at it.  Nor did Dorothy know, as yet, that
that 'if' is one of the biggest 'ifs' in the world.

Her job suited her, and she was happy in it.  She knew the minds
of the children intimately by this time, knew their individual
peculiarities and the special stimulants that were needed before
you could get them to think.  She was more fond of them, more
interested in their development, more anxious to do her best for
them, than she would have conceived possible a short while ago.
The complex, never-ended labour of teaching filled her life just as
the round of parish jobs had filled it at home.  She thought and
dreamed of teaching; she took books out of the public library and
studied theories of education.  She felt that quite willingly she
would go on teaching all her life, even at ten shillings a week and
her keep, if it could always be like this.  It was her vocation,
she thought.

Almost any job that fully occupied her would have been a relief
after the horrible futility of the time of her destitution.  But
this was more than a mere job; it was--so it seemed to her--a
mission, a life-purpose.  Trying to awaken the dulled minds of
these children, trying to undo the swindle that had been worked
upon them in the name of education--that, surely, was something to
which she could give herself heart and soul?  So for the time
being, in the interest of her work, she disregarded the beastliness
of living in Mrs Creevy's house, and quite forgot her strange,
anomalous position and the uncertainty of her future.



4


But of course, it could not last.

Not many weeks had gone by before the parents began interfering
with Dorothy's programme of work.  That--trouble with the parents--
is part of the regular routine of life in a private school.  All
parents are tiresome from a teacher's point of view, and the
parents of children at fourth-rate private schools are utterly
impossible.  On the one hand, they have only the dimmest idea of
what is meant by education; on the other hand, they look on
'schooling' exactly as they look on a butcher's bill or a grocer's
bill, and are perpetually suspicious that they are being cheated.
They bombard the teacher with ill-written notes making impossible
demands, which they send by hand and which the child reads on the
way to school.  At the end of the first fortnight Mabel Briggs,
one of the most promising girls in the class, brought Dorothy the
following note:


Dear Miss,--Would you please give Mabel a bit more ARITHMETIC?  I
feel that what your giving her is not practacle enough.  All these
maps and that.  She wants practacle work, not all this fancy stuff.
So more ARITHMETIC, please.  And remain,

Yours Faithfully,

Geo. Briggs

P.S.  Mabel says your talking of starting her on something called
decimals.  I don't want her taught decimals, I want her taught
ARITHMETIC.


So Dorothy stopped Mabel's geography and gave her extra arithmetic
instead, whereat Mabel wept.  More letters followed.  One lady was
disturbed to hear that her child was being given Shakespeare to
read.  'She had heard', she wrote, 'that this Mr Shakespeare was a
writer of stage-plays, and was Miss Millborough quite certain that
he wasn't a very IMMORAL writer?  For her own part she had never so
much as been to the pictures in her life, let alone to a stage-
play, and she felt that even in READING stage-plays there was a
very grave danger,' etc., etc.  She gave way, however, on being
informed that Mr Shakespeare was dead.  This seemed to reassure
her.  Another parent wanted more attention to his child's
handwriting, and another thought French was a waste of time; and
so it went on, until Dorothy's carefully arranged time-table was
almost in ruins.  Mrs Creevy gave her clearly to understand that
whatever the parents demanded she must do, or pretend to do.  In
many cases it was next door to impossible, for it disorganized
everything to have one child studying, for instance, arithmetic
while the rest of the class were doing history or geography.  But
in private schools the parents' word is law.  Such schools exist,
like shops, by flattering their customers, and if a parent wanted
his child taught nothing but cat's-cradle and the cuneiform
alphabet, the teacher would have to agree rather than lose a pupil.

The fact was that the parents were growing perturbed by the tales
their children brought home about Dorothy's methods.  They saw no
sense whatever in these new-fangled ideas of making plasticine maps
and reading poetry, and the old mechanical routine which had so
horrified Dorothy struck them as eminently sensible.  They became
more and more restive, and their letters were peppered with the
word 'practical', meaning in effect more handwriting lessons and
more arithmetic.  And even their notion of arithmetic was limited
to addition, subtraction, multiplication and 'practice', with long
division thrown in as a spectacular tour de force of no real value.
Very few of them could have worked out a sum in decimals themselves,
and they were not particularly anxious for their children to be able
to do so either.

However, if this had been all, there would probably never have been
any serious trouble.  The parents would have nagged at Dorothy, as
all parents do; but Dorothy would finally have learned--as, again,
all teachers finally learn--that if one showed a certain amount of
tact one could safely ignore them.  But there was one fact that was
absolutely certain to lead to trouble, and that was the fact that
the parents of all except three children were Nonconformists,
whereas Dorothy was an Anglican.  It was true that Dorothy had lost
her faith--indeed, for two months past, in the press of varying
adventures, had hardly thought either of her faith or of its loss.
But that made very little difference; Roman or Anglican, Dissenter,
Jew, Turk or infidel, you retain the habits of thought that you
have been brought up with.  Dorothy, born and bred in the precincts
of the Church, had no understanding of the Nonconformist mind.
With the best will in the world, she could not help doing things
that would cause offence to some of the parents.

Almost at the beginning there was a skirmish over the Scripture
lessons--twice a week the children used to read a couple of
chapters from the Bible.  Old Testament and New Testament
alternately--several of the parents writing to say, would Miss
Millborough please NOT answer the children when they asked
questions about the Virgin Mary; texts about the Virgin Mary were
to be passed over in silence, or, if possible, missed out
altogether.  But it was Shakespeare, that immoral writer, who
brought things to a head.  The girls had worked their way through
Macbeth, pining to know how the witches' prophecy was to be
fulfilled.  They reached the closing scenes.  Birnam Wood had come
to Dunsinane--that part was settled, anyway; now what about the man
who was not of woman born?  They came to the fatal passage:


MACBETH:  Thou losest labour;
As easy may'st thou the intrenchant air
With thy keen sword impress, as make me bleed:
Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests,
I bear a charmed life, which must not yield
To one of woman born.

MACDUFF:  Despair thy charm,
And let the Angel whom thou still hast served
Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother's womb
Untimely ripp'd.


The girls looked puzzled.  There was a momentary silence, and then
a chorus of voices round the room:

'Please, Miss, what does that mean?'

Dorothy explained.  She explained haltingly and incompletely, with
a sudden horrid misgiving--a premonition that this was going to
lead to trouble--but still, she did explain.  And after that, of
course, the fun began.

About half the children in the class went home and asked their
parents the meaning of the word 'womb'.  There was a sudden
commotion, a flying to and fro of messages, an electric thrill of
horror through fifteen decent Nonconformist homes.  That night the
parents must have held some kind of conclave, for the following
evening, about the time when school ended, a deputation called upon
Mrs Creevy.  Dorothy heard them arriving by ones and twos, and
guessed what was going to happen.  As soon as she had dismissed the
children, she heard Mrs Creevy call sharply down the stairs:

'Come up here a minute, Miss Millborough!'

Dorothy went up, trying to control the trembling of her knees.  In
the gaunt drawing-room Mrs Creevy was standing grimly beside the
piano, and six parents were sitting round on horsehair chairs like
a circle of inquisitors.  There was the Mr Geo. Briggs who had
written the letter about Mabel's arithmetic--he was an alert-
looking greengrocer with a dried-up, shrewish wife--and there was a
large, buffalo-like man with drooping moustaches and a colourless,
peculiarly FLAT wife who looked as though she had been flattened
out by the pressure of some heavy object--her husband, perhaps.
The names of these two Dorothy did not catch.  There was also Mrs
Williams, the mother of the congenital idiot, a small, dark, very
obtuse woman who always agreed with the last speaker, and there was
a Mr Poynder, a commercial traveller.  He was a youngish to middle-
aged man with a grey face, mobile lips, and a bald scalp across
which some strips of rather nasty-looking damp hair were carefully
plastered.  In honour of the parents' visit, a fire composed of
three large coals was sulking in the grate.

'Sit down there, Miss Millborough,' said Mrs Creevy, pointing to a
hard chair which stood like a stool of repentance in the middle of
the ring of parents.

Dorothy sat down.

'And now,' said Mrs Creevy, 'just you listen to what Mr Poynder's
got to say to you.'

Mr Poynder had a great deal to say.  The other parents had
evidently chosen him as their spokesman, and he talked till flecks
of yellowish foam appeared at the corners of his mouth.  And what
was remarkable, he managed to do it all--so nice was his regard for
the decencies--without ever once repeating the word that had caused
all the trouble.

'I feel that I'm voicing the opinion of all of us,' he said with
his facile bagman's eloquence, 'in saying that if Miss Millborough
knew that this play--Macduff, or whatever its name is--contained
such words as--well, such words as we're speaking about, she never
ought to have given it to the children to read at all.  To my mind
it's a disgrace that schoolbooks can be printed with such words in
them.  I'm sure if any of us had ever known that Shakespeare was
that kind of stuff, we'd have put our foot down at the start.  It
surprises me, I must say.  Only the other morning I was reading a
piece in my News Chronicle about Shakespeare being the father of
English Literature; well, if that's Literature, let's have a bit
LESS Literature, say I!  I think everyone'll agree with me there.
And on the other hand, if Miss Millborough didn't know that the
word--well, the word I'm referring to--was coming, she just ought
to have gone straight on and taken no notice when it did come.
There wasn't the slightest need to go explaining it to them.  Just
tell them to keep quiet and not get asking questions--that's the
proper way with children.'

'But the children wouldn't have understood the play if I hadn't
explained!' protested Dorothy for the third or fourth time.

'Of course they wouldn't!  You don't seem to get my point, Miss
Millborough!  We don't want them to understand.  Do you think we
want them to go picking up dirty ideas out of books?  Quite enough
of that already with all these dirty films and these twopenny
girls' papers that they get hold of--all these filthy, dirty love-
stories with pictures of--well, I won't go into it.  We don't send
our children to school to have ideas put into their heads.  I'm
speaking for all the parents in saying this.  We're all of decent
God-fearing folk--some of us are Baptists and some of us are
Methodists, and there's even one or two Church of England among us;
but we can sink our differences when it comes to a case like this--
and we try to bring our children up decent and save them from
knowing anything about the Facts of Life.  If I had my way, no
child--at any rate, no girl--would know anything about the Facts of
Life till she was twenty-one.'

There was a general nod from the parents, and the buffalo-like man
added, 'Yer, yer!  I'm with you there, Mr Poynder.  Yer, yer!' deep
down in his inside.

After dealing with the subject of Shakespeare, Mr Poynder added
some remarks about Dorothy's new-fangled methods of teaching, which
gave Mr Geo. Briggs the opportunity to rap out from time to time,
'That's it!  Practical work--that's what we want--practical work!
Not all this messy stuff like po'try and making maps and sticking
scraps of paper and such like.  Give 'em a good bit of figuring and
handwriting and bother the rest.  Practical work!  You've said it!'

This went on for about twenty minutes.  At first Dorothy attempted
to argue, but she saw Mrs Creevy angrily shaking her head at her
over the buffalo-like man's shoulder, which she rightly took as a
signal to be quiet.  By the time the parents had finished they had
reduced Dorothy very nearly to tears, and after this they made
ready to go.  But Mrs Creevy stopped them.

'JUST a minute, ladies and gentlemen,' she said.  'Now that you've
all had your say--and I'm sure I'm most glad to give you the
opportunity--I'd just like to say a little something on my own
account.  Just to make things clear, in case any of you might think
_I_ was to blame for this nasty business that's happened.  And YOU
stay here too, Miss Millborough!' she added.

She turned on Dorothy, and, in front of the parents, gave her a
venomous 'talking to' which lasted upwards of ten minutes.  The
burden of it all was that Dorothy had brought these dirty books
into the house behind her back; that it was monstrous treachery and
ingratitude; and that if anything like it happened again, out
Dorothy would go with a week's wages in her pocket.  She rubbed it
in and in and in.  Phrases like 'girl that I've taken into my
house', 'eating my bread', and even 'living on my charity',
recurred over and over again.  The parents sat round watching, and
in their crass faces--faces not harsh or evil, only blunted by
ignorance and mean virtues--you could see a solemn approval, a
solemn pleasure in the spectacle of sin rebuked.  Dorothy
understood this; she understood that it was necessary that Mrs
Creevy should give her her 'talking to' in front of the parents, so
that they might feel that they were getting their money's worth and
be satisfied.  But still, as the stream of mean, cruel reprimand
went on and on, such anger rose in her heart that she could with
pleasure have stood up and struck Mrs Creevy across the face.
Again and again she thought, 'I won't stand it, I won't stand it
any longer!  I'll tell her what I think of her and then walk
straight out of the house!'  But she did nothing of the kind.  She
saw with dreadful clarity the helplessness of her position.
Whatever happened, whatever insults it meant swallowing, she had
got to keep her job.  So she sat still, with pink humiliated face,
amid the circle of parents, and presently her anger turned to
misery, and she realized that she was going to begin crying if she
did not struggle to prevent it.  But she realized, too, that if she
began crying it would be the last straw and the parents would
demand her dismissal.  To stop herself, she dug her nails so hard
into the palms that afterwards she found that she had drawn a few
drops of blood.

Presently the 'talking to' wore itself out in assurances from Mrs
Creevy that this should never happen again and that the offending
Shakespeares should be burnt immediately.  The parents were now
satisfied.  Dorothy had had her lesson and would doubtless profit
by it; they did not bear her any malice and were not conscious of
having humiliated her.  They said good-bye to Mrs Creevy, said
good-bye rather more coldly to Dorothy, and departed.  Dorothy also
rose to go, but Mrs Creevy signed to her to stay where she was.

'Just you wait a minute,' she said ominously as the parents left
the room.  'I haven't finished yet, not by a long way I haven't.'

Dorothy sat down again.  She felt very weak at the knees, and
nearer to tears than ever.  Mrs Creevy, having shown the parents
out by the front door, came back with a bowl of water and threw it
over the fire--for where was the sense of burning good coals after
the parents had gone?  Dorothy supposed that the 'talking to' was
going to begin afresh.  However, Mrs Creevy's wrath seemed to have
cooled--at any rate, she had laid aside the air of outraged virtue
that it had been necessary to put on in front of the parents.

'I just want to have a bit of a talk with you, Miss Millborough,'
she said.  'It's about time we got it settled once and for all how
this school's going to be run and how it's not going to be run.'

'Yes,' said Dorothy.

'Well, I'll be straight with you.  When you came here I could see
with half an eye that you didn't know the first thing about school-
teaching; but I wouldn't have minded that if you'd just had a bit
of common sense like any other girl would have had.  Only it seems
you hadn't.  I let you have your own way for a week or two, and the
first thing you do is to go and get all the parents' backs up.
Well, I'm not going to have THAT over again.  From now on I'm going
to have things done MY way, not YOUR way.  Do you understand that?'

'Yes,' said Dorothy again.

'You're not to think as I can't do without you, mind,' proceeded
Mrs Creevy.  'I can pick up teachers at two a penny any day of the
week, M.A.s and B.A.s and all.  Only the M.A.s and B.A.s mostly
take to drink, or else they--well, no matter what--and I will say
for you you don't seem to be given to the drink or anything of that
kind.  I dare say you and me can get on all right if you'll drop
these new-fangled ideas of yours and understand what's meant by
practical school-teaching.  So just you listen to me.'

Dorothy listened.  With admirable clarity, and with a cynicism that
was all the more disgusting because it was utterly unconscious, Mrs
Creevy explained the technique of the dirty swindle that she called
practical school-teaching.

'What you've got to get hold of once and for all,' she began, 'is
that there's only one thing that matters in a school, and that's
the fees.  As for all this stuff about "developing the children's
minds", as you call it, it's neither here nor there.  It's the fees
I'm after, not DEVELOPING THE CHILDREN'S MINDS.  After all, it's no
more than common sense.  It's not to be supposed as anyone'd go to
all the trouble of keeping school and having the house turned
upside down by a pack of brats, if it wasn't that there's a bit of
money to be made out of it.  The fees come first, and everything
else comes afterwards.  Didn't I tell you that the very first day
you came here?'

'Yes,' admitted Dorothy humbly.

'Well, then, it's the parents that pay the fees, and it's the
parents you've got to think about.  Do what the parents want--
that's our rule here.  I dare say all this messing about with
plasticine and paper-scraps that you go in for doesn't do the
children any particular harm; but the parents don't want it, and
there's an end of it.  Well, there's just two subjects that they DO
want their children taught, and that's handwriting and arithmetic.
Especially handwriting.  That's something they CAN see the sense
of.  And so handwriting's the thing you've got to keep on and on
at.  Plenty of nice neat copies that the girls can take home, and
that the parents'll show off to the neighbours and give us a bit of
a free advert.  I want you to give the children two hours a day
just at handwriting and nothing else.'

'Two hours a day just at handwriting,' repeated Dorothy obediently.

'Yes.  And plenty of arithmetic as well.  The parents are very keen
on arithmetic: especially money-sums.  Keep your eye on the parents
all the time.  If you meet one of them in the street, get hold of
them and start talking to them about their own girl.  Make out that
she's the best girl in the class and that if she stays just three
terms longer she'll be working wonders.  You see what I mean?
Don't go and tell them there's no room for improvement; because if
you tell them THAT, they generally take their girls away.  Just
three terms longer--that's the thing to tell them.  And when you
make out the end of term reports, just you bring them to me and let
me have a good look at them.  I like to do the marking myself.'

Mrs Creevy's eye met Dorothy's.  She had perhaps been about to say
that she always arranged the marks so that every girl came out
somewhere near the top of the class; but she refrained.  Dorothy
could not answer for a moment.  Outwardly she was subdued, and very
pale, but in her heart were anger and deadly repulsion against
which she had to struggle before she could speak.  She had no
thought, however, of contradicting Mrs Creevy.  The 'talking to'
had quite broken her spirit.  She mastered her voice, and said:

'I'm to teach nothing but handwriting and arithmetic--is that it?'

'Well, I didn't say that exactly.  There's plenty of other subjects
that look well on the prospectus.  French, for instance--French
looks VERY well on the prospectus.  But it's not a subject you want
to waste much time over.  Don't go filling them up with a lot of
grammar and syntax and verbs and all that.  That kind of stuff
doesn't get them anywhere so far as _I_ can see.  Give them a bit
of "Parley vous Francey", and "Passey moi le beurre", and so forth;
that's a lot more use than grammar.  And then there's Latin--I
always put Latin on the prospectus.  But I don't suppose you're
very great on Latin, are you?'

'No,' admitted Dorothy.

'Well, it doesn't matter.  You won't have to teach it.  None of OUR
parents'd want their children to waste time over Latin.  But they
like to see it on the prospectus.  It looks classy.  Of course
there's a whole lot of subjects that we can't actually teach, but
we have to advertise them all the same.  Book-keeping and typing
and shorthand, for instance; besides music and dancing.  It all
looks well on the prospectus.'

'Arithmetic, handwriting, French--is there anything else?' Dorothy
said.

'Oh, well, history and geography and English Literature, of course.
But just drop that map-making business at once--it's nothing but
waste of time.  The best geography to teach is lists of capitals.
Get them so that they can rattle off the capitals of all the
English counties as if it was the multiplication table.  Then
they've got something to show for what they've learnt, anyway.  And
as for history, keep on with the Hundred Page History of Britain.
I won't have them taught out of those big history books you keep
bringing home from the library.  I opened one of those books the
other day, and the first thing I saw was a piece where it said the
English had been beaten in some battle or other.  There's a nice
thing to go teaching children!  The parents won't stand for THAT
kind of thing, I can tell you!'

'And Literature?' said Dorothy.

'Well, of course they've got to do a bit of reading, and I can't
think why you wanted to turn up your nose at those nice little
readers of ours.  Keep on with the readers.  They're a bit old, but
they're quite good enough for a pack of children, I should have
thought.  And I suppose they might as well learn a few pieces of
poetry by heart.  Some of the parents like to hear their children
say a piece of poetry.  "The Boy stood on the Burning Deck"--that's
a very good piece--and then there's "The Wreck of the Steamer"--
now, what was that ship called?  "The Wreck of the Steamer
Hesperus".  A little poetry doesn't hurt now and again.  But don't
let's have any more SHAKESPEARE, please!'

Dorothy got no tea that day.  It was now long past tea-time, but
when Mrs Creevy had finished her harangue she sent Dorothy away
without saying anything about tea.  Perhaps this was a little extra
punishment for l'affaire Macbeth.

Dorothy had not asked permission to go out, but she did not feel
that she could stay in the house any longer.  She got her hat and
coat and set out down the ill-lit road, for the public library.  It
was late into November.  Though the day had been damp the night
wind blew sharply, like a threat, through the almost naked trees,
making the gas-lamps flicker in spite of their glass chimneys, and
stirring the sodden plane leaves that littered the pavement.
Dorothy shivered slightly.  The raw wind sent through her a bone-
deep memory of the cold of Trafalgar Square.  And though she did
not actually think that if she lost her job it would mean going
back to the sub-world from which she had come--indeed, it was not
so desperate as that; at the worst her cousin or somebody else
would help her--still, Mrs Creevy's 'talking to' had made Trafalgar
Square seem suddenly very much nearer.  It had driven into her a
far deeper understanding than she had had before of the great
modern commandment--the eleventh commandment which has wiped out
all the others:  'Thou shalt not lose thy job.'

But as to what Mrs Creevy had said about 'practical school-
teaching', it had been no more than a realistic facing of the
facts.  She had merely said aloud what most people in her position
think but never say.  Her oft-repeated phrase, 'It's the fees I'm
after', was a motto that might be--indeed, ought to be--written
over the doors of every private school in England.

There are, by the way, vast numbers of private schools in England.
Second-rate, third-rate, and fourth-rate (Ringwood House was a
specimen of the fourth-rate school), they exist by the dozen and
the score in every London suburb and every provincial town.  At
any given moment there are somewhere in the neighbourhood of ten
thousand of them, of which less than a thousand are subject to
Government inspection.  And though some of them are better than
others, and a certain number, probably, are better than the council
schools with which they compete, there is the same fundamental evil
in all of them; that is, that they have ultimately no purpose
except to make money.  Often, except that there is nothing illegal
about them, they are started in exactly the same spirit as one
would start a brothel or a bucket shop.  Some snuffy little man of
business (it is quite usual for these schools to be owned by people
who don't teach themselves) says one morning to his wife:

'Emma, I got a notion!  What you say to us two keeping school, eh?
There's plenty of cash in a school, you know, and there ain't the
same work in it as what there is in a shop or a pub.  Besides, you
don't risk nothing; no over'ead to worry about, 'cept jest your
rent and few desks and a blackboard.  But we'll do it in style.
Get in one of these Oxford and Cambridge chaps as is out of a job
and'll come cheap, and dress 'im up in a gown and--what do they
call them little square 'ats with tassels on top?  That 'ud fetch
the parents, eh?  You jest keep your eyes open and see if you can't
pick on a good district where there's not too many on the same game
already.'

He chooses a situation in one of those middle-class districts where
the people are too poor to afford the fees of a decent school and
too proud to send their children to the council schools, and 'sets
up'.  By degrees he works up a connexion in very much the same
manner as a milkman or a greengrocer, and if he is astute and
tactful and has not too many competitors, he makes his few hundreds
a year out of it.

Of course, these schools are not all alike.  Not every principal is
a grasping low-minded shrew like Mrs Creevy, and there are plenty
of schools where the atmosphere is kindly and decent and the
teaching is as good as one could reasonably expect for fees of five
pounds a term.  On the other hand, some of them are crying
scandals.  Later on, when Dorothy got to know one of the teachers
at another private school in Southbridge, she heard tales of
schools that were worse by far than Ringwood House.  She heard of a
cheap boarding-school where travelling actors dumped their children
as one dumps luggage in a railway cloakroom, and where the children
simply vegetated, doing absolutely nothing, reaching the age of
sixteen without learning to read; and another school where the days
passed in a perpetual riot, with a broken-down old hack of a master
chasing the boys up and down and slashing at them with a cane, and
then suddenly collapsing and weeping with his head on a desk, while
the boys laughed at him.  So long as schools are run primarily for
money, things like this will happen.  The expensive private schools
to which the rich send their children are not, on the surface, so
bad as the others, because they can afford a proper staff, and the
Public School examination system keeps them up to the mark; but
they have the same essential taint.

It was only later, and by degrees, that Dorothy discovered these
facts about private schools.  At first, she used to suffer from an
absurd fear that one day the school inspectors would descend upon
Ringwood House, find out what a sham and a swindle it all was, and
raise the dust accordingly.  Later on, however, she learned that
this could never happen.  Ringwood House was not 'recognized', and
therefore was not liable to be inspected.  One day a Government
inspector did, indeed, visit the school, but beyond measuring the
dimensions of the schoolroom to see whether each girl had her right
number of cubic feet of air, he did nothing; he had no power to do
more.  Only the tiny minority of 'recognized' schools--less than
one in ten--are officially tested to decide whether they keep up a
reasonable educational standard.  As for the others, they are free
to teach or not teach exactly as they choose.  No one controls or
inspects them except the children's parents--the blind leading the
blind.



5


Next day Dorothy began altering her programme in accordance with
Mrs Creevy's orders.  The first lesson of the day was handwriting,
and the second was geography.

'That'll do, girls,' said Dorothy as the funereal clock struck ten.
'We'll start our geography lesson now.'

The girls flung their desks open and put their hated copybooks away
with audible sighs of relief.  There were murmurs of 'Oo, jography!
Good!'  It was one of their favourite lessons.  The two girls who
were 'monitors' for the week, and whose job it was to clean the
blackboard, collect exercise books and so forth (children will
fight for the privilege of doing jobs of that kind), leapt from
their places to fetch the half-finished contour map that stood
against the wall.  But Dorothy stopped them.

'Wait a moment.  Sit down, you two.  We aren't going to go on with
the map this morning.'

There was a cry of dismay.  'Oh, Miss!  Why can't we, Miss?  PLEASE
let's go on with it!'

'No.  I'm afraid we've been wasting a little too much time over the
map lately.  We're going to start learning some of the capitals of
the English counties.  I want every girl in the class to know the
whole lot of them by the end of the term.'

The children's faces fell.  Dorothy saw it, and added with an
attempt at brightness--that hollow, undeceiving brightness of a
teacher trying to palm off a boring subject as an interesting one:

'Just think how pleased your parents will be when they can ask you
the capital of any county in England and you can tell it them!'

The children were not in the least taken in.  They writhed at the
nauseous prospect.

'Oh, CAPITALS!  Learning CAPITALS!  That's just what we used to do
with Miss Strong.  Please, Miss, WHY can't we go on with the map?'

'Now don't argue.  Get your notebooks out and take them down as I
give them to you.  And afterwards we'll say them all together.'

Reluctantly, the children fished out their notebooks, still
groaning.  'Please, Miss, can we go on with the map NEXT time?'

'I don't know.  We'll see.'

That afternoon the map was removed from the schoolroom, and Mrs
Creevy scraped the plasticine off the board and threw it away.  It
was the same with all the other subjects, one after another.  All
the changes that Dorothy had made were undone.  They went back to
the routine of interminable 'copies' and interminable 'practice'
sums, to the learning parrot-fashion of 'Passez-moi le beurre' and
'Le fils du jardinier a perdu son chapeau', to the Hundred Page
History and the insufferable little 'reader'.  (Mrs Creevy had
impounded the Shakespeares, ostensibly to burn them.  The
probability was that she had sold them.)  Two hours a day were set
apart for handwriting lessons.  The two depressing pieces of black
paper, which Dorothy had taken down from the wall, were replaced,
and their proverbs written upon them afresh in neat copperplate.
As for the historical chart, Mrs Creevy took it away and burnt it.

When the children saw the hated lessons, from which they had
thought to have escaped for ever, coming back upon them one by one,
they were first astonished, then miserable, then sulky.  But it was
far worse for Dorothy than for the children.  After only a couple
of days the rigmarole through which she was obliged to drive them
so nauseated her that she began to doubt whether she could go on
with it any longer.  Again and again she toyed with the idea of
disobeying Mrs Creevy.  Why not, she would think, as the children
whined and groaned and sweated under their miserable bondage--why
not stop it and go back to proper lessons, even if it was only for
an hour or two a day?  Why not drop the whole pretence of lessons
and simply let the children play?  It would be so much better for
them than this.  Let them draw pictures or make something out of
plasticine or begin making up a fairy tale--anything REAL, anything
that would interest them, instead of this dreadful nonsense.  But
she dared not.  At any moment Mrs Creevy was liable to come in, and
if she found the children 'messing about' instead of getting on
with their routine work, there would be fearful trouble.  So
Dorothy hardened her heart, and obeyed Mrs Creevy's instructions to
the letter, and things were very much as they had been before Miss
Strong was 'taken bad'.

The lessons reached such a pitch of boredom that the brightest spot
in the week was Mr Booth's so-called chemistry lecture on Thursday
afternoons.  Mr Booth was a seedy, tremulous man of about fifty,
with long, wet, cowdung-coloured moustaches.  He had been a Public
School master once upon a time, but nowadays he made just enough
for a life of chronic sub-drunkenness by delivering lectures at two
and sixpence a time.  The lectures were unrelieved drivel.  Even in
his palmiest days Mr Booth had not been a particularly brilliant
lecturer, and now, when he had had his first go of delirium tremens
and lived in a daily dread of his second, what chemical knowledge
he had ever had was fast deserting him.  He would stand dithering
in front of the class, saying the same thing over and over again
and trying vainly to remember what he was talking about.  'Remember,
girls,' he would say in his husky, would-be fatherly voice, 'the
number of the elements is ninety-three--ninety-three elements,
girls--you all of you know what an element is, don't you?--there are
just ninety-three of them--remember that number, girls--ninety-
three,' until Dorothy (she had to stay in the schoolroom during the
chemistry lectures, because Mrs Creevy considered that it DIDN'T DO
to leave the girls alone with a man) was miserable with vicarious
shame.  All the lectures started with the ninety-three elements, and
never got very much further.  There was also talk of 'a very
interesting little experiment that I'm going to perform for you next
week, girls--very interesting you'll find it--we'll have it next
week without fail--a very interesting little experiment', which,
needless to say, was never performed.  Mr Booth possessed no chemical
apparatus, and his hands were far too shaky to have used it even if
he had had any.  The girls sat through his lectures in a suety
stupor of boredom, but even he was a welcome change from handwriting
lessons.

The children were never quite the same with Dorothy after the
parents' visit.  They did not change all in a day, of course.  They
had grown to be fond of 'old Millie', and they expected that after
a day or two of tormenting them with handwriting and 'commercial
arithmetic' she would go back to something interesting.  But the
handwriting and arithmetic went on, and the popularity Dorothy had
enjoyed, as a teacher whose lessons weren't boring and who didn't
slap you, pinch you, or twist your ears, gradually vanished.
Moreover, the story of the row there had been over Macbeth was not
long in leaking out.  The children grasped that old Millie had done
something wrong--they didn't exactly know what--and had been given
a 'talking to'.  It lowered her in their eyes.  There is no dealing
with children, even with children who are fond of you, unless you
can keep your prestige as an adult; let that prestige be once
damaged, and even the best-hearted children will despise you.

So they began to be naughty in the normal, traditional way.
Before, Dorothy had only had to deal with occasional laziness,
outbursts of noise and silly giggling fits; now there were spite
and deceitfulness as well.  The children revolted ceaselessly
against the horrible routine.  They forgot the short weeks when old
Millie had seemed quite a good sort and school itself had seemed
rather fun.  Now, school was simply what it had always been, and
what indeed you expected it to be--a place where you slacked and
yawned and whiled the time away by pinching your neighbour and
trying to make the teacher lose her temper, and from which you
burst with a yell of relief the instant the last lesson was over.
Sometimes they sulked and had fits of crying, sometimes they argued
in the maddening persistent way that children have, 'WHY should we
do this?  WHY does anyone have to learn to read and write?' over
and over again, until Dorothy had to stand over them and silence
them with threats of blows.  She was growing almost habitually
irritable nowadays; it surprised and shocked her, but she could not
stop it.  Every morning she vowed to herself, 'Today I will NOT
lose my temper', and every morning, with depressing regularity, she
DID lose her temper, especially at about half past eleven when the
children were at their worst.  Nothing in the world is quite so
irritating as dealing with mutinous children.  Sooner or later,
Dorothy knew, she would lose control of herself and begin hitting
them.  It seemed to her an unforgivable thing to do, to hit a
child; but nearly all teachers come to it in the end.  It was
impossible now to get any child to work except when your eye was
upon it.  You had only to turn your back for an instant and
blotting-paper pellets were flying to and fro.  Nevertheless, with
ceaseless slave-driving the children's handwriting and 'commercial
arithmetic' did certainly show some improvement, and no doubt the
parents were satisfied.

The last few weeks of the term were a very bad time.  For over a
fortnight Dorothy was quite penniless, for Mrs Creevy had told her
that she couldn't pay her her term's wages 'till some of the fees
came in'.  So she was deprived of the secret slabs of chocolate
that had kept her going, and she suffered from a perpetual slight
hunger that made her languid and spiritless.  There were leaden
mornings when the minutes dragged like hours, when she struggled
with herself to keep her eyes away from the clock, and her heart
sickened to think that beyond this lesson there loomed another just
like it, and more of them and more, stretching on into what seemed
like a dreary eternity.  Worse yet were the times when the children
were in their noisy mood and it needed a constant exhausting effort
of the will to keep them under control at all; and beyond the wall,
of course, lurked Mrs Creevy, always listening, always ready to
descend upon the schoolroom, wrench the door open, and glare round
the room with 'Now then!  What's all this noise about, please?' and
the sack in her eye.

Dorothy was fully awake, now, to the beastliness of living in Mrs
Creevy's house.  The filthy food, the cold, and the lack of baths
seemed much more important than they had seemed a little while ago.
Moreover, she was beginning to appreciate, as she had not done when
the joy of her work was fresh upon her, the utter loneliness of her
position.  Neither her father nor Mr Warburton had written to her,
and in two months she had made not a single friend in Southbridge.
For anyone so situated, and particularly for a woman, it is all but
impossible to make friends.  She had no money and no home of her
own, and outside the school her sole places of refuge were the
public library, on the few evenings when she could get there, and
church on Sunday mornings.  She went to church regularly, of
course--Mrs Creevy had insisted on that.  She had settled the
question of Dorothy's religious observances at breakfast on her
first Sunday morning.

'I've just been wondering what Place of Worship you ought to go
to,' she said.  'I suppose you were brought up C. of E., weren't
you?'

'Yes,' said Dorothy.

'Hm, well.  I can't quite make up my mind where to send you.
There's St George's--that's the C. of E.--and there's the Baptist
Chapel where I go myself.  Most of our parents are Nonconformists,
and I don't know as they'd quite approve of a C. of E. teacher.
You can't be too careful with the parents.  They had a bit of a
scare two years ago when it turned out that the teacher I had then
was actually a Roman Catholic, if you please!  Of course she kept
it dark as long as she could, but it came out in the end, and three
of the parents took their children away.  I got rid of her the same
day as I found it out, naturally.'

Dorothy was silent.

'Still,' went on Mrs Creevy, 'we HAVE got three C. of E. pupils,
and I don't know as the Church connexion mightn't be worked up a
bit.  So perhaps you'd better risk it and go to St George's.  But
you want to be a bit careful, you know.  I'm told St George's is
one of these churches where they go in for a lot of bowing and
scraping and crossing yourself and all that.  We've got two parents
that are Plymouth Brothers, and they'd throw a fit if they heard
you'd been seen crossing yourself.  So don't go and do THAT,
whatever you do.'

'Very well,' said Dorothy.

'And just you keep your eyes well open during the sermon.  Have a
good look round and see if there's any young girls in the
congregation that we could get hold of.  If you see any likely
looking ones, get on to the parson afterwards and try and find out
their names and addresses.'

So Dorothy went to St George's.  It was a shade 'Higher' than St
Athelstan's had been; chairs, not pews, but no incense, and the
vicar (his name was Mr Gore-Williams) wore a plain cassock and
surplice except on festival days.  As for the services, they were
so like those at home that Dorothy could go through them, and utter
all the responses at the right moment, in a state of the completest
abstraction.

There was never a moment when the power of worship returned to her.
Indeed, the whole concept of worship was meaningless to her now;
her faith had vanished, utterly and irrevocably.  It is a
mysterious thing, the loss of faith--as mysterious as faith itself.
Like faith, it is ultimately not rooted in logic; it is a change in
the climate of the mind.  But however little the church services
might mean to her, she did not regret the hours she spent in
church.  On the contrary, she looked forward to her Sunday mornings
as blessed interludes of peace; and that not only because Sunday
morning meant a respite from Mrs Creevy's prying eye and nagging
voice.  In another and deeper sense the atmosphere of the church
was soothing and reassuring to her.  For she perceived that in all
that happens in church, however absurd and cowardly its supposed
purpose may be, there is something--it is hard to define, but
something of decency, of spiritual comeliness--that is not easily
found in the world outside.  It seemed to her that even though you
no longer believe, it is better to go to church than not; better to
follow in the ancient ways, than to drift in rootless freedom.  She
knew very well that she would never again be able to utter a prayer
and mean it; but she knew also that for the rest of her life she
must continue with the observances to which she had been bred.
Just this much remained to her of the faith that had once, like the
bones in a living frame, held all her life together.

But as yet she did not think very deeply about the loss of her
faith and what it might mean to her in the future.  She was too
busy merely existing, merely struggling to make her nerves hold out
for the rest of that miserable term.  For as the term drew to an
end, the job of keeping the class in order grew more and more
exhausting.  The girls behaved atrociously, and they were all the
bitterer against Dorothy because they had once been fond of her.
She had deceived them, they felt.  She had started off by being
decent, and now she had turned out to be just a beastly old teacher
like the rest of them--a nasty old beast who kept on and on with
those awful handwriting lessons and snapped your head off if you so
much as made a blot on your book.  Dorothy caught them eyeing her
face, sometimes, with the aloof, cruel scrutiny of children.  They
had thought her pretty once, and now they thought her ugly, old,
and scraggy.  She had grown, indeed, much thinner since she had
been at Ringwood House.  They hated her now, as they had hated all
their previous teachers.

Sometimes they baited her quite deliberately.  The older and more
intelligent girls understood the situation well enough--understood
that Millie was under old Creevy's thumb and that she got dropped
on afterwards when they had been making too much noise; sometimes
they made all the noise they dared, just so as to bring old Creevy
in and have the pleasure of watching Millie's face while old Creevy
told her off.  There were times when Dorothy could keep her temper
and forgive them all they did, because she realized that it was
only a healthy instinct that made them rebel against the loathsome
monotony of their work.  But there were other times when her nerves
were more on edge than usual, and when she looked round at the
score of silly little faces, grinning or mutinous, and found it
possible to hate them.  Children are so blind, so selfish, so
merciless.  They do not know when they are tormenting you past
bearing, and if they did know they would not care.  You may do your
very best for them, you may keep your temper in situations that
would try a saint, and yet if you are forced to bore them and
oppress them, they will hate you for it without ever asking
themselves whether it is you who are to blame.  How true--when you
happen not to be a school-teacher yourself--how true those often-
quoted lines sound--


Under a cruel eye outworn
The little ones spend the day
In sighing and dismay!


But when you yourself are the cruel eye outworn, you realize that
there is another side to the picture.

The last week came, and the dirty farce of 'exams', was carried
through.  The system, as explained by Mrs Creevy, was quite simple.
You coached the children in, for example, a series of sums until
you were quite certain that they could get them right, and then set
them the same sums as an arithmetic paper before they had time to
forget the answers; and so with each subject in turn.  The
children's papers were, of course, sent home for their parents'
inspection.  And Dorothy wrote the reports under Mrs Creevy's
dictation, and she had to write 'excellent' so many times that--as
sometimes happens when you write a word over and over again--she
forgot how to spell it and began writing in 'excelent', 'exsellent',
'ecsellent', 'eccelent'.

The last day passed in fearful tumults.  Not even Mrs Creevy
herself could keep the children in order.  By midday Dorothy's
nerves were in rags, and Mrs Creevy gave her a 'talking to' in
front of the seven children who stayed to dinner.  In the afternoon
the noise was worse than ever, and at last Dorothy, overcome,
appealed to the girls almost tearfully to stop.

'Girls!' she called out, raising her voice to make herself heard
through the din.  'PLEASE stop it, PLEASE!  You're behaving
horribly to me.  Do you think it's kind to go on like this?'

That was fatal, of course.  Never, never, never throw yourself on
the mercy of a child!  There was an instant's hush, and then one
child cried out, loudly and derisively, 'Mill-iee!'  The next
moment the whole class had taken it up, even the imbecile Mavis,
chanting all together 'Mill-iee!  Mill-iee!  Mill-iee!'  At that,
something within Dorothy seemed to snap.  She paused for an
instant, picked out the girl who was making the most noise, walked
up to her, and gave her a smack across the ear almost as hard as
she could hit.  Happily it was only one of the 'medium payers'.



6


On the first day of the holidays Dorothy received a letter from Mr
Warburton.


My Dear Dorothy [he wrote],--Or should I call you Ellen, as I
understand that is your new name?  You must, I am afraid, have
thought it very heartless of me not to have written sooner, but I
assure you that it was not until ten days ago that I even heard
anything about our supposed escapade.  I have been abroad, first in
various parts of France, then in Austria and then in Rome, and, as
you know, I avoid my fellow countrymen most strenuously on these
trips.  They are disgusting enough even at home, but in foreign
parts their behaviour makes me so ashamed of them that I generally
try to pass myself off as an American.

When I got to Knype Hill your father refused to see me, but I
managed to get hold of Victor Stone, who gave me your address and
the name you are using.  He seemed rather reluctant to do so, and I
gathered that even he, like everyone else in this poisonous town,
still believes that you have misbehaved yourself in some way.  I
think the theory that you and I eloped together has been dropped,
but you must, they feel, have done SOMETHING scandalous.  A young
woman has left home suddenly, therefore there must be a man in the
case; that is how the provincial mind works, you see.  I need not
tell you that I have been contradicting the whole story with the
utmost vigour.  You will be glad to hear that I managed to corner
that disgusting hag, Mrs Semprill, and give her a piece of my mind;
and I assure you that a piece of MY mind is distinctly formidable.
But the woman is simply sub-human.  I could get nothing out of her
except hypocritical snivellings about 'poor, POOR Dorothy'.

I hear that your father misses you very much, and would gladly have
you home again if it were not for the scandal.  His meals are never
punctual nowadays, it seems.  He gives it out that you 'went away
to recuperate from a slight illness and have now got an excellent
post at a girls' school'.  You will be surprised to hear of one
thing that has happened to him.  He has been obliged to pay off all
his debts!  I am told that the tradesmen rose in a body and held
what was practically a creditors' meeting in the Rectory.  Not the
kind of thing that could have happened at Plumstead Episcopi--but
these are democratic days, alas!  You, evidently, were the only
person who could keep the tradesmen permanently at bay.

And now I must tell you some of my own news, etc., etc., etc.


At this point Dorothy tore the letter up in disappointment and even
in annoyance.  He might have shown a little more sympathy! she
thought.  It was just like Mr Warburton after getting her into
serious trouble--for after all, he was principally to blame for
what had happened--to be so flippant and unconcerned about it.  But
when she had thought it over she acquitted him of heartlessness.
He had done what little was possible to help her, and he could not
be expected to pity her for troubles of which he had not heard.
Besides, his own life had been a series of resounding scandals;
probably he could not understand that to a woman a scandal is a
serious matter.

At Christmas Dorothy's father also wrote, and what was more, sent
her a Christmas present of two pounds.  It was evident from the
tone of his letter that he had forgiven Dorothy by this time.  WHAT
exactly he had forgiven her was not certain, because it was not
certain what exactly she had done; but still, he had forgiven her.
The letter started with some perfunctory but quite friendly
inquiries.  He hoped her new job suited her, he wrote.  And were
her rooms at the school comfortable and the rest of the staff
congenial?  He had heard that they did one very well at schools
nowadays--very different from what it had been forty years ago.
Now, in his day, etc., etc., etc.  He had, Dorothy perceived, not
the dimmest idea of her present circumstances.  At the mention of
schools his mind flew to Winchester, his old school; such a place
as Ringwood House was beyond his imagining.

The rest of the letter was taken up with grumblings about the way
things were going in the parish.  The Rector complained of being
worried and overworked.  The wretched churchwardens kept bothering
him with this and that, and he was growing very tired of Proggett's
reports about the collapsing belfry, and the daily woman whom he
had engaged to help Ellen was a great nuisance and had put her
broom-handle through the face of the grandfather clock in his
study--and so on, and so forth, for a number of pages.  He said
several times in a mumbling roundabout way that he wished Dorothy
were there to help him; but he did not actually suggest that she
should come home.  Evidently it was still necessary that she should
remain out of sight and out of mind--a skeleton in a distant and
well-locked cupboard.

The letter filled Dorothy with sudden painful homesickness.  She
found herself pining to be back at her parish visiting and her Girl
Guides' cooking class, and wondering unhappily how her father had
got on without her all this while and whether those two women were
looking after him properly.  She was fond of her father, in a way
that she had never dared to show; for he was not a person to whom
you could make any display of affection.  It surprised and rather
shocked her to realize how little he had been in her thoughts
during the past four months.  There had been periods of weeks at a
time when she had forgotten his existence.  But the truth was that
the mere business of keeping body and soul together had left her
with no leisure for other emotions.

Now, however, school work was over, and she had leisure and to
spare, for though Mrs Creevy did her best she could not invent
enough household jobs to keep Dorothy busy for more than part of
the day.  She made it quite plain to Dorothy that during the
holidays she was nothing but a useless expense, and she watched her
at her meals (obviously feeling it an outrage that she should eat
when she wasn't working) in a way that finally became unbearable.
So Dorothy kept out of the house as much as possible, and, feeling
fairly rich with her wages (four pounds ten, for nine weeks) and
her father's two pounds, she took to buying sandwiches at the ham
and beef shop in the town and eating her dinner out of doors.  Mrs
Creevy acquiesced, half sulkily because she liked to have Dorothy
in the house to nag at her, and half pleased at the chance of
skimping a few more meals.

Dorothy went for long solitary walks, exploring Southbridge and its
yet more desolate neighbours, Dorley, Wembridge, and West Holton.
Winter had descended, dank and windless, and more gloomy in those
colourless labyrinthine suburbs than in the bleakest wilderness.
On two or three occasions, though such extravagance would probably
mean hungry days later on, Dorothy took a cheap return ticket to
Iver Heath or Burnham Beeches.  The woods were sodden and wintry,
with great beds of drifted beech leaves that glowed like copper in
the still, wet air, and the days were so mild that you could sit
out of doors and read if you kept your gloves on.  On Christmas Eve
Mrs Creevy produced some sprigs of holly that she had saved from
last year, dusted them, and nailed them up; but she did not, she
said, intend to have a Christmas dinner.  She didn't hold with all
this Christmas nonsense, she said--it was just a lot of humbug got
up by the shopkeepers, and such an unnecessary expense; and she
hated turkey and Christmas pudding anyway.  Dorothy was relieved; a
Christmas dinner in that joyless 'morning-room' (she had an awful
momentary vision of Mrs Creevy in a paper hat out of a cracker) was
something that didn't bear thinking about.  She ate her Christmas
dinner--a hard-boiled egg, two cheese sandwiches, and a bottle of
lemonade--in the woods near Burnham, against a great gnarled beech
tree, over a copy of George Gissing's The Odd Women.

On days when it was too wet to go for walks she spent most of her
time in the public library--becoming, indeed, one of the regular
habituees of the library, along with the out-of-work men who sat
drearily musing over illustrated papers which they did not read,
and the elderly discoloured bachelor who lived in 'rooms' on two
pounds a week and came to the library to study books on yachting by
the hour together.  It had been a great relief to her when the term
ended, but this feeling soon wore off; indeed, with never a soul to
talk to, the days dragged even more heavily than before.  There is
perhaps no quarter of the inhabited world where one can be quite so
completely alone as in the London suburbs.  In a big town the
throng and bustle give one at least the illusion of companionship,
and in the country everyone is interested in everyone else--too
much so, indeed.  But in places like Southbridge, if you have no
family and no home to call your own, you could spend half a
lifetime without managing to make a friend.  There are women in
such places, and especially derelict gentlewomen in ill-paid jobs,
who go for years upon end in almost utter solitude.  It was not
long before Dorothy found herself in a perpetually low-spirited,
jaded state in which, try as she would, nothing seemed able to
interest her.  And it was in the hateful ennui of this time--the
corrupting ennui that lies in wait for every modern soul--that she
first came to a full understanding of what it meant to have lost
her faith.

She tried drugging herself with books, and it succeeded for a week
or so.  But after a while very nearly all books seemed wearisome
and unintelligible; for the mind will not work to any purpose when
it is quite alone.  In the end she found that she could not cope
with anything more difficult than a detective story.  She took
walks of ten and fifteen miles, trying to tire herself into a
better mood; but the mean suburban roads, and the damp, miry paths
through the woods, the naked trees, the sodden moss and great
spongy fungi, afflicted her with a deadly melancholy.  It was human
companionship that she needed, and there seemed no way of getting
it.  At nights' when she walked back to the school and looked at
the warm-lit windows of the houses, and heard voices laughing and
gramophones playing within, her heart swelled with envy.  Ah, to be
like those people in there--to have at least a home, a family, a
few friends who were interested in you!  There were days when she
pined for the courage to speak to strangers in the street.  Days,
too, when she contemplated shamming piety in order to scrape
acquaintance with the Vicar of St George's and his family, and
perhaps get the chance of occupying herself with a little parish
work; days, even, when she was so desperate that she thought of
joining the Y.W.C.A.

But almost at the end of the holidays, through a chance encounter
at the library, she made friends with a little woman named Miss
Beaver, who was geography mistress at Toot's Commercial College,
another of the private schools in Southbridge.  Toot's Commerical
College was a much larger and more pretentious school than Ringwood
House--it had about a hundred and fifty day-pupils of both sexes
and even rose to the dignity of having a dozen boarders--and its
curriculum was a somewhat less blatant swindle.  It was one of
those schools that are aimed at the type of parent who blathers
about 'up-to-date business training', and its watch-word was
Efficiency; meaning a tremendous parade of hustling, and the
banishment of all humane studies.  One of its features was a kind
of catechism called the Efficiency Ritual, which all the children
were required to learn by heart as soon as they joined the school.
It had questions and answers such as:

Q.  What is the secret of success?
A.  The secret of success is efficiency.
Q.  What is the test of efficiency?
A.  The test of efficiency is success.

And so on and so on.  It was said that the spectacle of the whole
school, boys and girls together, reciting the Efficiency Ritual
under the leadership of the Headmaster--they had this ceremony two
mornings a week instead of prayers--was most impressive.

Miss Beaver was a prim little woman with a round body, a thin face,
a reddish nose, and the gait of a guinea-hen.  After twenty years
of slave-driving she had attained to an income of four pounds a
week and the privilege of 'living out' instead of having to put the
boarders to bed at nights.  She lived in 'rooms'--that is, in a
bed-sitting room--to which she was sometimes able to invite Dorothy
when both of them had a free evening.  How Dorothy looked forward
to those visits!  They were only possible at rare intervals,
because Miss Beaver's landlady 'didn't approve of visitors', and
even when you got there there was nothing much to do except to help
solve the crossword puzzle out of the Daily Telegraph and look at
the photographs Miss Beaver had taken on her trip (this trip had
been the summit and glory of her life) to the Austrian Tyrol in
1913.  But still, how much it meant to sit talking to somebody in a
friendly way and to drink a cup of tea less wishy-washy than Mrs
Creevy's!  Miss Beaver had a spirit lamp in a japanned travelling
case (it had been with her to the Tyrol in 1913) on which she
brewed herself pots of tea as black as coal-tar, swallowing about a
bucketful of this stuff during the day.  She confided to Dorothy
that she always took a Thermos flask to school and had a nice hot
cup of tea during the break and another after dinner.  Dorothy
perceived that by one of two well-beaten roads every third-rate
schoolmistress must travel: Miss Strong's road, via whisky to the
workhouse; or Miss Beaver's road, via strong tea to a decent death
in the Home for Decayed Gentlewomen.

Miss Beaver was in truth a dull little woman.  She was a memento
mori, or rather memento senescere, to Dorothy.  Her soul seemed to
have withered until it was as forlorn as a dried-up cake of soap in
a forgotten soap dish.  She had come to a point where life in a
bed-sitting room under a tyrannous landlady and the 'efficient'
thrusting of Commercial Geography down children's retching throats,
were almost the only destiny she could imagine.  Yet Dorothy grew
to be very fond of Miss Beaver, and those occasional hours that
they spent together in the bed-sitting room, doing the Daily
Telegraph crossword over a nice hot cup of tea, were like oases in
her life.

She was glad when the Easter term began, for even the daily round
of slave-driving was better than the empty solitude of the
holidays.  Moreover, the girls were much better in hand this term;
she never again found it necessary to smack their heads.  For she
had grasped now that it is easy enough to keep children in order if
you are ruthless with them from the start.  Last term the girls had
behaved badly, because she had started by treating them as human
beings, and later on, when the lessons that interested them were
discontinued, they had rebelled like human beings.  But if you are
obliged to teach children rubbish, you mustn't treat them as human
beings.  You must treat them like animals--driving, not persuading.
Before all else, you must teach them that it is more painful to
rebel than to obey.  Possibly this kind of treatment is not very
good for children, but there is no doubt they understand it and
respond to it.

She learned the dismal arts of the school-teacher.  She learned to
glaze her mind against the interminable boring hours, to economize
her nervous energy, to be merciless and ever-vigilant, to take a
kind of pride and pleasure in seeing a futile rigmarole well done.
She had grown, quite suddenly it seemed, much tougher and maturer.
Her eyes had lost the half-childish look that they had once had,
and her face had grown thinner, making her nose seem longer.  At
times it was quite definitely a schoolmarm's face; you could
imagine pince-nez upon it.  But she had not become cynical as yet.
She still knew that these children were the victims of a dreary
swindle, still longed, if it had been possible, to do something
better for them.  If she harried them and stuffed their heads with
rubbish, it was for one reason alone: because whatever happened she
had got to keep her job.

There was very little noise in the schoolroom this term.  Mrs
Creevy, anxious as she always was for a chance of finding fault,
seldom had reason to rap on the wall with her broom-handle.  One
morning at breakfast she looked rather hard at Dorothy, as though
weighing a decision, and then pushed the dish of marmalade across
the table.

'Have some marmalade if you like, Miss Millborough,' she said,
quite graciously for her.

It was the first time that marmalade had crossed Dorothy's lips
since she had come to Ringwood House.  She flushed slightly.  'So
the woman realizes that I have done my best for her,' she could not
help thinking.

Thereafter she had marmalade for breakfast every morning.  And in
other ways Mrs Creevy's manner became--not indeed, genial, for it
could never be that, but less brutally offensive.  There were even
times when she produced a grimace that was intended for a smile;
her face, it seemed to Dorothy, CREASED with the effort.  About
this time her conversation became peppered with references to 'next
term'.  It was always 'Next term we'll do this', and 'Next term I
shall want you to do that', until Dorothy began to feel that she
had won Mrs Creevy's confidence and was being treated more like a
colleague than a slave.  At that a small, unreasonable but very
exciting hope took root in her heart.  Perhaps Mrs Creevy was going
to raise her wages!  It was profoundly unlikely, and she tried to
break herself of hoping for it, but could not quite succeed.  If
her wages were raised even half a crown a week, what a difference
it would make!

The last day came.  With any luck Mrs Creevy might pay her wages
tomorrow, Dorothy thought.  She wanted the money very badly indeed;
she had been penniless for weeks past, and was not only unbearably
hungry, but also in need of some new stockings, for she had not a
pair that were not darned almost out of existence.  The following
morning she did the household jobs allotted to her, and then,
instead of going out, waited in the 'morning-room' while Mrs Creevy
banged about with her broom and pan upstairs.  Presently Mrs Creevy
came down.

'Ah, so THERE you are, Miss Millborough!' she said in a peculiar
meaning tone.  'I had a sort of an idea you wouldn't be in such a
hurry to get out of doors this morning.  Well, as you ARE here, I
suppose I may as well pay you your wages.'

'Thank you,' said Dorothy.

'And after that,' added Mrs Creevy, 'I've got a little something as
I want to say to you.'

Dorothy's heart stirred.  Did that 'little something' mean the
longed-for rise in wages?  It was just conceivable.  Mrs Creevy
produced a worn, bulgy leather purse from a locked drawer in the
dresser, opened it and licked her thumb.

'Twelve weeks and five days,' she said.  'Twelve weeks is near
enough.  No need to be particular to a day.  That makes six
pounds.'

She counted out five dingy pound notes and two ten-shilling notes;
then, examining one of the notes and apparently finding it too
clean, she put it back into her purse and fished out another that
had been torn in half.  She went to the dresser, got a piece of
transparent sticky paper and carefully stuck the two halves
together.  Then she handed it, together with the other six, to
Dorothy.

'There you are, Miss Millborough,' she said.  'And now, will you
just leave the house AT once, please?  I shan't be wanting you any
longer.'

'You won't be--'

Dorothy's entrails seemed to have turned to ice.  All the blood
drained out of her face.  But even now, in her terror and despair,
she was not absolutely sure of the meaning of what had been said to
her.  She still half thought that Mrs Creevy merely meant that she
was to stay out of the house for the rest of the day.

'You won't be wanting me any longer?' she repeated faintly.

'No.  I'm getting in another teacher at the beginning of next term.
And it isn't to be expected as I'd keep you through the holidays
all free for nothing, is it?'

'But you don't mean that you want me to LEAVE--that you're
dismissing me?'

'Of course I do.  What else did you think I meant?'

'But you've given me no notice!' said Dorothy.

'Notice!' said Mrs Creevy, getting angry immediately.  'What's it
got to do with YOU whether I give you notice or not?  You haven't
got a written contract, have you?'

'No . . . I suppose not.'

'Well, then!  You'd better go upstairs and start packing your box.
It's no good your staying any longer, because I haven't got
anything in for your dinner.'

Dorothy went upstairs and sat down on the side of the bed.  She was
trembling uncontrollably, and it was some minutes before she could
collect her wits and begin packing.  She felt dazed.  The disaster
that had fallen upon her was so sudden, so apparently causeless,
that she had difficulty in believing that it had actually happened.
But in truth the reason why Mrs Creevy had sacked her was quite
simple and adequate.

Not far from Ringwood House there was a poor, moribund little
school called The Gables, with only seven pupils.  The teacher was
an incompetent old hack called Miss Allcock, who had been at
thirty-eight different schools in her life and was not fit to have
charge of a tame canary.  But Miss Allcock had one outstanding
talent; she was very good at double-crossing her employers.  In
these third-rate and fourth-rate private schools a sort of piracy
is constantly going on.  Parents are 'got round' and pupils stolen
from one school to another.  Very often the treachery of the
teacher is at the bottom of it.  The teacher secretly approaches
the parents one by one ('Send your child to me and I'll take her
at ten shillings a term cheaper'), and when she has corrupted a
sufficient number she suddenly deserts and 'sets up' on her own,
or carries the children off to another school.  Miss Allcock had
succeeded in stealing three out of her employer's seven pupils, and
had come to Mrs Creevy with the offer of them.  In return, she was
to have Dorothy's place and a fifteen-per-cent commission on the
pupils she brought.

There were weeks of furtive chaffering before the bargain was
clinched, Miss Allcock being finally beaten down from fifteen per
cent to twelve and a half.  Mrs Creevy privately resolved to sack
old Allcock the instant she was certain that the three children she
brought with her would stay.  Simultaneously, Miss Allcock was
planning to begin stealing old Creevy's pupils as soon as she had
got a footing in the school.

Having decided to sack Dorothy, it was obviously most important to
prevent her from finding it out.  For, of course, if she knew what
was going to happen, she would begin stealing pupils on her own
account, or at any rate wouldn't do a stroke of work for the rest
of the term.  (Mrs Creevy prided herself on knowing human nature.)
Hence the marmalade, the creaky smiles, and the other ruses to
allay Dorothy's suspicions.  Anyone who knew the ropes would have
begun thinking of another job the very moment when the dish of
marmalade was pushed across the table.

Just half an hour after her sentence of dismissal, Dorothy,
carrying her handbag, opened the front gate.  It was the fourth of
April, a bright blowy day, too cold to stand about in, with a sky
as blue as a hedgesparrow's egg, and one of those spiteful spring
winds that come tearing along the pavement in sudden gusts and blow
dry, stinging dust into your face.  Dorothy shut the gate behind
her and began to walk very slowly in the direction of the main-line
station.

She had told Mrs Creevy that she would give her an address to which
her box could be sent, and Mrs Creevy had instantly exacted five
shillings for the carriage.  So Dorothy had five pounds fifteen in
hand, which might keep her for three weeks with careful economy.
What she was going to do, except that she must start by going to
London and finding a suitable lodging, she had very little idea.
But her first panic had worn off, and she realized that the
situation was not altogether desperate.  No doubt her father would
help her, at any rate for a while, and at the worst, though she
hated even the thought of doing it, she could ask her cousin's help
a second time.  Besides, her chances of finding a job were probably
fairly good.  She was young, she spoke with a genteel accent, and
she was willing to drudge for a servant's wages--qualities that are
much sought after by the proprietors of fourth-rate schools.  Very
likely all would be well.  But that there was an evil time ahead of
her, a time of job-hunting, of uncertainty and possibly of hunger--
that, at any rate, was certain.




CHAPTER 5



1


However, it turned out quite otherwise.  For Dorothy had not gone
five yards from the gate when a telegraph boy came riding up the
street in the opposite direction, whistling and looking at the
names of the houses.  He saw the name Ringwood House, wheeled his
bicycle round, propped it against the kerb, and accosted Dorothy.

'Miss Mill-BURROW live 'ere?' he said, jerking his head in the
direction of Ringwood House.

'Yes.  I am Miss Millborough.'

'Gotter wait case there's a answer,' said the boy, taking an
orange-coloured envelope from his belt.

Dorothy put down her bag.  She had once more begun trembling
violently.  And whether this was from joy or fear she was not
certain, for two conflicting thoughts had sprung almost
simultaneously into her brain.  One, 'This is some kind of good
news!'  The other, 'Father is seriously ill!'  She managed to tear
the envelope open, and found a telegram which occupied two pages,
and which she had the greatest difficulty in understanding.  It
ran:


Rejoice in the lord o ye righteous note of exclamation great news
note of exclamation your reputation absolutely reestablished stop
mrs semprill fallen into the pit that she hath digged stop action
for libel stop no one believes her any longer stop your father
wishes you return home immediately stop am coming up to town myself
comma will pick you up if you like stop arriving shortly after this
stop wait for me stop praise him with the loud cymbals note of
exclamation much love stop.


No need to look at the signature.  It was from Mr Warburton, of
course.  Dorothy felt weaker and more tremulous than ever.  She was
dimly aware the telegraph boy was asking her something.

'Any answer?' he said for the third or fourth time.

'Not today, thank you,' said Dorothy vaguely.

The boy remounted his bicycle and rode off, whistling with extra
loudness to show Dorothy how much he despised her for not tipping
him.  But Dorothy was unaware of the telegraph's boy's scorn.  The
only phrase of the telegram that she had fully understood was 'your
father wishes you return home immediately', and the surprise of it
had left her in a semi-dazed condition.  For some indefinite time
she stood on the pavement, until presently a taxi rolled up the
street, with Mr Warburton inside it.  He saw Dorothy, stopped the
taxi, jumped out and came across to meet her, beaming.  He seized
her both hands.

'Hullo!' he cried, and at once threw his arm pseudo-paternally
about her and drew her against him, heedless of who might be
looking.  'How are you?  But by Jove, how thin you've got!  I can
feel all your ribs.  Where is this school of yours?'

Dorothy, who had not yet managed to get free of his arm, turned
partly round and cast a glance towards the dark windows of Ringwood
House.

'What!  That place?  Good God, what a hole!  What have you done
with your luggage?'

'It's inside.  I've left them the money to send it on.  I think
it'll be all right.'

'Oh, nonsense!  Why pay?  We'll take it with us.  It can go on top
of the taxi.'

'No, no!  Let them send it.  I daren't go back.  Mrs Creevy would
be horribly angry.'

'Mrs Creevy?  Who's Mrs Creevy?'

'The headmistress--at least, she owns the school.'

'What, a dragon, is she?  Leave her to me--I'll deal with her.
Perseus and the Gorgon, what?  You are Andromeda.  Hi!' he called
to the taxi-driver.

The two of them went up to the front door and Mr Warburton knocked.
Somehow, Dorothy never believed that they would succeed in getting
her box from Mrs Creevy.  In fact, she half expected to see them
come out flying for their lives, and Mrs Creevy after them with her
broom.  However, in a couple of minutes they reappeared, the taxi-
driver carrying the box on his shoulder.  Mr Warburton handed
Dorothy into the taxi and, as they sat down, dropped half a crown
into her hand.

'What a woman!  What a woman!' he said comprehensively as the taxi
bore them away.  'How the devil have you put up with it all this
time?'

'What is this?' said Dorothy, looking at the coin.

'Your half-crown that you left to pay for the luggage.  Rather a
feat getting it out of the old girl, wasn't it?'

'But I left five shillings!' said Dorothy.

'What!  The woman told me you only left half a crown.  By God, what
impudence!  We'll go back and have the half-crown out of her.  Just
to spite her!'  He tapped on the glass.

'No, no!' said Dorothy, laying her hand on his arm.  'It doesn't
matter in the least.  Let's get away from here--right away.  I
couldn't bear to go back to that place again--EVER!'

It was quite true.  She felt that she would sacrifice not merely
half a crown, but all the money in her possession, sooner than set
eyes on Ringwood House again.  So they drove on, leaving Mrs Creevy
victorious.  It would be interesting to know whether this was
another of the occasions when Mrs Creevy laughed.

Mr Warburton insisted on taking the taxi the whole way into London,
and talked so voluminously in the quieter patches of the traffic
that Dorothy could hardly get a word in edgeways.  It was not till
they had reached the inner suburbs that she got from him an
explanation of the sudden change in her fortunes.

'Tell me,' she said, 'what is it that's happened?  I don't
understand.  Why is it all right for me to go home all of a sudden?
Why don't people believe Mrs Semprill any longer?  Surely she
hasn't confessed?'

'Confessed?  Not she!  But her sins have found her out, all the
same.  It was the kind of thing that you pious people would ascribe
to the finger of Providence.  Cast thy bread upon the waters, and
all that.  She got herself into a nasty mess--an action for libel.
We've talked of nothing else in Knype Hill for the last fortnight.
I though you would have seen something about it in the newspapers.'

'I've hardly looked at a paper for ages.  Who brought an action for
libel?  Not my father, surely?'

'Good gracious, no!  Clergymen can't bring actions for libel.  It
was the bank manager.  Do you remember her favourite story about
him--how he was keeping a woman on the bank's money, and so forth?'

'Yes, I think so.'

'A few months ago she was foolish enough to put some of it in
writing.  Some kind friend--some female friend, I presume--took the
letter round to the bank manager.  He brought an action--Mrs
Semprill was ordered to pay a hundred and fifty pounds damages.
I don't suppose she paid a halfpenny, but still, that's the end of
her career as a scandalmonger.  You can go on blackening people's
reputations for years, and everyone will believe you, more or less,
even when it's perfectly obvious that you're lying.  But once
you've been proved a liar in open court, you're disqualified, so to
speak.  Mrs Semprill's done for, so far as Knype Hill goes.  She
left the town between days--practically did a moonlight flit, in
fact.  I believe she's inflicting herself on Bury St Edmunds at
present.'

'But what has all that got to do with the things she said about you
and me?'

'Nothing--nothing whatever.  But why worry?  The point is that
you're reinstated; and all the hags who've been smacking their
chops over you for months past are saying, "Poor, poor Dorothy, how
SHOCKINGLY that dreadful woman has treated her!"'

'You mean they think that because Mrs Semprill was telling lies in
one case she must have been telling lies in another?'

'No doubt that's what they'd say if they were capable of reasoning
it out.  At any rate, Mrs Semprill's in disgrace, and so all the
people she's slandered must be martyrs.  Even MY reputation is
practically spotless for the time being.'

'And do you think that's really the end of it?  Do you think they
honestly believe that it was all an accident--that I only lost my
memory and didn't elope with anybody?'

'Oh, well, I wouldn't go as far as that.  In these country places
there's always a certain amount of suspicion knocking about.  Not
suspicion of anything in particular, you know; just generalized
suspicion.  A sort of instinctive rustic dirty-mindedness.  I can
imagine its being vaguely rumoured in the bar parlour of the Dog
and Bottle in ten years' time that you've got some nasty secret in
your past, only nobody can remember what.  Still, your troubles are
over.  If I were you I wouldn't give any explanations till you're
asked for them.  The official theory is that you had a bad attack
of flu and went away to recuperate.  I should stick to that.
You'll find they'll accept it all right.  Officially, there's
nothing against you.

Presently they got to London, and Mr Warburton took Dorothy to
lunch at a restaurant in Coventry Street, where they had a young
chicken, roasted, with asparagus and tiny, pearly-white potatoes
that had been ripped untimely from their mother earth, and also
treacle tart and a nice warm bottle of Burgundy; but what gave
Dorothy the most pleasure of all, after Mrs Creevy's lukewarm water
tea, was the black coffee they had afterwards.  After lunch they
took another taxi to Liverpool Street Station and caught the 2.45.
It was a four-hour journey to Knype Hill.

Mr Warburton insisted on travelling first-class, and would not hear
of Dorothy paying her own fare; he also, when Dorothy was not
looking, tipped the guard to let them have a carriage to themselves.
It was one of those bright cold days which are spring or winter
according as you are indoors or out.  From behind the shut windows
of the carriage the too-blue sky looked warm and kind, and all the
slummy wilderness through which the train was rattling--the
labyrinths of little dingy-coloured houses, the great chaotic
factories, the miry canals, and derelict building lots littered with
rusty boilers and overgrown by smoke-blackened weeds--all were
redeemed and gilded by the sun.  Dorothy hardly spoke for the first
half-hour of the journey.  For the moment she was too happy to talk.
She did not even think of anything in particular, but merely sat
there luxuriating in the glass-filtered sunlight, in the comfort of
the padded seat and the feeling of having escaped from Mrs Creevy's
clutches.  But she was aware that this mood could not last very much
longer.  Her contentment, like the warmth of the wine that she had
drunk at lunch, was ebbing away, and thoughts either painful or
difficult to express were taking shape in her mind.  Mr Warburton
had been watching her face, more observantly than was usual for him,
as though trying to gauge the changes that the past eight months had
worked in her.

'You look older,' he said finally.

'I am older,' said Dorothy.

'Yes; but you look--well, more completely grown up.  Tougher.
Something has changed in your face.  You look--if you'll forgive
the expression--as though the Girl Guide had been exorcized from
you for good and all.  I hope seven devils haven't entered into you
instead?'  Dorothy did not answer, and he added:  'I suppose, as a
matter of fact, you must have had the very devil of a time?'

'Oh, beastly!  Sometimes too beastly for words.  Do you know that
sometimes--'

She paused.  She had been about to tell him how she had had to beg
for her food; how she had slept in the streets; how she had been
arrested for begging and spent a night in the police cells; how Mrs
Creevy had nagged at her and starved her.  But she stopped, because
she had suddenly realized that these were not the things that she
wanted to talk about.  Such things as these, she perceived, are of
no real importance; they are mere irrelevant accidents, not
essentially different from catching a cold in the head or having to
wait two hours at a railway junction.  They are disagreeable, but
they do not matter.  The truism that all real happenings are in the
mind struck her more forcibly than ever before, and she said:

'Those things don't really matter.  I mean, things like having no
money and not having enough to eat.  Even when you're practically
starving--it doesn't CHANGE anything inside you.'

'Doesn't it?  I'll take your word for it.  I should be very sorry
to try.'

'Oh, well, it's beastly while it's happening, of course; but it
doesn't make any real difference; it's the things that happen
inside you that matter.'

'Meaning?' said Mr Warburton.

'Oh--things change in your mind.  And then the whole world changes,
because you look at it differently.'

She was still looking out of the window.  The train had drawn clear
of the eastern slums and was running at gathering speed past
willow-bordered streams and low-lying meadows upon whose hedges the
first buds made a faint soft greenness, like a cloud.  In a field
near the line a month-old calf, flat as a Noah's Ark animal, was
bounding stiff-legged after its mother, and in a cottage garden an
old labourer, with slow, rheumatic movements, was turning over the
soil beneath a pear tree covered with ghostly bloom.  His spade
flashed in the sun as the train passed.  The depressing hymn-line
'Change and decay in all around I see' moved through Dorothy's
mind.  It was true what she had said just now.  Something had
happened in her heart, and the world was a little emptier, a little
poorer from that minute.  On such a day as this, last spring or any
earlier spring, how joyfully, and how unthinkingly, she would have
thanked God for the first blue skies and the first flowers of the
reviving year!  And now, seemingly, there was no God to thank, and
nothing--not a flower or a stone or a blade of grass--nothing in
the universe would ever be the same again.

'Things change in your mind,' she repeated.  'I've lost my faith,'
she added, somewhat abruptly, because she found herself half
ashamed to utter the words.

'You've lost your WHAT?' said Mr Warburton, less accustomed than
she to this kind of phraseology.

'My faith.  Oh, you know what I mean!  A few months ago, all of a
sudden, it seemed as if my whole mind had changed.  Everything that
I'd believed in till then--everything--seemed suddenly meaningless
and almost silly.  God--what I'd meant by God--immortal life,
Heaven and Hell--everything.  It had all gone.  And it wasn't that
I'd reasoned it out; it just happened to me.  It was like when
you're a child, and one day, for no particular reason, you stop
believing in fairies.  I just couldn't go on believing in it any
longer.'

'You never did believe in it,' said Mr Warburton unconcernedly.

'But I did, really I did!  I know you always thought I didn't--you
thought I was just pretending because I was ashamed to own up.  But
it wasn't that at all.  I believed it just as I believe that I'm
sitting in this carriage.'

'Of course you didn't, my poor child!  How could you, at your age?
You were far too intelligent for that.  But you'd been brought up
in these absurd beliefs, and you'd allowed yourself to go on
thinking, in a sort of way, that you could still swallow them.
You'd built yourself a life-pattern--if you'll excuse a bit of
psychological jargon--that was only possible for a believer, and
naturally it was beginning to be a strain on you.  In fact, it was
obvious all the time what was the matter with you.  I should say
that in all probability that was why you lost your memory.'

'What do you mean?' she said, rather puzzled by this remark.

He saw that she did not understand, and explained to her that loss
of memory is only a device, unconsciously used, to escape from an
impossible situation.  The mind, he said, will play curious tricks
when it is in a tight corner.  Dorothy had never heard of anything
of this kind before, and she could not at first accept his
explanation.  Nevertheless she considered it for a moment, and
perceived that, even if it were true, it did not alter the
fundamental fact.

'I don't see that it makes any difference,' she said finally.

'Doesn't it?  I should have said it made a considerable
difference.'

'But don't you see, if my faith is gone, what does it matter
whether I've only lost it now or whether I'd really lost it years
ago?  All that matters is that it's gone, and I've got to begin my
life all over again.'

'Surely I don't take you to mean,' said Mr Warburton, 'that you
actually REGRET losing your faith, as you call it?  One might as
well regret losing a goitre.  Mind you, I'm speaking, as it were,
without the book--as a man who never had very much faith to lose.
The little I had passed away quite painlessly at the age of nine.
But it's hardly the kind of thing I should have thought anyone
would REGRET losing.  Used you not, if I remember rightly, to do
horrible things like getting up at five in the morning to go to
Holy Communion on an empty belly?  Surely you're not homesick for
that kind of thing?'

'I don't believe in it any longer, if that's what you mean.  And I
see now that a lot of it was rather silly.  But that doesn't help.
The point is that all the beliefs I had are gone, and I've nothing
to put in their place.'

'But good God! why do you want to put anything in their place?
You've got rid of a load of superstitious rubbish, and you ought to
be glad of it.  Surely it doesn't make you any happier to go about
quaking in fear of Hell fire?'

'But don't you see--you must see--how different everything is when
all of a sudden the whole world is empty?'

'Empty?' exclaimed Mr Warburton.  'What do you mean by saying it's
empty?  I call that perfectly scandalous in a girl of your age.
It's not empty at all, it's a deuced sight too full, that's the
trouble with it.  We're here today and gone tomorrow, and we've no
time to enjoy what we've got.'

'But how CAN one enjoy anything when all the meaning's been taken
out of it?'

'Good gracious!  What do you want with a meaning?  When I eat my
dinner I don't do it to the greater glory of God; I do it because I
enjoy it.  The world's full of amusing things--books, pictures,
wine, travel, friends--everything.  I've never seen any meaning in
it all, and I don't want to see one.  Why not take life as you find
it?'

'But--'

She broke off, for she saw already that she was wasting words in
trying to make herself clear to him.  He was quite incapable of
understanding her difficulty--incapable of realizing how a mind
naturally pious must recoil from a world discovered to be
meaningless.  Even the loathsome platitudes of the pantheists would
be beyond his understanding.  Probably the idea that life was
essentially futile, if he thought of it at all, struck him as
rather amusing than otherwise.  And yet with all this he was
sufficiently acute.  He could see the difficulty of her own
particular position, and he adverted to it a moment later.

'Of course,' he said, 'I can see that things are going to be a
little awkward for you when you get home.  You're going to be, so
to speak, a wolf in sheep's clothing.  Parish work--Mothers'
Meetings, prayers with the dying, and all that--I suppose it might
be a little distasteful at times.  Are you afraid you won't be able
to keep it up--is that the trouble?'

'Oh, no.  I wasn't thinking of that.  I shall go on with it, just
the same as before.  It's what I'm most used to.  Besides, Father
needs my help.  He can't afford a curate, and the work's got to be
done.'

'Then what's the matter?  Is it the hypocrisy that's worrying you?
Afraid that the consecrated bread might stick in your throat, and
so forth?  I shouldn't trouble.  Half the parsons' daughters in
England are probably in the same difficulty.  And quite nine-tenths
of the parsons, I should say.'

'It's partly that.  I shall have to be always pretending--oh, you
can't imagine in what ways!  But that's not the worst.  Perhaps
that part of it doesn't matter, really.  Perhaps it's better to be
a hypocrite--THAT kind of hypocrite--than some things.'

'Why do you say THAT kind of hypocrite?  I hope you don't mean that
pretending to believe is the next best thing to believing?'

'Yes . . . I suppose that's what I do mean.  Perhaps it's better--
less selfish--to pretend one believes even when one doesn't, than
to say openly that one's an unbeliever and perhaps help turn other
people into unbelievers too.'

'My dear Dorothy,' said Mr Warburton, 'your mind, if you'll excuse
my saying so, is in a morbid condition.  No, dash it! it's worse
than morbid; it's downright septic.  You've a sort of mental
gangrene hanging over from your Christian upbringing.  You tell me
that you've got rid of these ridiculous beliefs that were stuffed
into you from your cradle upwards, and yet you're taking an
attitude to life which is simply meaningless without those beliefs.
Do you call that reasonable?'

'I don't know.  No perhaps it's not.  But I suppose it's what comes
naturally to me.'

'What you're trying to do, apparently,' pursued Mr Warburton, 'is
to make the worst of both worlds.  You stick to the Christian
scheme of things, but you leave Paradise out of it.  And I suppose,
if the truth were known, there are quite a lot of your kind
wandering about among the ruins of C. of E.  You're practically a
sect in yourselves,' he added reflectively: 'the Anglican Atheists.
Not a sect I should care to belong to, I must say.'

They talked for a little while longer, but not to much purpose.  In
reality the whole subject of religious belief and religious doubt
was boring and incomprehensible to Mr Warburton.  Its only appeal
to him was as a pretext for blasphemy.  Presently he changed the
subject, as though giving up the attempt to understand Dorothy's
outlook.

'This is nonsense that we're talking,' he said.  'You've got hold
of some very depressing ideas, but you'll grow out of them later
on, you know.  Christianity isn't really an incurable disease.
However, there was something quite different that I was going to
say to you.  I want you to listen to me for a moment.  You're
coming home, after being away eight months, to what I expect you
realize is a rather uncomfortable situation.  You had a hard enough
life before--at least, what I should call a hard life--and now that
you aren't quite such a good Girl Guide as you used to be, it's
going to be a great deal harder.  Now, do you think it's absolutely
necessary to go back to it?'

'But I don't see what else I can do, unless I could get another
job.  I've really no alternative.'

Mr Warburton, with his head cocked a little on one side, gave
Dorothy a rather curious look.

'As a matter of fact,' he said, in a more serious tone than usual,
'there's at least one other alternative that I could suggest to
you.'

'You mean that I could go on being a schoolmistress?  Perhaps
that's what I ought to do, really.  I shall come back to it in the
end, in any case.'

'No.  I don't think that's what I should advise.'

All this time Mr Warburton, unwilling as ever to expose his
baldness, had been wearing his rakish, rather broad-brimmed grey
felt hat.  Now, however, he took it off and laid it carefully on
the empty seat beside him.  His naked cranium, with only a wisp or
two of golden hair lingering in the neighbourhood of the ears,
looked like some monstrous pink pearl.  Dorothy watched him with a
slight surprise.

'I am taking my hat off,' he said, 'in order to let you see me at
my very worst.  You will understand why in a moment.  Now, let me
offer you another alternative besides going back to your Girl
Guides and your Mothers' Union, or imprisoning yourself in some
dungeon of a girls' school.'

'What do you mean?' said Dorothy.

'I mean, will you--think well before you answer; I admit there are
some very obvious objections, but--will you marry me?'

Dorothy's lips parted with surprise.  Perhaps she turned a little
paler.  With a hasty, almost unconscious recoil she moved as far
away from him as the back of the seat would allow.  But he had made
no movement towards her.  He said with complete equanimity:

'You know, of course, that Dolores [Dolores was Mr Warburton's ex-
mistress] left me a year ago?'

'But I can't, I can't!' exclaimed Dorothy.  'You know I can't!  I'm
not--like that.  I thought you always knew.  I shan't ever marry.'

Mr Warburton ignored this remark.

'I grant you,' he said, still with exemplary calmness, 'that I
don't exactly come under the heading of eligible young men.  I am
somewhat older than you.  We both seem to be putting our cards on
the table today, so I'll let you into a great secret and tell you
that my age is forty-nine.  And then I've three children and a bad
reputation.  It's a marriage that your father would--well, regard
with disfavour.  And my income is only seven hundred a year.  But
still, don't you think it's worth considering!'

'I can't, you know why I can't!' repeated Dorothy.

She took it for granted that he 'knew why she couldn't', though she
had never explained to him, or to anyone else, why it was impossible
for her to marry.  Very probably, even if she had explained, he
would not have understood her.  He went on speaking, not appearing
to notice what she had said.

'Let me put it to you', he said, 'in the form of a bargain.  Of
course, I needn't tell you that it's a great deal more than that.
I'm not a marrying kind of man, as the saying goes, and I shouldn't
ask you to marry me if you hadn't a rather special attraction for
me.  But let me put the business side of it first.  You need a home
and a livelihood; I need a wife to keep me in order.  I'm sick of
these disgusting women I've spent my life with, if you'll forgive
my mentioning them, and I'm rather anxious to settle down.  A bit
late in the day, perhaps, but better late than never.  Besides, I
need somebody to look after the children; the BASTARDS, you know.
I don't expect you to find me overwhelmingly attractive,' he added,
running a hand reflectively over his bald crown, 'but on the other
hand I am very easy to get on with.  Immoral people usually are, as
a matter of fact.  And from your own point of view the scheme would
have certain advantages.  Why should you spend your life delivering
parish magazines and rubbing nasty old women's legs with Elliman's
embrocation?  You would be happier married, even to a husband with
a bald head and a clouded past.  You've had a hard, dull life for a
girl of your age, and your future isn't exactly rosy.  Have you
really considered what your future will be like if you don't
marry?'

'I don't know.  I have to some extent,' she said.

As he had not attempted to lay hands on her or to offer any
endearments, she answered his question without repeating her
previous refusal.  He looked out of the window, and went on in a
musing voice, much quieter than his normal tone, so that at first
she could barely hear him above the rattle of the train; but
presently his voice rose, and took on a note of seriousness that
she had never heard in it before, or even imagined that it could
hold.

'Consider what your future would be like,' he repeated.  'It's the
same future that lies before any woman of your class with no
husband and no money.  Let us say your father will live another ten
years.  By the end of that time the last penny of his money will
have gone down the sink.  The desire to squander it will keep him
alive just as long as it lasts, and probably no longer.  All that
time he will be growing more senile, more tiresome, more impossible
to live with; he will tyrannize over you more and more, keep you
shorter and shorter of money, make more and more trouble for you
with the neighbours and the tradesmen.  And you will go on with
that slavish, worrying life that you have lived, struggling to make
both ends meet, drilling the Girl Guides, reading novels to the
Mothers' Union, polishing the altar brasses, cadging money for the
organ fund, making brown paper jackboots for the schoolchildren's
plays, keeping your end up in the vile little feuds and scandals of
the church hen-coop.  Year after year, winter and summer, you will
bicycle from one reeking cottage to another, to dole out pennies
from the poor box and repeat prayers that you don't even believe in
any longer.  You will sit through interminable church services
which in the end will make you physically sick with their sameness
and futility.  Every year your life will be a little bleaker, a
little fuller of those deadly little jobs that are shoved off on to
lonely women.  And remember that you won't always be twenty-eight.
All the while you will be fading, withering, until one morning you
will look in the glass and realize that you aren't a girl any
longer, only a skinny old maid.  You'll fight against it, of
course.  You'll keep your physical energy and your girlish
mannerisms--you'll keep them just a little bit too long.  Do you
know that type of bright--too bright--spinster who says "topping"
and "ripping" and "right-ho", and prides herself on being such a
good sport, and she's such a good sport that she makes everyone
feel a little unwell?  And she's so splendidly hearty at tennis and
so handy at amateur theatricals, and she throws herself with a kind
of desperation into her Girl Guide work and her parish visiting,
and she's the life and soul of Church socials, and always, year
after year, she thinks of herself as a young girl still and never
realizes that behind her back everyone laughs at her for a poor,
disappointed old maid?  That's what you'll become, what you must
become, however much you foresee it and try to avoid it.  There's
no other future possible to you unless you marry.  Women who don't
marry wither up--they wither up like aspidistras in back-parlour
windows; and the devilish thing is that they don't even know that
they're withering.'

Dorothy sat silent and listening with intent and horrified
fascination.  She did not even notice that he had stood up, with
one hand on the door to steady him against the swaying of the
train.  She was as though hypnotized, not so much by his voice as
by the visions that his words had evoked in her.  He had described
her life, as it must inevitably be, with such dreadful fidelity
that he seemed actually to have carried her ten years onward into
the menacing future, and she felt herself no longer a girl full of
youth and energy, but a desperate, worn virgin of thirty-eight.  As
he went on he took her hand, which was lying idle on the arm of the
seat; and even that she scarcely noticed.

'After ten years,' he continued, 'your father will die, and he will
leave you with not a penny, only debts.  You will be nearly forty,
with no money, no profession, no chance of marrying; just a
derelict parson's daughter like the ten thousand others in England.
And after that, what do you suppose will become of you?  You will
have to find yourself a job--the sort of job that parsons'
daughters get.  A nursery governess, for instance, or companion to
some diseased hag who will occupy herself in thinking of ways to
humiliate you.  Or you will go back to school-teaching; English
mistress in some grisly girls' school, seventy-five pounds a year
and your keep, and a fortnight in a seaside boarding-house every
August.  And all the time withering, drying up, growing more sour
and more angular and more friendless.  And therefore--'

As he said 'therefore' he pulled Dorothy to her feet.  She made no
resistance.  His voice had put her under a spell.  As her mind took
in the prospect of that forbidding future, whose emptiness she was
far more able to appreciate than he, such a despair had grown in
her that if she had spoken at all it would have been to say, 'Yes,
I will marry you.'  He put his arm very gently about her and drew
her a little towards him, and even now she did not attempt to
resist.  Her eyes, half hypnotized, were fixed upon his.  When he
put his arm about her it was as though he were protecting her,
sheltering her, drawing her away from the brink of grey, deadly
poverty and back to the world of friendly and desirable things--to
security and ease, to comely houses and good clothes, to books and
friends and flowers, to summer days and distant lands.  So for
nearly a minute the fat, debauched bachelor and the thin,
spinsterish girl stood face to face, their eyes meeting, their
bodies all but touching, while the train swayed them in its motion,
and clouds and telegraph poles and bud-misted hedges and fields
green with young wheat raced past unseen.

Mr Warburton tightened his grip and pulled her against him.  It
broke the spell.  The visions that had held her helpless--visions
of poverty and of escape from poverty--suddenly vanished and left
only a shocked realization of what was happening to her.  She was
in the arms of a man--a fattish, oldish man!  A wave of disgust and
deadly fear went through her, and her entrails seemed to shrink and
freeze.  His thick male body was pressing her backwards and
downwards, his large, pink face, smooth, but to her eyes old, was
bearing down upon her own.  The harsh odour of maleness forced
itself into her nostrils.  She recoiled.  Furry thighs of satyrs!
She began to struggle furiously, though indeed he made hardly any
effort to retain her, and in a moment she had wrenched herself free
and fallen back into her seat, white and trembling.  She looked up
at him with eyes which, from fear and aversion, were for a moment
those of a stranger.

Mr Warburton remained on his feet, regarding her with an expression
of resigned, almost amused disappointment.  He did not seem in the
least distressed.  As her calmness returned to her she perceived
that all he had said had been no more than a trick to play upon her
feelings and cajole her into saying that she would marry him; and
what was stranger yet, that he had said it without seriously caring
whether she married him or not.  He had, in fact, merely been
amusing himself.  Very probably the whole thing was only another of
his periodical attempts to seduce her.

He sat down, but more deliberately than she, taking care of the
creases of his trousers as he did so.

'If you want to pull the communication cord,' he said mildly, 'you
had better let me make sure that I have five pounds in my pocket-
book.'

After that he was quite himself again, or as nearly himself as
anyone could possibly be after such a scene, and he went on talking
without the smallest symptom of embarrassment.  His sense of shame,
if he had ever possessed one, had perished many years ago.  Perhaps
it had been killed by overwork in a lifetime of squalid affairs
with women.

For an hour, perhaps, Dorothy was ill at ease, but after that the
train reached Ipswich, where it stopped for a quarter of an hour,
and there was the diversion of going to the refreshment room for a
cup of tea.  For the last twenty miles of the journey they talked
quite amicably.  Mr Warburton did not refer again to his proposal
of marriage, but as the train neared Knype Hill he returned, less
seriously than before, to the question of Dorothy's future.

'So you really propose', he said 'to go back to your parish work?
"The trivial round, the common task?"  Mrs Pither's rheumatism and
Mrs Lewin's corn-plaster and all the rest of it?  The prospect
doesn't dismay you?'

'I don't know--sometimes it does.  But I expect it'll be all right
once I'm back at work.  I've got the habit, you see.'

'And you really feel equal to years of calculated hypocrisy?  For
that's what it amounts to, you know.  Not afraid of the cat getting
out of the bag?  Quite sure you won't find yourself teaching the
Sunday School kids to say the Lord's Prayer backwards, or reading
Gibbon's fifteenth chapter to the Mothers' Union instead of Gene
Stratton Porter?'

'I don't think so.  Because, you see, I do feel that that kind of
work, even if it means saying prayers that one doesn't believe in,
and even if it means teaching children things that one doesn't
always think are true--I do feel that in a way it's useful.'

'Useful?' said Mr Warburton distastefully.  'You're a little too
fond of that depressing word "useful".  Hypertrophy of the sense of
duty--that's what's the matter with you.  Now, to me, it seems the
merest common sense to have a bit of fun while the going's good.'

'That's just hedonism,' Dorothy objected.

'My dear child, can you show me a philosophy of life that isn't
hedonism?  Your verminous Christian saints are the biggest hedonists
of all.  They're out for an eternity of bliss, whereas we poor
sinners don't hope for more than a few years of it.  Ultimately
we're all trying for a bit of fun; but some people take it in such
perverted forms.  Your notion of fun seems to be massaging Mrs
Pither's legs.'

'It's not that exactly, but--oh! somehow I can't explain!'

What she would have said was that though her faith had left her,
she had not changed, could not change, did not want to change, the
spiritual background of her mind; that her cosmos, though now it
seemed to her empty and meaningless, was still in a sense the
Christian cosmos; that the Christian way of life was still the way
that must come naturally to her.  But she could not put this into
words, and felt that if she tried to do so he would probably begin
making fun of her.  So she concluded lamely:

'Somehow I feel that it's better for me to go on as I was before.'

'EXACTLY the same as before?  The whole bill of fare?  The Girl
Guides, the Mothers' Union, the Band of Hope, the Companionship of
Marriage, parish visiting and Sunday School teaching, Holy
Communion twice a week and here we go round the doxology-bush,
chanting Gregorian plain-song?  You're quite certain you can manage
it?'

Dorothy smiled in spite of herself.  'Not plain-song.  Father
doesn't like it.'

'And you think that, except for your inner thoughts, your life will
be precisely what it was before you lost your faith?  There will be
NO change in your habits?'

Dorothy thought.  Yes, there WOULD be changes in her habits; but
most of them would be secret ones.  The memory of the disciplinary
pin crossed her mind.  It had always been a secret from everyone
except herself and she decided not to mention it.

'Well,' she said finally, 'perhaps at Holy Communion I shall kneel
down on Miss Mayfill's right instead of on her left.'



2


A week had gone by.

Dorothy rode up the hill from the town and wheeled her bicycle in
at the Rectory gate.  It was a fine evening, clear and cold, and
the sun, unclouded, was sinking in remote, greenish skies.  Dorothy
noticed that the ash tree by the gate was in bloom, with clotted
dark red blossoms that looked like festerings from a wound.

She was rather tired.  She had had a busy week of it, what with
visiting all the women on her list in turn and trying to get the
parish affairs into some kind of order again.  Everything was in a
fearful mess after her absence.  The church was dirty beyond all
belief--in fact, Dorothy had had to spend the best part of a day
cleaning up with scrubbing-brushes, broom and dustpan, and the beds
of 'mouse dirts' that she had found behind the organ made her wince
when she thought of them.  (The reason why the mice came there was
because Georgie Frew, the organ-blower, WOULD bring penny packets
of biscuits into church and eat them during the sermon.)  All the
Church associations had been neglected, with the result that the
Band of Hope and the Companionship of Marriage had now given up the
ghost, Sunday School attendance had dropped by half, and there was
internecine warfare going on in the Mothers' Union because of some
tactless remark that Miss Foote had made.  The belfry was in a
worse state than ever.  The parish magazine had not been delivered
regularly and the money for it had not been collected.  None of the
accounts of the Church Funds had been properly kept up, and there
was nineteen shillings unaccounted for in all, and even the parish
registers were in a muddle--and so on and so on, ad infinitum.  The
Rector had let everything slide.

Dorothy had been up to her eyes in work from the moment of reaching
home.  Indeed, things had slipped back into their old routine with
astonishing swiftness.  It was as though it had been only yesterday
that she had gone away.  Now that the scandal had blown over, her
return to Knype Hill had aroused very little curiosity.  Some of
the women on her visiting list, particularly Mrs Pither, were
genuinely glad to see her back, and Victor Stone, perhaps, seemed
just a little ashamed of having temporarily believed Mrs Semprill's
libel; but he soon forgot it in recounting to Dorothy his latest
triumph in the Church Times.  Various of the coffee-ladies, of
course, had stopped Dorothy in the street with 'My dear, how VERY
nice to see you back again!  You HAVE been away a long time!  And
you know, dear, we all thought it such a SHAME when that horrible
woman was going round telling those stories about you.  But I do
hope you'll understand, dear, that whatever anyone else may have
thought, I never believed a word of them', etc., etc., etc.  But
nobody had asked her the uncomfortable questions that she had been
fearing.  'I've been teaching in a school near London' had
satisfied everyone; they had not even asked her the name of the
school.  Never, she saw, would she have to confess that she had
slept in Trafalgar Square and been arrested for begging.  The fact
is that people who live in small country towns have only a very dim
conception of anything that happens more than ten miles from their
own front door.  The world outside is a terra incognita, inhabited,
no doubt, by dragons and anthropophagi, but not particularly
interesting.

Even Dorothy's father had greeted her as though she had only been
away for the week-end.  He was in his study when she arrived,
musingly smoking his pipe in front of the grandfather clock, whose
glass, smashed by the charwoman's broom-handle four months ago, was
still unmended.  As Dorothy came into the room he took his pipe out
of his mouth and put it away in his pocket with an absent-minded,
old-mannish movement.  He looked a great deal older, Dorothy
thought.

'So here you are at last,' he said.  'Did you have a good journey?'

Dorothy put her arms round his neck and touched his silver-pale
cheek with her lips.  As she disengaged herself he patted her
shoulder with a just perceptible trace more affection than usual.

'What made you take it into your head to run away like that?' he
said.

'I told you, Father--I lost my memory.'

'Hm,' said the Rector; and Dorothy saw that he did not believe her,
never would believe her, and that on many and many a future
occasion, when he was in a less agreeable mood than at present,
that escapade would be brought up against her.  'Well,' he added,
'when you've taken your bag upstairs, just bring your typewriter
down here, would you?  I want you to type out my sermon.'

Not much that was of interest had happened in the town.  Ye Olde
Tea Shoppe was enlarging its premises, to the further disfigurement
of the High Street.  Mrs Pither's rheumatism was better (thanks to
the angelica tea, no doubt), but Mr Pither had 'been under the
doctor' and they were afraid he had stone in the bladder.  Mr
Blifil-Gordon was now in Parliament, a docile deadhead on the back
benches of the Conservative Party.  Old Mr Tombs had died just
after Christmas, and Miss Foote had taken over seven of his cats
and made heroic efforts to find homes for the others.  Eva Twiss,
the niece of Mr Twiss the ironmonger, had had an illegitimate baby,
which had died.  Proggett had dug the kitchen garden and sowed a
few seeds, and the broad beans and the first peas were just
showing.  The shop-debts had begun to mount up again after the
creditors' meeting, and there was six pounds owing to Cargill.
Victor Stone had had a controversy with Professor Coulton in the
Church Times, about the Holy Inquisition, and utterly routed him.
Ellen's eczema had been very bad all the winter.  Walph Blifil-
Gordon had had two poems accepted by the London Mercury.

Dorothy went into the conservatory.  She had got a big job on hand--
costumes for a pageant that the schoolchildren were going to have
on St George's Day, in aid of the organ fund.  Not a penny had been
paid towards the organ during the past eight months, and it was
perhaps as well that the Rector always threw the organ-people's
bills away unopened, for their tone was growing more and more
sulphurous.  Dorothy had racked her brains for a way of raising
some money, and finally decided on a historical pageant, beginning
with Julius Caesar and ending with the Duke of Wellington.  They
might raise two pounds by a pageant, she thought--with luck and a
fine day, they might even raise three pounds!

She looked round the conservatory.  She had hardly been in here
since coming home, and evidently nothing had been touched during
her absence.  Her things were lying just as she had left them; but
the dust was thick on everything.  Her sewing-machine was on the
table amid the old familiar litter of scraps of cloth, sheets of
brown paper, cotton-reels and pots of paint, and though the needle
had rusted, the thread was still in it.  And, yes! there were the
jackboots that she had been making the night she went away.  She
picked one of them up and looked at it.  Something stirred in her
heart.  Yes, say what you like, they WERE good jackboots!  What a
pity they had never been used!  However, they would come in useful
for the pageant.  For Charles II, perhaps--or, no, better not have
Charles II; have Oliver Cromwell instead; because if you had Oliver
Cromwell you wouldn't have to make him a wig.

Dorothy lighted the oilstove, found her scissors and two sheets of
brown paper, and sat down.  There was a mountain of clothes to be
made.  Better start off with Julius Caesar's breastplate, she
thought.  It was always that wretched armour that made all the
trouble!  What did a Roman soldier's armour look like?  Dorothy
made an effort, and called to mind the statue of some idealized
curly-bearded emperor in the Roman Room at the British Museum.  You
might make a sort of rough breastplate out of glue and brown paper,
and glue narrow strips of paper across it to represent the plates
of the armour, and then silver them over.  No helmet to make, thank
goodness!  Julius Caesar always wore a laurel wreath--ashamed of
his baldness, no doubt, like Mr Warburton.  But what about greaves?
Did they wear greaves in Julius Caesar's time?  And boots?  Was a
caligum a boot or a sandal?

After a few moments she stopped with the shears resting on her
knee.  A thought which had been haunting her like some inexorcizable
ghost at every unoccupied moment during the past week had returned
once more to distract her.  It was the thought of what Mr Warburton
had said to her in the train--of what her life was going to be like
hereafter, unmarried and without money.

It was not that she was in any doubt about the external facts of
her future.  She could see it all quite clearly before her.  Ten
years, perhaps, as unsalaried curate, and then back to school-
teaching.  Not necessarily in quite such a school as Mrs Creevy's--
no doubt she could do something rather better for herself than
that--but at least in some more or less shabby, more or less
prison-like school; or perhaps in some even bleaker, even less
human kind of drudgery.  Whatever happened, at the very best, she
had got to face the destiny that is common to all lonely and
penniless women.  'The Old Maids of Old England', as somebody
called them.  She was twenty-eight--just old enough to enter their
ranks.

But it didn't matter, it didn't matter!  That was the thing that
you could never drive into the heads of the Mr Warburtons of this
world, not if you talked to them for a thousand years; that mere
outward things like poverty and drudgery, and even loneliness,
don't matter in themselves.  It is the things that happen in your
heart that matter.  For just a moment--an evil moment--while Mr
Warburton was talking to her in the train, she had known the fear
of poverty.  But she had mastered it; it was not a thing worth
worrying about.  It was not because of THAT that she had got to
stiffen her courage and remake the whole structure of her mind.

No, it was something far more fundamental; it was the deadly
emptiness that she had discovered at the heart of things.  She
thought of how a year ago she had sat in this chair, with these
scissors in her hand, doing precisely what she was doing now; and
yet it was as though then and now she had been two different
beings.  Where had she gone, that well-meaning, ridiculous girl who
had prayed ecstatically in summer-scented fields and pricked her
arm as a punishment for sacrilegious thoughts?  And where is any of
ourselves of even a year ago?  And yet after all--and here lay the
trouble--she WAS the same girl.  Beliefs change, thoughts change,
but there is some inner part of the soul that does not change.
Faith vanishes, but the need for faith remains the same as before.

And given only faith, how can anything else matter?  How can
anything dismay you if only there is some purpose in the world
which you can serve, and which, while serving it, you can
understand?  Your whole life is illumined by the sense of purpose.
There is no weariness in your heart, no doubts, no feeling of
futility, no Baudelairean ennui waiting for unguarded hours.  Every
act is significant, every moment sanctified, woven by faith as into
a pattern, a fabric of never-ending joy.

She began to meditate upon the nature of life.  You emerged from
the womb, you lived sixty or seventy years, and then you died and
rotted.  And in every detail of your life, if no ultimate purpose
redeemed it, there was a quality of greyness, of desolation, that
could never be described, but which you could feel like a physical
pang at your heart.  Life, if the grave really ends it, is
monstrous and dreadful.  No use trying to argue it away.  Think of
life as it really is, think of the DETAILS of life; and then think
that there is no meaning in it, no purpose, no goal except the
grave.  Surely only fools or self-deceivers, or those whose lives
are exceptionally fortunate, can face that thought without
flinching?

She shifted her position in her chair.  But after all there must be
SOME meaning, SOME purpose in it all!  The world cannot be an
accident.  Everything that happens must have a cause--ultimately,
therefore, a purpose.  Since you exist, God must have created you,
and since He created you a conscious being, He must be conscious.
The greater doesn't come out of the less.  He created you, and He
will kill you, for His own purpose.  But that purpose is inscrutable.
It is in the nature of things that you can never discover it, and
perhaps even if you did discover it you would be averse to it.
Your life and death, it may be, are a single note in the eternal
orchestra that plays for His diversion.  And suppose you don't like
the tune?  She thought of that dreadful unfrocked clergyman in
Trafalgar Square.  Had she dreamed the things he said, or had he
really said them?  'Therefore with Demons and Archdemons and with
all the company of Hell'.  But that was silly, really.  For your not
liking the tune was also part of the tune.

Her mind struggled with the problem, while perceiving that there
was no solution.  There was, she saw clearly, no possible
substitute for faith; no pagan acceptance of life as sufficient to
itself, no pantheistic cheer-up stuff, no pseudo-religion of
'progress' with visions of glittering Utopias and ant-heaps of
steel and concrete.  It is all or nothing.  Either life on earth is
a preparation for something greater and more lasting, or it is
meaningless, dark, and dreadful.

Dorothy started.  A frizzling sound was coming from the glue-pot.
She had forgotten to put any water in the saucepan, and the glue
was beginning to burn.  She took the saucepan, hastened to the
scullery sink to replenish it, then brought it back and put it on
the oilstove again.  I simply MUST get that breastplate done before
supper! she thought.  After Julius Caesar there was William the
Conqueror to be thought of.  More armour!  And presently she must
go along to the kitchen and remind Ellen to boil some potatoes to
go with the minced beef for supper; also there was her 'memo list'
to be written out for tomorrow.  She shaped the two halves of the
breastplate, cut out the armholes and neckholes, and then stopped
again.

Where had she got to?  She had been saying that if death ends all,
then there is no hope and no meaning in anything.  Well, what then?

The action of going to the scullery and refilling the saucepan had
changed the tenor of her thoughts.  She perceived, for a moment at
least, that she had allowed herself to fall into exaggeration and
self-pity.  What a fuss about nothing, after all!  As though in
reality there were not people beyond number in the same case as
herself!  All over the world, thousands, millions of them; people
who had lost their faith without losing their need of faith.  'Half
the parsons' daughters in England,' Mr Warburton had said.  He was
probably right.  And not only parsons' daughters; people of every
description--people in illness and loneliness and failure, people
leading thwarted, discouraging lives--people who needed faith to
support them, and who hadn't got it.  Perhaps even nuns in
convents, scrubbing floors and singing Ave Marias, secretly
unbelieving.

And how cowardly, after all, to regret a superstition that you had
got rid of--to want to believe something that you knew in your
bones to be untrue!

And yet--!

Dorothy had put down her scissors.  Almost from force of habit, as
though her return home, which had not restored her faith, had
restored the outward habits of piety, she knelt down beside her
chair.  She buried her face in her hands.  She began to pray.

'Lord, I believe, help Thou my unbelief.  Lord, I believe, I
believe; help Thou my unbelief.'

It was useless, absolutely useless.  Even as she spoke the words
she was aware of their uselessness, and was half ashamed of her
action.  She raised her head.  And at that moment there stole into
her nostrils a warm, evil smell, forgotten these eight months but
unutterably familiar--the smell of glue.  The water in the saucepan
was bubbling noisily.  Dorothy jumped to her feet and felt the
handle of the glue-brush.  The glue was softening--would be liquid
in another five minutes.

The grandfather clock in her father's study struck six.  Dorothy
started.  She realized that she had wasted twenty minutes, and her
conscience stabbed her so hard that all the questions that had been
worrying her fled out of her mind.  What on earth have I been doing
all this time? she thought; and at that moment it really seemed to
her that she did not know what she had been doing.  She admonished
herself.  Come on, Dorothy!  No slacking, please!  You've got to
get that breastplate done before supper.  She sat down, filled her
mouth with pins and began pinning the two halves of the breastplate
together, to get it into shape before the glue should be ready.

The smell of glue was the answer to her prayer.  She did not know
this.  She did not reflect, consciously, that the solution to her
difficulty lay in accepting the fact that there was no solution;
that if one gets on with the job that lies to hand, the ultimate
purpose of the job fades into insignificance; that faith and no
faith are very much the same provided that one is doing what is
customary, useful, and acceptable.  She could not formulate these
thoughts as yet, she could only live them.  Much later, perhaps,
she would formulate them and draw comfort from them.

There was still a minute or two before the glue would be ready to
use.  Dorothy finished pinning the breastplate together, and in the
same instant began mentally sketching the innumerable costumes that
were yet to be made.  After William the Conqueror--was it chain
mail in William the Conqueror's day?--there were Robin Hood--
Lincoln Green and a bow and arrow--and Thomas a Becket in his cope
and mitre, and Queen Elizabeth's ruff, and a cocked hat for the
Duke of Wellington.  And I must go and see about those potatoes at
half past six, she thought.  And there was her 'memo list' to be
written out for tomorrow.  Tomorrow was Wednesday--mustn't forget
to set the alarm clock for half past five.  She took a slip of
paper and began writing out the 'memo list':


7 oc.  H.C.

Mrs J. baby next month go and see her.

BREAKFAST.  Bacon.


She paused to think of fresh items.  Mrs J. was Mrs Jowett, the
blacksmith's wife; she came sometimes to be churched after her
babies were born, but only if you coaxed her tactfully beforehand.
And I must take old Mrs Frew some paregoric lozenges, Dorothy
thought, and then perhaps she'll speak to Georgie and stop him
eating those biscuits during the sermon.  She added Mrs Frew to her
list.  And then what about tomorrow's dinner--luncheon?  We simply
MUST pay Cargill something! she thought.  And tomorrow was the day
of the Mothers' Union tea, and they had finished the novel that
Miss Foote had been reading to them.  The question was, what to get
for them next?  There didn't seem to be any more books by Gene
Stratton Porter, their favourite.  What about Warwick Deeping?  Too
highbrow, perhaps?  And I must ask Proggett to get us some young
cauliflowers to plant out, she thought finally.

The glue had liquefied.  Dorothy took two fresh sheets of brown
paper, sliced them into narrow strips, and--rather awkwardly,
because of the difficulty of keeping the breastplate convex--pasted
the strips horizontally across it, back and front.  By degrees it
stiffened under her hands.  When she had reinforced it all over she
set it on end to look at it.  It really wasn't half bad!  One more
coating of paper and it would be almost like real armour.  We MUST
make that pageant a success! she thought.  What a pity we can't
borrow a horse from somebody and have Boadicea in her chariot!  We
might make five pounds if we had a really good chariot, with
scythes on the wheels.  And what about Hengist and Horsa?  Cross-
gartering and winged helmets.  Dorothy sliced two more sheets of
brown paper into strips, and took up the breastplate to give it its
final coating.  The problem of faith and no faith had vanished
utterly from her mind.  It was beginning to get dark, but, too busy
to stop and light the lamp, she worked on, pasting strip after
strip of paper into place, with absorbed, with pious concentration,
in the penetrating smell of the glue-pot.



THE END



Title:      Keep the Aspidistra Flying
Author:     George Orwell


Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not
money, I am become as a sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.  And
though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries,
and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could
remove mountains, and have not money, I am nothing.  And though I
bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to
be burned, and have not money, it profiteth me nothing.  Money
suffereth long, and is kind; money envieth not; money vaunteth not
itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave unseemly, seeketh not her
own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil; rejoiceth not in
iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; beareth all things, believeth
all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. . . .  And now
abideth faith, hope, money, these three; but the greatest of these
is money.

I Corinthians xiii (adapted)



1


The clock struck half past two.  In the little office at the back
of Mr McKechnie's bookshop, Gordon--Gordon Comstock, last member
of the Comstock family, aged twenty-nine and rather moth-eaten
already--lounged across the table, pushing a four-penny packet of
Player's Weights open and shut with his thumb.

The ding-dong of another, remoter clock--from the Prince of Wales,
the other side of the street--rippled the stagnant air.  Gordon
made an effort, sat upright, and stowed his packet of cigarettes
away in his inside pocket.  He was perishing for a smoke.  However,
there were only four cigarettes left.  Today was Wednesday and he
had no money coming to him till Friday.  It would be too bloody to
be without tobacco tonight as well as all tomorrow.

Bored in advance by tomorrow's tobaccoless hours, he got up and
moved towards the door--a small frail figure, with delicate bones
and fretful movements.  His coat was out at elbow in the right
sleeve and its middle button was missing; his ready-made flannel
trousers were stained and shapeless.  Even from above you could see
that his shoes needed resoling.

The money clinked in his trouser pocket as he got up.  He knew
the precise sum that was there.  Fivepence halfpenny--twopence
halfpenny and a Joey.  He paused, took out the miserable little
threepenny-bit, and looked at it.  Beastly, useless thing!  And
bloody fool to have taken it!  It had happened yesterday, when he
was buying cigarettes.  'Don't mind a threepenny-bit, do you, sir?'
the little bitch of a shop-girl had chirped.  And of course he had
let her give it him.  'Oh no, not at all!' he had said--fool,
bloody fool!

His heart sickened to think that he had only fivepence halfpenny in
the world, threepence of which couldn't even be spent.  Because how
can you buy anything with a threepenny-bit?  It isn't a coin, it's
the answer to a riddle.  You look such a fool when you take it out
of your pocket, unless it's in among a whole handful of other
coins.  'How much?' you say.  'Threepence,' the shop-girl says.
And then you feel all round your pocket and fish out that absurd
little thing, all by itself, sticking on the end of your finger
like a tiddley-wink.  The shop-girl sniffs.  She spots immediately
that it's your last threepence in the world.  You see her glance
quickly at it--she's wondering whether there's a piece of Christmas
pudding still sticking to it.  And you stalk out with your nose in
the air, and can't ever go to that shop again.  No!  We won't spend
our Joey.  Twopence halfpenny left--twopence halfpenny to last till
Friday.

This was the lonely after-dinner hour, when few or no customers
were to be expected.  He was alone with seven thousand books.  The
small dark room, smelling of dust and decayed paper, that gave on
the office, was filled to the brim with books, mostly aged and
unsaleable.  On the top shelves near the ceiling the quarto volumes
of extinct encyclopedias slumbered on their sides in piles like the
tiered coffins in common graves.  Gordon pushed aside the blue,
dust-sodden curtains that served as a doorway to the next room.
This, better lighted than the other, contained the lending library.
It was one of those 'twopenny no-deposit' libraries beloved of
book-pinchers.  No books in it except novels, of course.  And WHAT
novels!  But that too was a matter of course.

Eight hundred strong, the novels lined the room on three sides
ceiling-high, row upon row of gaudy oblong backs, as though the
walls had been built of many-coloured bricks laid upright.  They
were arranged alphabetically.  Arlen, Burroughs, Deeping, Dell,
Frankau, Galsworthy, Gibbs, Priestley, Sapper, Walpole.  Gordon
eyed them with inert hatred.  At this moment he hated all books,
and novels most of all.  Horrible to think of all that soggy, half-
baked trash massed together in one place.  Pudding, suet pudding.
Eight hundred slabs of pudding, walling him in--a vault of
puddingstone.  The thought was oppressive.  He moved on through the
open doorway into the front part of the shop.  In doing so, he
smoothed his hair.  It was an habitual movement.  After all, there
might be girls outside the glass door.  Gordon was not impressive
to look at.  He was just five feet seven inches high, and because
his hair was usually too long he gave the impression that his head
was a little too big for his body.  He was never quite unconscious
of his small stature.  When he knew that anyone was looking at him
he carried himself very upright, throwing a chest, with a you-be-
damned air which occasionally deceived simple people.

However, there was nobody outside.  The front room, unlike the rest
of the shop, was smart and expensive-looking, and it contained
about two thousand books, exclusive of those in the window.  On the
right there was a glass showcase in which children's books were
kept.  Gordon averted his eyes from a beastly Rackhamesque dust-
jacket; elvish children tripping Wendily through a bluebell glade.
He gazed out through the glass door.  A foul day, and the wind
rising.  The sky was leaden, the cobbles of the street were slimy.
It was St Andrew's day, the thirtieth of November.  McKechnie's
stood on a corner, on a sort of shapeless square where four streets
converged.  To the left, just within sight from the door, stood a
great elm-tree, leafless now, its multitudinous twigs making sepia-
coloured lace against the sky.  Opposite, next to the Prince of
Wales, were tall hoardings covered with ads for patent foods and
patent medicines.  A gallery of monstrous doll-faces--pink vacuous
faces, full of goofy optimism.  Q.T. Sauce, Truweet Breakfast
Crisps ('Kiddies clamour for their Breakfast Crisps'), Kangaroo
Burgundy, Vitamalt Chocolate, Bovex.  Of them all, the Bovex one
oppressed Gordon the most.  A spectacled rat-faced clerk, with
patent-leather hair, sitting at a cafe table grinning over a white
mug of Bovex.  'Corner Table enjoys his meal with Bovex', the
legend ran.

Gordon shortened the focus of his eyes.  From the dust-dulled pane
the reflection of his own face looked back at him.  Not a good
face.  Not thirty yet, but moth-eaten already.  Very pale, with
bitter, ineradicable lines.  What people call a 'good' forehead--
high, that is--but a small pointed chin, so that the face as a
whole was pear-shaped rather than oval.  Hair mouse-coloured and
unkempt, mouth unamiable, eyes hazel inclining to green.  He
lengthened the focus of his eyes again.  He hated mirrors nowadays.
Outside, all was bleak and wintry.  A tram, like a raucous swan of
steel, glided groaning over the cobbles, and in its wake the wind
swept a debris of trampled leaves.  The twigs of the elm-tree were
swirling, straining eastward.  The poster that advertised Q.T.
Sauce was torn at the edge; a ribbon of paper fluttered fitfully
like a tiny pennant.  In the side street too, to the right, the
naked poplars that lined the pavement bowed sharply as the wind
caught them.  A nasty raw wind.  There was a threatening note in it
as it swept over; the first growl of winter's anger.  Two lines of
a poem struggled for birth in Gordon's mind:

Sharply the something wind--for instance, threatening wind?  No,
better, menacing wind.  The menacing wind blows over--no, sweeps
over, say.

The something poplars--yielding poplars?  No, better, bending
poplars.  Assonance between bending and menacing?  No matter.  The
bending poplars, newly bare.  Good.


Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over
The bending poplars, newly bare.


Good.  'Bare' is a sod to rhyme; however, there's always 'air',
which every poet since Chaucer has been struggling to find rhymes
for.  But the impulse died away in Gordon's mind.  He turned the
money over in his pocket.  Twopence halfpenny and a Joey--twopence
halfpenny.  His mind was sticky with boredom.  He couldn't cope
with rhymes and adjectives.  You can't, with only twopence
halfpenny in your pocket.

His eyes refocused themselves upon the posters opposite.  He had
his private reasons for hating them.  Mechanically he re-read their
slogans.  'Kangaroo Burgundy--the wine for Britons.'  'Asthma was
choking her!'  'Q.T. Sauce Keeps Hubby Smiling.'  'Hike all day on
a Slab of Vitamalt!'  'Curve Cut--the Smoke for Outdoor Men.'
'Kiddies clamour for their Breakfast Crisps.'  'Corner Table enjoys
his meal with Bovex.'

Ha!  A customer--potential, at any rate.  Gordon stiffened himself.
Standing by the door, you could get an oblique view out of the
front window without being seen yourself.  He looked the potential
customer over.

A decentish middle-aged man, black suit, bowler hat, umbrella, and
dispatch-case--provincial solicitor or Town Clerk--keeking at the
window with large pale-coloured eyes.  He wore a guilty look.
Gordon followed the direction of his eyes.  Ah!  So that was it!
He had nosed out those D. H. Lawrence first editions in the far
corner.  Pining for a bit of smut, of course.  He had heard of Lady
Chatterley afar off.  A bad face he had, Gordon thought.  Pale,
heavy, downy, with bad contours.  Welsh, by the look of him--
Nonconformist, anyway.  He had the regular Dissenting pouches round
the corners of his mouth.  At home, president of the local Purity
League or Seaside Vigilance Committee (rubber-soled slippers and
electric torch, spotting kissing couples along the beach parade),
and now up in town on the razzle.  Gordon wished he would come in.
Sell him a copy of Women in Love.  How it would disappoint him!

But no!  The Welsh solicitor had funked it.  He tucked his umbrella
under his arm and moved off with righteously turned backside.  But
doubtless tonight, when darkness hid his blushes, he'd slink into
one of the rubber-shops and buy High Jinks in a Parisian Convent,
by Sadie Blackeyes.

Gordon turned away from the door and back to the book-shelves.  In
the shelves to your left as you came out of the library the new and
nearly-new books were kept--a patch of bright colour that was meant
to catch the eye of anyone glancing through the glass door.  Their
sleek unspotted backs seemed to yearn at you from the shelves.
'Buy me, buy me!' they seemed to be saying.  Novels fresh from the
press--still unravished brides, pining for the paperknife to
deflower them--and review copies, like youthful widows, blooming
still though virgin no longer, and here and there, in sets of half
a dozen, those pathetic spinster-things, 'remainders', still
guarding hopefully their long preserv'd virginity.  Gordon turned
his eyes away from the 'remainders'.  They called up evil memories.
The single wretched little book that he himself had published, two
years ago, had sold exactly a hundred and fifty-three copies and
then been 'remaindered'; and even as a 'remainder' it hadn't sold.
He passed the new books by and paused in front of the shelves which
ran at right angles to them and which contained more second-hand
books.

Over to the right were shelves of poetry.  Those in front of him
were prose, a miscellaneous lot.  Upwards and downwards they were
graded, from clean and expensive at eye-level to cheap and dingy at
top and bottom.  In all book-shops there goes on a savage Darwinian
struggle in which the works of living men gravitate to eye-level
and the works of dead men go up or down--down to Gehenna or up to
the throne, but always away from any position where they will be
noticed.  Down in the bottom shelves the 'classics', the extinct
monsters of the Victorian age, were quietly rotting.  Scott,
Carlyle, Meredith, Ruskin, Pater, Stevenson--you could hardly read
the names upon their broad dowdy backs.  In the top shelves, almost
out of sight, slept the pudgy biographies of dukes.  Below those,
saleable still and therefore placed within reach, was 'religious'
literature--all sects and all creeds, lumped indiscriminately
together.  The World Beyond, by the author of Spirit Hands Have
Touched me.  Dean Farrar's Life of Christ.  Jesus the First
Rotarian.  Father Hilaire Chestnut's latest book of R. C.
propaganda.  Religion always sells provided it is soppy enough.
Below, exactly at eye-level, was the contemporary stuff.
Priestley's latest.  Dinky little books of reprinted 'middles'.
Cheer-up 'humour' from Herbert and Knox and Milne.  Some highbrow
stuff as well.  A novel or two by Hemingway and Virginia Woolf.
Smart pseudo-Strachey predigested biographies.  Snooty, refined
books on safe painters and safe poets by those moneyed young beasts
who glide so gracefully from Eton to Cambridge and from Cambridge
to the literary reviews.

Dull-eyed, he gazed at the wall of books.  He hated the whole lot
of them, old and new, highbrow and lowbrow, snooty and chirpy.  The
mere sight of them brought home to him his own sterility.  For here
was he, supposedly a 'writer', and he couldn't even 'write'!  It
wasn't merely a question of not getting published; it was that he
produced nothing, or next to nothing.  And all that tripe
cluttering the shelves--well, at any rate it existed; it was an
achievement of sorts.  Even the Dells and Deepings do at least turn
out their yearly acre of print.  But it was the snooty 'cultured'
kind of books that he hated the worst.  Books of criticism and
belles-lettres.  The kind of thing that those moneyed young beasts
from Cambridge write almost in their sleep--and that Gordon himself
might have written if he had had a little more money.  Money and
culture!  In a country like England you can no more be cultured
without money than you can join the Cavalry Club.  With the same
instinct that makes a child waggle a loose tooth, he took out a
snooty-looking volume--Some Aspects of the Italian Baroque--opened
it, read a paragraph, and shoved it back with mingled loathing and
envy.  That devastating omniscience!  That noxious, horn-spectacled
refinement!  And the money that such refinement means!  For after
all, what is there behind it, except money?  Money for the right
kind of education, money for influential friends, money for leisure
and peace of mind, money for trips to Italy.  Money writes books,
money sells them.  Give me not righteousness, O Lord, give me
money, only money.

He jingled the coins in his pocket.  He was nearly thirty and had
accomplished nothing; only his miserable book of poems that had
fallen flatter than any pancake.  And ever since, for two whole
years, he had been struggling in the labyrinth of a dreadful book
that never got any further, and which, as he knew in his moments of
clarity, never would get any further.  It was the lack of money,
simply the lack of money, that robbed him of the power to 'write'.
He clung to that as to an article of faith.  Money, money, all is
money!  Could you write even a penny novelette without money to put
heart in you?  Invention, energy, wit, style, charm--they've all
got to be paid for in hard cash.

Nevertheless, as he looked along the shelves he felt himself a
little comforted.  So many of the books were faded and unreadable.
After all, we're all in the same boat.  Memento mori.  For you and
for me and for the snooty young men from Cambridge, the same
oblivion waits--though doubtless it'll wait rather longer for those
snooty young men from Cambridge.  He looked at the time-dulled
'classics' near his feet.  Dead, all dead.  Carlyle and Ruskin and
Meredith and Stevenson--all are dead, God rot them.  He glanced
over their faded titles.  Collected Letters of Robert Louis
Stevenson.  Ha, ha!  That's good.  Collected Letters of Robert
Louis Stevenson!  Its top edge was black with dust.  Dust thou art,
to dust returnest.  Gordon kicked Stevenson's buckram backside.
Art there, old false-penny?  You're cold meat, if ever Scotchman
was.

Ping!  The shop bell.  Gordon turned round.  Two customers, for the
library.

A dejected, round-shouldered, lower-class woman, looking like a
draggled duck nosing among garbage, seeped in, fumbling with a rush
basket.  In her wake hopped a plump little sparrow of a woman, red-
cheeked, middle-middle class, carrying under her arm a copy of The
Forsyte Saga--title outwards, so that passers-by could spot her for
a high-brow.

Gordon had taken off his sour expression.  He greeted them with the
homey, family-doctor geniality reserved for library-subscribers.

'Good afternoon, Mrs Weaver.  Good afternoon, Mrs Penn.  What
terrible weather!'

'Shocking!' said Mrs Penn.

He stood aside to let them pass.  Mrs Weaver upset her rush basket
and spilled on to the floor a much-thumbed copy of Ethel M. Dell's
Silver Wedding.  Mrs Penn's bright bird-eye lighted upon it.
Behind Mrs Weaver's back she smiled up to Gordon, archly, as
highbrow to highbrow.  Dell!  The lowness of it!  The books these
lower classes read!  Understandingly, he smiled back.  They passed
into the library, highbrow to highbrow smiling.

Mrs Penn laid The Forsyte Saga on the table and turned her sparrow-
bosom upon Gordon.  She was always very affable to Gordon.  She
addressed him as Mister Comstock, shopwalker though he was, and
held literary conversations with him.  There was the free-masonry
of highbrows between them.

'I hope you enjoyed The Forsyte Saga, Mrs Penn?'

'What a perfectly MARVELLOUS achievement that book is, Mr Comstock!
Do you know that that makes the fourth time I've read it?  An epic,
a real epic!'

Mrs Weaver nosed among the books, too dim-witted to grasp that they
were in alphabetical order.

'I don't know what to 'ave this week, that I don't,' she mumbled
through untidy lips.  'My daughter she keeps on at me to 'ave a try
at Deeping.  She's great on Deeping, my daughter is.  But my son-
in-law, now, 'e's more for Burroughs.  I don't know, I'm sure.'

A spasm passed over Mrs Penn's face at the mention of Burroughs.
She turned her back markedly on Mrs Weaver.

'What I feel, Mr Comstock, is that there's something so BIG about
Galsworthy.  He's so broad, so universal, and yet at the same time
so thoroughly English in spirit, so HUMAN.  His books are real
HUMAN documents.'

'And Priestley, too,' said Gordon.  'I think Priestley's such an
awfully fine writer, don't you?'

'Oh, he is!  So big, so broad, so human!  And so essentially
English!'

Mrs Weaver pursed her lips.  Behind them were three isolated yellow
teeth.

'I think p'raps I can do better'n 'ave another Dell,' she said.
'You 'ave got some more Dells, 'aven't you?  I DO enjoy a good read
of Dell, I must say.  I says to my daughter, I says, "You can keep
your Deepings and your Burroughses.  Give me Dell," I says.'

Ding Dong Dell!  Dukes and dogwhips!  Mrs Penn's eye signalled
highbrow irony.  Gordon returned her signal.  Keep in with Mrs
Penn!  A good, steady customer.

'Oh, certainly, Mrs Weaver.  We've got a whole shelf by Ethel M.
Dell.  Would you like The Desire of his Life?  Or perhaps you've
read that.  Then what about The Alter of Honour?'

'I wonder whether you have Hugh Walpole's latest book?' said Mrs
Penn.  'I feel in the mood this week for something epic, something
BIG.  Now Walpole, you know, I consider a really GREAT writer, I
put him second only to Galsworthy.  There's something so BIG about
him.  And yet he's so human with it.'

'And so essentially English,' said Gordon.

'Oh, of course!  So essentially English!'

'I b'lieve I'll jest 'ave The Way of an Eagle over again,' said Mrs
Weaver finally.  'You don't never seem to get tired of The Way of
an Eagle, do you, now?'

'It's certainly astonishingly popular,' said Gordon, diplomatically,
his eye on Mrs Penn.

'Oh, asTONishingly!' echoed Mrs Penn, ironically, her eye on
Gordon.

He took their twopences and sent them happy away, Mrs Penn with
Walpole's Rogue Herries and Mrs Weaver with The Way of an Eagle.

Soon he had wandered back to the other room and towards the shelves
of poetry.  A melancholy fascination, those shelves had for him.
His own wretched book was there--skied, of course, high up among
the unsaleable.  Mice, by Gordon Comstock; a sneaky little foolscap
octavo, price three and sixpence but now reduced to a bob.  Of the
thirteen B.F.s who had reviewed it (and The Times Lit. Supp. had
declared that it showed 'exceptional promise') not one had seen the
none too subtle joke of that title.  And in the two years he had
been at McKechnie's bookshop, not a single customer, not a single
one, had ever taken Mice out of its shelf.

There were fifteen or twenty shelves of poetry.  Gordon regarded
them sourly.  Dud stuff, for the most part.  A little above eye-
level, already on their way to heaven and oblivion, were the poets
of yesteryear, the stars of his earlier youth.  Yeats, Davies,
Housman, Thomas, De la Mare, Hardy.  Dead stars.  Below them,
exactly at eye-level, were the squibs of the passing minute.
Eliot, Pound, Auden, Campbell, Day Lewis, Spender.  Very damp
squibs, that lot.  Dead stars above, damp squibs below.  Shall we
ever again get a writer worth reading?  But Lawrence was all right,
and Joyce even better before he went off his coconut.  And if we
did get a writer worth reading, should we know him when we saw him,
so choked as we are with trash?

Ping!  Shop bell.  Gordon turned.  Another customer.

A youth of twenty, cherry-lipped, with gilded hair, tripped
Nancifully in.  Moneyed, obviously.  He had the golden aura of
money.  He had been in the shop before.  Gordon assumed the
gentlemanly-servile mien reserved for new customers.  He repeated
the usual formula:

'Good afternoon.  Can I do anything for you?  Are you looking for
any particular book?'

'Oh, no, not weally.'  An R-less Nancy voice.  'May I just BWOWSE?
I simply couldn't wesist your fwont window.  I have such a tewwible
weakness for bookshops!  So I just floated in--tee-hee!'

Float out again, then, Nancy.  Gordon smiled a cultured smile, as
booklover to booklover.

'Oh, please do.  We like people to look round.  Are you interested
in poetry, by any chance?'

'Oh, of course!  I ADORE poetwy!'

Of course!  Mangy little snob.  There was a sub-artistic look about
his clothes.  Gordon slid a 'slim' red volume from the poetry
shelves.

'These are just out.  They might interest you, perhaps.  They're
translations--something rather out of the common.  Translations
from the Bulgarian.'

Very subtle, that.  Now leave him to himself.  That's the proper
way with customers.  Don't hustle them; let them browse for twenty
minutes or so; then they get ashamed and buy something.  Gordon
moved to the door, discreetly, keeping out of Nancy's way; yet
casually, one hand in his pocket, with the insouciant air proper to
a gentleman.

Outside, the slimy street looked grey and drear.  From somewhere
round the corner came the clatter of hooves, a cold hollow sound.
Caught by the wind, the dark columns of smoke from the chimneys
veered over and rolled flatly down the sloping roofs.  Ah!


Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over
The bending poplars, newly bare,
And the dark ribbons of the chimneys
Veer downward tumty tumty (something like 'murky') air.


Good.  But the impulse faded.  His eye fell again upon the ad-
posters across the street.

He almost wanted to laugh at them, they were so feeble, so dead-
alive, so unappetizing.  As though anybody could be tempted by
THOSE!  Like succubi with pimply backsides.  But they depressed him
all the same.  The money-stink, everywhere the money-stink.  He
stole a glance at the Nancy, who had drifted away from the poetry
shelves and taken out a large expensive book on the Russian ballet.
He was holding it delicately between his pink non-prehensile paws,
as a squirrel holds a nut, studying the photographs.  Gordon knew
his type.  The moneyed 'artistic' young man.  Not an artist
himself, exactly, but a hanger-on of the arts; frequenter of
studios, retailer of scandal.  A nice-looking boy, though, for all
his Nancitude.  The skin at the back of his neck was as silky-
smooth as the inside of a shell.  You can't have a skin like that
under five hundred a year.  A sort of charm he had, a glamour, like
all moneyed people.  Money and charm; who shall separate them?

Gordon thought of Ravelston, his charming, rich friend, editor of
Antichrist, of whom he was extravagantly fond, and whom he did not
see so often as once in a fortnight; and of Rosemary, his girl, who
loved him--adored him, so she said--and who, all the same, had
never slept with him.  Money, once again; all is money.  All human
relationships must be purchased with money.  If you have no money,
men won't care for you, women won't love you; won't, that is, care
for you or love you the last little bit that matters.  And how
right they are, after all!  For, moneyless, you are unlovable.
Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels.  But then,
if I haven't money, I DON'T speak with the tongues of men and of
angels.

He looked again at the ad-posters.  He really hated them this time.
That Vitamalt one, for instance!  'Hike all day on a slab of
Vitamalt!'  A youthful couple, boy and girl, in clean-minded hiking
kit, their hair picturesquely tousled by the wind, climbing a stile
against a Sussex landscape.  That girl's face!  The awful bright
tomboy cheeriness of it!  The kind of girl who goes in for Plenty
of Clean Fun.  Windswept.  Tight khaki shorts but that doesn't mean
you can pinch her backside.  And next to them--Corner Table.
'Corner Table enjoys his meal with Bovex'.  Gordon examined the
thing with the intimacy of hatred.  The idiotic grinning face, like
the face of a self-satisfied rat, the slick black hair, the silly
spectacles.  Corner Table, heir of the ages; victor of Waterloo,
Corner Table, Modern man as his master want him to be.  A docile
little porker, sitting in the money-sty, drinking Bovex.

Faces passed, wind-yellowed.  A tram boomed across the square, and
the clock over the Prince of Wales struck three.  A couple of old
creatures, a tramp or a beggar and his wife, in long greasy
overcoats that reached almost to the ground, were shuffling towards
the shop.  Book-pinchers, by the look of them.  Better keep an eye
on the boxes outside.  The old man halted on the kerb a few yards
away while his wife came to the door.  She pushed it open and
looked up at Gordon, between grey strings of hair, with a sort of
hopeful malevolence.

'Ju buy books?' she demanded hoarsely.

'Sometimes.  It depends what books they are.'

'I gossome LOVELY books 'ere.'

She came in, shutting the door with a clang.  The Nancy glanced
over his shoulder distastefully and moved a step or two away, into
the corner.  The old woman had produced a greasy little sack from
under her overcoat.  She moved confidentially nearer to Gordon.
She smelt of very, very old breadcrusts.

'Will you 'ave 'em?' she said, clasping the neck of the sack.
'Only 'alf a crown the lot.'

'What are they?  Let me see them, please.'

'LOVELY books, they are,' she breathed, bending over to open the
sack and emitting a sudden very powerful whiff of breadcrusts.

''Ere!' she said, and thrust an armful of filthy-looking books
almost into Gordon's face.

They were an 1884 edition of Charlotte M. Yonge's novels, and had
the appearance of having been slept on for many years.  Gordon
stepped back, suddenly revolted.

'We can't possibly buy those,' he said shortly.

'Can't buy 'em?  WHY can't yer buy 'em?'

'Because they're no use to us.  We can't sell that kind of thing.'

'Wotcher make me take 'em out o' me bag for, then?' demanded the
old woman ferociously.

Gordon made a detour round her, to avoid the smell, and held the
door open, silently.  No use arguing.  You had people of this type
coming into the shop all day long.  The old woman made off,
mumbling, with malevolence in the hump of her shoulders, and joined
her husband.  He paused on the kerb to cough, so fruitily that you
could hear him through the door.  A clot of phlegm, like a little
white tongue, came slowly out between his lips and was ejected into
the gutter.  Then the two old creatures shuffled away, beetle-like
in the long greasy overcoats that hid everything except their feet.

Gordon watched them go.  They were just by-products.  The throw-
outs of the money-god.  All over London, by tens of thousands,
draggled old beasts of that description; creeping like unclean
beetles to the grave.

He gazed out at the graceless street.  At this moment it seemed to
him that in a street like this, in a town like this, every life
that is lived must be meaningless and intolerable.  The sense of
disintegration, of decay, that is endemic in our time, was strong
upon him.  Somehow it was mixed up with the ad-posters opposite.
He looked now with more seeing eyes at those grinning yard-wide
faces.  After all, there was more there than mere silliness, greed,
and vulgarity.  Corner Table grins at you, seemingly optimistic,
with a flash of false teeth.  But what is behind the grin?
Desolation, emptiness, prophecies of doom.  For can you not see, if
you know how to look, that behind that slick self-satisfaction, that
tittering fat-bellied triviality, there is nothing but a frightful
emptiness, a secret despair?  The great death-wish of the modern
world.  Suicide pacts.  Heads stuck in gas-ovens in lonely
maisonettes.  French letters and Amen Pills.  And the reverberations
of future wars.  Enemy aeroplanes flying over London; the deep
threatening hum of the propellers, the shattering thunder of the
bombs.  It is all written in Corner Table's face.

More customers coming.  Gordon stood back, gentlemanly-servile.

The door-bell clanged.  Two upper-middle-class ladies sailed
noisily in.  One pink and fruity, thirty-fivish, with voluptuous
bosom burgeoning from her coat of squirrel-skin, emitting a super-
feminine scent of Parma violets: the other middle-aged, tough, and
curried--India, presumably.  Close behind them a dark, grubby, shy
young man slipped through the doorway as apologetically as a cat.
He was one of the shop's best customers--a flitting, solitary
creature who was almost too shy to speak and who by some strange
manipulation kept himself always a day away from a shave.

Gordon repeated his formula:

'Good afternoon.  Can I do anything for you?  Are you looking for
any particular book?'

Fruity-face overwhelmed him with a smile, but curry-face decided to
treat the question as an impertinence.  Ignoring Gordon, she drew
fruity-face across to the shelves next to the new books where the
dog-books and cat-books were kept.  The two of them immediately
began taking books out of the shelves and talking loudly.  Curry-
face had the voice of a drill-sergeant.  She was no doubt a
colonel's wife, or widow.  The Nancy, still deep in the big book on
the Russian ballet, edged delicately away.  His face said that he
would leave the shop if his privacy were disturbed again.  The shy
young man had already found his way to the poetry shelves.  The two
ladies were fairly frequent visitors to the shop.  They always
wanted to see books about cats and dogs, but never actually bought
anything.  There were two whole shelves of dog-books and cat-books.
'Ladies' Corner,' old McKechnie called it.

Another customer arrived, for the library.  An ugly girl of twenty,
hatless, in a white overall, with a sallow, blithering, honest face
and powerful spectacles that distorted her eyes.  She was an
assistant at a chemist's shop.  Gordon put on his homey library
manner.  She smiled at him, and with a gait as clumsy as a bear's
followed him into the library.

'What kind of book would you like this time, Miss Weeks?'

'Well'--she clutched the front of her overall.  Her distorted,
black-treacle eyes beamed trustfully into his.  'Well, what I'd
REALLY like's a good hot-stuff love story.  You know--something
MODERN.'

'Something modern?  Something by Barbara Bedworthy for instance?
Have you read Almost a Virgin?'

'Oh no, not her.  She's too Deep.  I can't bear Deep books.  But I
want something--well, YOU know--MODERN.  Sex-problems and divorce
and all that.  YOU know.'

'Modern, but not Deep,' said Gordon, as lowbrow to lowbrow.

He ranged among the hot-stuff modern love-stories.  There were not
less than three hundred of them in the library.  From the front
room came the voices of the two upper-middle-class ladies, the one
fruity, the other curried, disputing about dogs.  They had taken
out one of the dog-books and were examining the photographs.
Fruity-voice enthused over the photograph of a Peke, the ickle
angel pet, wiv his gweat big Soulful eyes and his ickle black
nosie--oh, so ducky-duck!  But curry-voice--yes, undoubtedly a
colonel's widow--said Pekes were soppy.  Give her dogs with guts--
dogs that would fight, she said; she hated these soppy lapdogs, she
said.  'You have no Soul, Bedelia, no Soul,' said fruity-voice
plaintively.  The door-bell pinged again.  Gordon handed the
chemist's girl Seven Scarlet Nights and booked it on her ticket.
She took a shabby leather purse out of her overall pocket and paid
him twopence.

He went back to the front room.  The Nancy had put his book back in
the wrong shelf and vanished.  A lean, straight-nosed, brisk woman,
with sensible clothes and gold-rimmed pince-nez--schoolmarm
possibly, feminist certainly--came in and demanded Mrs Wharton-
Beverley's history of the suffrage movement.  With secret joy
Gordon told her that they hadn't got it.  She stabbed his male
incompetence with gimlet eyes and went out again.  The thin young
man stood apologetically in the corner, his face buried in D. H.
Lawrence's Collected Poems, like some long-legged bird with its
head buried under its wing.

Gordon waited by the door.  Outside, a shabby-genteel old man with
a strawberry nose and a khaki muffler round his throat was picking
over the books in the sixpenny box.  The two upper-middle-class
ladies suddenly departed, leaving a litter of open books on the
table.  Fruity-face cast reluctant backward glances at the dog-
books, but curry-face drew her away, resolute not to buy anything.
Gordon held the door open.  The two ladies sailed noisily out,
ignoring him.

He watched their fur-coated upper-middle-class backs go down the
street.  The old strawberry-nosed man was talking to himself as he
pawed over the books.  A bit wrong in the head, presumably.  He
would pinch something if he wasn't watched.  The wind blew colder,
drying the slime of the street.  Time to light up presently.
Caught by a swirl of air, the torn strip of paper on the Q. T.
Sauce advertisement fluttered sharply, like a piece of washing on
the line.  Ah!


Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over
The bending poplars, newly bare,
And the dark ribbons of the chimneys
Veer downward; flicked by whips of air
Torn posters flutter.


Not bad, not bad at all.  But he had no wish to go on--could not go
on, indeed.  He fingered the money in his pocket, not chinking it,
lest the shy young man should hear.  Twopence-halfpenny.  No
tobacco all tomorrow.  His bones ached.

A light sprang up in the Prince of Wales.  They would be swabbing
out the bar.  The old strawberry-nosed man was reading an Edgar
Wallace out of the twopenny box.  A tram boomed in the distance.
In the room upstairs Mr McKechnie, who seldom came down to the
shop, drowsed by the gas-fire, white-haired and white-bearded, with
snuff-box handy, over his calf-bound folio of Middleton's Travels
in the Levant.

The thin young man suddenly realized that he was alone and looked
up guiltily.  He was a habitue of bookshops, yet never stayed
longer than ten minutes in any one shop.  A passionate hunger for
books, and the fear of being a nuisance, were constantly at war in
him.  After ten minutes in any shop he would grow uneasy, feel
himself de trop, and take to flight, having bought something out of
sheer nervousness.  Without speaking he held out the copy of
Lawrence's poems and awkwardly extracted three florins from his
pocket.  In handing them to Gordon he dropped one.  Both dived for
it simultaneously; their heads bumped against one another.  The
young man stood back, blushing sallowly.

'I'll wrap it up for you,' said Gordon.

But the shy young man shook his head--he stammered so badly that he
never spoke when it was avoidable.  He clutched his book to him and
slipped out with the air of having committed some disgraceful
action.

Gordon was alone.  He wandered back to the door.  The strawberry-
nosed man glanced over his shoulder, caught Gordon's eye, and moved
off, foiled.  He had been on the point of slipping Edgar Wallace
into his pocket.  The clock over the Prince of Wales struck a
quarter past three.

Ding Dong!  A quarter past three.  Light up at half past.  Four and
three-quarter hours till closing time.  Five and a quarter hours
till supper.  Twopence halfpenny in pocket.  No tobacco tomorrow.

Suddenly a ravishing, irresistible desire to smoke came over
Gordon.  He had made up his mind not to smoke this afternoon.  He
had only four cigarettes left.  They must be saved for tonight,
when he intended to 'write'; for he could no more 'write' without
tobacco than without air.  Nevertheless, he had got to have a
smoke.  He took out his packet of Player's Weights and extracted
one of the dwarfish cigarettes.  It was sheer stupid indulgence; it
meant half an hour off tonight's 'writing' time.  But there was no
resisting it.  With a sort of shameful joy he sucked the soothing
smoke into his lungs.

The reflection of his own face looked back at him from the greyish
pane.  Gordon Comstock, author of MICE; en l'an trentiesme de son
eage, and moth-eaten already.  Only twenty-six teeth left.
However, Villon at the same age was poxed on his own showing.
Let's be thankful for small mercies.

He watched the ribbon of torn paper whirling, fluttering on the
Q. T. Sauce advertisement.  Our civilization is dying.  It MUST be
dying.  But it isn't going to die in its bed.  Presently the
aeroplanes are coming.  Zoom--whizz--crash!  The whole western
world going up in a roar of high explosives.

He looked at the darkening street, at the greyish reflection of his
face in the pane, at the shabby figures shuffling past.  Almost
involuntarily he repeated:


'C'est l'Ennui--l'oeil charge d'un pleur involontaire,
Il reve d'echafauds en fumant son houka!'


Money, money!  Corner Table!  The humming of the aeroplanes and the
crash of the bombs.

Gordon squinted up at the leaden sky.  Those aeroplanes are coming.
In imagination he saw them coming now; squadron after squadron,
innumerable, darkening the sky like clouds of gnats.  With his
tongue not quite against his teeth he made a buzzing, bluebottle-
on-the-window-pane sound to represent the humming of the
aeroplanes.  It was a sound which, at that moment, he ardently
desired to hear.



2


Gordon walked homeward against the rattling wind, which blew his
hair backward and gave him more of a 'good' forehead than ever.
His manner conveyed to the passers-by--at least, he hoped it did--
that if he wore no overcoat it was from pure caprice.  His overcoat
was up the spout for fifteen shillings, as a matter of fact.

Willowbed Road, NW, was not definitely slummy, only dingy and
depressing.  There were real slums hardly five minutes' walk away.
Tenement houses where families slept five in a bed, and, when one
of them died, slept every night with the corpse until it was
buried; alley-ways where girls of fifteen were deflowered by boys
of sixteen against leprous plaster walls.  But Willowbed Road
itself contrived to keep up a kind of mingy, lower-middle-class
decency.  There was even a dentist's brass plate on one of the
houses.  In quite two-thirds of them, amid the lace curtains of the
parlour window, there was a green card with 'Apartments' on it in
silver lettering, above the peeping foliage of an aspidistra.

Mrs Wisbeach, Gordon's landlady, specialized in 'single gentlemen'.
Bed-sitting-rooms, with gaslight laid on and find your own heating,
baths extra (there was a geyser), and meals in the tomb-dark
dining-room with the phalanx of clotted sauce-bottles in the middle
of the table.  Gordon, who came home for his midday dinner, paid
twenty-seven and six a week.

The gaslight shone yellow through the frosted transom above the
door of Number 31.  Gordon took out his key and fished about in the
keyhole--in that kind of house the key never quite fits the lock.
The darkish little hallway--in reality it was only a passage--smelt
of dishwater, cabbage, rag mats, and bedroom slops.  Gordon glanced
at the japanned tray on the hall-stand.  No letters, of course.  He
had told himself not to hope for a letter, and nevertheless had
continued to hope.  A stale feeling, not quite a pain, settled upon
his breast.  Rosemary might have written!  It was four days now
since she had written.  Moreover, there were a couple of poems that
he had sent out to magazines and had not yet had returned to him.
The one thing that made the evening bearable was to find a letter
waiting for him when he got home.  But he received very few
letters--four or five in a week at the very most.

On the left of the hall was the never-used parlour, then came the
staircase, and beyond that the passage ran down to the kitchen and
to the unapproachable lair inhabited by Mrs Wisbeach herself.  As
Gordon came in, the door at the end of the passage opened a foot or
so.  Mrs Wisbeach's face emerged, inspected him briefly but
suspiciously, and disappeared again.  It was quite impossible to
get in or out of the house, at any time before eleven at night,
without being scrutinized in this manner.  Just what Mrs Wisbeach
suspected you of it was hard to say; smuggling women into the
house, possibly.  She was one of those malignant respectable women
who keep lodging-houses.  Age about forty-five, stout but active,
with a pink, fine-featured, horribly observant face, beautifully
grey hair, and a permanent grievance.

Gordon halted at the foot of the narrow stairs.  Above, a coarse
rich voice was singing, 'Who's afraid of the Big Bad Wolf?'  A very
fat man of thirty-eight or nine came round the angle of the stairs,
with the light dancing step peculiar to fat men, dressed in a smart
grey suit, yellow shoes, a rakish trilby hat, and a belted blue
overcoat of startling vulgarity.  This was Flaxman, the first-floor
lodger and travelling representative of the Queen of Sheba Toilet
Requisites Co.  He saluted Gordon with a lemon-coloured glove as he
came down.

'Hullo, chappie!' he said blithely.  (Flaxman called everyone
'chappie'.)  'How's life with you?'

'Bloody,' said Gordon shortly.

Flaxman had reached the bottom of the stairs.  He threw a roly-poly
arm affectionately round Gordon's shoulders.

'Cheer up, old man, cheer up!  You look like a bloody funeral.  I'm
off down to the Crichton.  Come on down and have a quick one.'

'I can't.  I've got to work.'

'Oh, hell!  Be matey, can't you?  What's the good of mooning about
up here?  Come on down to the Cri and we'll pinch the barmaid's
bum.'

Gordon wriggled free of Flaxman' s arm.  Like all small frail
people, he hated being touched.  Flaxman merely grinned, with the
typical fat man's good humour.  He was really horribly fat.  He
filled his trousers as though he had been melted and then poured
into them.  But of course, like other fat people, he never admitted
to being fat.  No fat person ever uses the word 'fat' if there is
any way of avoiding it.  'Stout' is the word they use--or, better
still, 'robust'.  A fat man is never so happy as when he is
describing himself as 'robust'.  Flaxman, at his first meeting with
Gordon, had been on the point of calling himself 'robust', but
something in Gordon's greenish eye had deterred him.  He compromised
on 'stout' instead.

'I do admit, chappie,' he said, 'to being--well, just a wee bit on
the stout side.  Nothing unwholesome, you know.'  He patted the
vague frontier between his belly and his chest.  'Good firm flesh.
I'm pretty nippy on my feet, as a matter of fact.  But--well, I
suppose you might call me STOUT.'

'Like Cortez,' Gordon suggested.

'Cortez?  Cortez?  Was that the chappie who was always wandering
about in the mountains in Mexico?'

'That's the fellow.  He was stout, but he had eagle eyes.'

'Ah?  Now that's funny.  Because the wife said something rather
like that to me once.  "George," she said, "you've got the most
wonderful eyes in the world.  You've got eyes just like an eagle,"
she said.  That would be before she married me, you'll understand.'

Flaxman was living apart from his wife at the moment.  A little
while back the Queen of Sheba Toilet Requisites Co. had
unexpectedly paid out a bonus of thirty pounds to all its
travellers, and at the same time Flaxman and two others had been
sent across to Paris to press the new Sexapeal Naturetint lipstick
on various French firms.  Flaxman had not thought it necessary to
mention the thirty pounds to his wife.  He had had the time of his
life on that Paris trip, of course.  Even now, three months
afterwards, his mouth watered when he spoke of it.  He used to
entertain Gordon with luscious descriptions.  Ten days in Paris
with thirty quid that wifie hadn't heard about!  Oh boy!  But
unfortunately there had been a leakage somewhere; Flaxman had got
home to find retribution awaiting him.  His wife had broken his
head with a cut-glass whisky decanter, a wedding present which they
had had for fourteen years, and then fled to her mother's house,
taking the children with her.  Hence Flaxman's exile in Willowbed
Road.  But he wasn't letting it worry him.  It would blow over, no
doubt; it had happened several times before.

Gordon made another attempt to get past Flaxman and escape up the
stairs.  The dreadful thing was that in his heart he was pining to
go with him.  He needed a drink so badly--the mere mention of the
Crichton Arms had made him feel thirsty.  But it was impossible, of
course; he had no money.  Flaxman put an arm across the stairs,
barring his way.  He was genuinely fond of Gordon.  He considered
him 'clever'--'cleverness', to him, being a kind of amiable lunacy.
Moreover, he detested being alone, even for so short a time as it
would take him to walk to the pub.

'Come on, chappie!' he urged.  'You want a Guinness to buck you up,
that's what you want.  You haven't seen the new girl they've got in
the saloon bar yet.  Oh, boy!  There's a peach for you!'

'So that's why you're all dolled up, is it?' said Gordon, looking
coldly at Flaxman's yellow gloves.

'You bet it is, chappie!  Coo, what a peach!  Ash blonde she is.
And she knows a thing or two, that girlie does.  I gave her a stick
of our Sexapeal Naturetint last night.  You ought to have seen her
wag her little bottom at me as she went past my table.  Does she
give me the palpitations?  Does she?  Oh, boy!'

Flaxman wriggled lascivously.  His tongue appeared between his
lips.  Then, suddenly pretending that Gordon was the ash-blonde
barmaid, he seized him by the waist and gave him a tender squeeze.
Gordon shoved him away.  For a moment the desire to go down to the
Crichton Arms was so ravishing that it almost overcame him.  Oh,
for a pint of beer!  He seemed almost to feel it going down his
throat.  If only he had had any money!  Even sevenpence for a pint.
But what was the use?  Twopence halfpenny in pocket.  You can't let
other people buy your drinks for you.

'Oh, leave me alone, for God's sake!' he said irritably, stepping
out of Flaxman's reach, and went up the stairs without looking
back.

Flaxman settled his hat on his head and made for the front door,
mildly offended.  Gordon reflected dully that it was always like
this nowadays.  He was for ever snubbing friendly advances.  Of
course it was money that was at the bottom of it, always money.
You can't be friendly, you can't even be civil, when you have no
money in your pocket.  A spasm of self-pity went through him.  His
heart yearned for the saloon bar at the Crichton; the lovely smell
of beer, the warmth and bright lights, the cheery voices, the
clatter of glasses on the beer-wet bar.  Money, money!  He went on,
up the dark evil-smelling stairs.  The thought of his cold lonely
bedroom at the top of the house was like a doom before him.

On the second floor lived Lorenheim, a dark, meagre, lizard-like
creature of uncertain age and race, who made about thirty-five
shillings a week by touting vacuum-cleaners.  Gordon always went
very hurriedly past Lorenheim's door.  Lorenheim was one of those
people who have not a single friend in the world and who are
devoured by a lust for company.  His loneliness was so deadly that
if you so much as slowed your pace outside his door he was liable
to pounce out upon you and half drag, half wheedle you in to listen
to interminable paranoiac tales of girls he had seduced and
employers he had scored off.  And his room was more cold and
squalid than even a lodging-house bedroom has any right to be.
There were always half-eaten bits of bread and margarine lying
about everywhere.  The only other lodger in the house was an
engineer of some kind, employed on nightwork.  Gordon only saw him
occasionally--a massive man with a grim, discoloured face, who wore
a bowler hat indoors and out.

In the familiar darkness of his room, Gordon felt for the gas-jet
and lighted it.  The room was medium-sized, not big enough to be
curtained into two, but too big to be sufficiently warmed by one
defective oil lamp.  It had the sort of furniture you expect in a
top floor back.  White-quilted single-bed; brown lino floor-
covering; wash-hand-stand with jug and basin of that cheap white
ware which you can never see without thinking of chamberpots.  On
the window-sill there was a sickly aspidistra in a green-glazed
pot.

Up against this, under the window, there was a kitchen table with
an inkstained green cloth.  This was Gordon's 'writing' table.  It
was only after a bitter struggle that he had induced Mrs Wisbeach
to give him a kitchen table instead of the bamboo 'occasional'
table--a mere stand for the aspidistra--which she considered proper
for a top floor back.  And even now there was endless nagging
because Gordon would never allow his table to be 'tidied up'.  The
table was in a permanent mess.  It was almost covered with a muddle
of papers, perhaps two hundred sheets of sermon paper, grimy and
dog-eared, and all written on and crossed out and written on again--
a sort of sordid labyrinth of papers to which only Gordon possessed
the key.  There was a film of dust over everything, and there were
several foul little trays containing tobacco ash and the twisted
stubs of cigarettes.  Except for a few books on the mantelpiece,
this table, with its mess of papers, was the sole mark Gordon's
personality had left on the room.

It was beastly cold.  Gordon thought he would light the oil lamp.
He lifted it--it felt very light; the spare oil can also was empty--
no oil till Friday.  He applied a match; a dull yellow flame crept
unwillingly round the wick.  It might burn for a couple of hours,
with any luck.  As Gordon threw away the match his eye fell upon
the aspidistra in its grass-green pot.  It was a peculiarly mangy
specimen.  It had only seven leaves and never seemed to put forth
any new ones.  Gordon had a sort of secret feud with the
aspidistra.  Many a time he had furtively attempted to kill it--
starving it of water, grinding hot cigarette-ends against its stem,
even mixing salt with its earth.  But the beastly things are
practically immortal.  In almost any circumstances they can
preserve a wilting, diseased existence.  Gordon stood up and
deliberately wiped his kerosiny fingers on the aspidistra leaves.

At this moment Mrs Wisbeach's voice rang shrewishly up the stairs:

'Mister Com-stock!'

Gordon went to the door.  'Yes?' he called down.

'Your supper's been waiting for you this ten minutes.  Why can't
you come down and have it, 'stead of keeping me waiting for the
washing up?'

Gordon went down.  The dining-room was on the first floor, at the
back, opposite Flaxman's room.  It was a cold, close-smelling room,
twilit even at midday.  There were more aspidistras in it than
Gordon had ever accurately counted.  They were all over the place--
on the sideboard, on the floor, on 'occasional' tables; in the
window there was a sort of florist's stand of them, blocking out
the light.  In the half-darkness, with aspidistras all about you,
you had the feeling of being in some sunless aquarium amid the
dreary foliage of water-flowers.  Gordon's supper was set out,
waiting for him, in the circle of white light that the cracked gas-
jet cast upon the table cloth.  He sat down with his back to the
fireplace (there was an aspidistra in the grate instead of a fire)
and ate his plate of cold beef and his two slices of crumbly white
bread, with Canadian butter, mousetrap cheese and Pan Yan pickle,
and drank a glass of cold but musty water.

When he went back to his room the oil lamp had got going, more or
less.  It was hot enough to boil a kettle by, he thought.  And now
for the great event of the evening--his illicit cup of tea.  He
made himself a cup of tea almost every night, in the deadliest
secrecy.  Mrs Wisbeach refused to give her lodgers tea with their
supper, because she 'couldn't be bothered with hotting up extra
water', but at the same time making tea in your bedroom was
strictly forbidden.  Gordon looked with disgust at the muddled
papers on the table.  He told himself defiantly that he wasn't
going to do any work tonight.  He would have a cup of tea and smoke
up his remaining cigarettes, and read King Lear or Sherlock Holmes.
His books were on the mantelpiece beside the alarm clock--
Shakespeare in the Everyman edition, Sherlock Holmes, Villon's
poems, Roderick Random, Les Fleurs du Mal, a pile of French novels.
But he read nothing nowadays, except Shakespeare and Sherlock
Holmes.  Meanwhile, that cup of tea.

Gordon went to the door, pushed it ajar, and listened.  No sound of
Mrs Wisbeach.  You had to be very careful; she was quite capable of
sneaking upstairs and catching you in the act.  This tea-making was
the major household offence, next to bringing a woman in.  Quietly
he bolted the door, dragged his cheap suitcase from under the bed,
and unlocked it.  From it he extracted a sixpenny Woolworth's
kettle, a packet of Lyons' tea, a tin of condensed milk, a tea-pot,
and a cup.  They were all packed in newspaper to prevent them from
chinking.

He had his regular procedure for making tea.  First he half filled
the kettle with water from the jug and set it on the oil stove.
Then he knelt down and spread out a piece of newspaper.  Yesterday's
tea-leaves were still in the pot, of course.  He shook them out on
to the newspaper, cleaned out the pot with his thumb and folded the
leaves into a bundle.  Presently he would smuggle them downstairs.
That was always the most risky part--getting rid of the used
tea-leaves.  It was like the difficulty murderers have in disposing
of the body.  As for the cup, he always washed it in his hand basin
in the morning.  A squalid business.  It sickened him, sometimes.
It was queer how furtively you had to live in Mrs Wisbeach's house.
You had the feeling that she was always watching you; and indeed,
she was given to tiptoeing up and downstairs at all hours, in hope
of catching the lodgers up to mischief.  It was one of those houses
where you cannot even go to the W.C. in peace because of the
feeling that somebody is listening to you.

Gordon unbolted the door again and listened intently.  No one
stirring.  Ah!  A clatter of crockery far below.  Mrs Wisbeach was
washing up the supper things.  Probably safe to go down, then.

He tiptoed down, clutching the damp bundle of tea-leaves against
his breast.  The W.C. was on the second floor.  At the angle of
the stairs he halted, listened a moment longer.  Ah!  Another
clatter of crockery.

All clear!  Gordon Comstock, poet ('of exceptional promise', The
Times Lit. Supp. had said), hurriedly slipped into the W.C., flung
his tea-leaves down the waste-pipe, and pulled the plug.  Then he
hurried back to his room, rebolted the door, and, with precautions
against noise, brewed himself a fresh pot of tea.

The room was passably warm by now.  The tea and a cigarette worked
their short-lived magic.  He began to feel a little less bored and
angry.  Should he do a spot of work after all?  He ought to work,
of course.  He always hated himself afterwards when he had wasted a
whole evening.  Half unwillingly, he shoved his chair up to the
table.  It needed an effort even to disturb that frightful jungle
of papers.  He pulled a few grimy sheets towards him, spread them
out, and looked at them.  God, what a mess!  Written on, scored
out, written over, scored out again, till they were like poor
old hacked cancer-patients after twenty operations.  But the
handwriting, where it was not crossed out, was delicate and
'scholarly'.  With pain and trouble Gordon had acquired that
'scholarly' hand, so different from the beastly copper-plate they
had taught him at school.

Perhaps he WOULD work; for a little while, anyway.  He rummaged in
the litter of papers.  Where was that passage he had been working
on yesterday?  The poem was an immensely long one--that is, it was
going to be immensely long when it was finished--two thousand lines
or so, in rhyme royal, describing a day in London.  London
Pleasures, its name was.  It was a huge, ambitious project--the
kind of thing that should only be undertaken by people with endless
leisure.  Gordon had not grasped that fact when he began the poem;
he grasped it now, however.  How light-heartedly he had begun it,
two years ago!  When he had chucked up everything and descended
into the slime of poverty, the conception of this poem had been at
least a part of his motive.  He had felt so certain, then, that he
was equal to it.  But somehow, almost from the start, London
Pleasures had gone wrong.  It was too big for him, that was the
truth.  It had never really progressed, it had simply fallen apart
into a series of fragments.  And out of two years' work that was
all that he had to show--just fragments, incomplete in themselves
and impossible to join together.  On every one of those sheets of
paper there was some hacked scrap of verse which had been written
and rewritten and rewritten over intervals of months.  There were
not five hundred lines that you could say were definitely finished.
And he had lost the power to add to it any longer; he could only
tinker with this passage or that, groping now here, now there, in
its confusion.  It was no longer a thing that he created, it was
merely a nightmare with which he struggled.

For the rest, in two whole years he had produced nothing except a
handful of short poems--perhaps a score in all.  It was so rarely
that he could attain the peace of mind in which poetry, or prose
for that matter, has got to be written.  The times when he 'could
not' work grew commoner and commoner.  Of all types of human being,
only the artist takes it upon him to say that he 'cannot' work.
But it is quite true; there ARE times when one cannot work.  Money
again, always money!  Lack of money means discomfort, means squalid
worries, means shortage of tobacco, means ever-present consciousness
of failure--above all, it means loneliness.  How can you be anything
but lonely on two quid a week?  And in loneliness no decent book was
ever written.  It was quite certain that London Pleasures would
never be the poem he had conceived--it was quite certain, indeed,
that it would never even be finished.  And in the moments when he
faced facts Gordon himself was aware of this.

Yet all the same, and all the more for that very reason, he went on
with it.  It was something to cling to.  It was a way of hitting
back at his poverty and his loneliness.  And after all, there were
times when the mood of creation returned, or seemed to return.  It
returned tonight, for just a little while--just as long as it takes
to smoke two cigarettes.  With smoke tickling his lungs, he
abstracted himself from the mean and actual world.  He drove his
mind into the abyss where poetry is written.  The gas-jet sang
soothing overhead.  Words became vivid and momentous things.  A
couplet, written a year ago and left as unfinished, caught his eye
with a note of doubt.  He repeated it to himself, over and over.
It was wrong, somehow.  It had seemed all right, a year ago; now,
on the other hand, it seemed subtly vulgar.  He rummaged among the
sheets of foolscap till he found one that had nothing written on
the back, turned it over, wrote the couplet out anew, wrote a dozen
different versions of it, repeated each of them over and over to
himself.  Finally there was none that satisfied him.  The couplet
would have to go.  It was cheap and vulgar.  He found the original
sheet of paper and scored the couplet out with thick lines.  And in
doing this there was a sense of achievement, of time not wasted, as
though the destruction of much labour were in some way an act of
creation.

Suddenly a double knock deep below made the whole house rattle.
Gordon started.  His mind fled upwards from the abyss.  The post!
London Pleasures was forgotten.

His heart fluttered.  Perhaps Rosemary HAD written.  Besides, there
were those two poems he had sent to the magazines.  One of them,
indeed, he had almost given up as lost; he had sent it to an
American paper, the Californian Review, months ago.  Probably they
wouldn't even bother to send it back.  But the other was with an
English paper, the Primrose Quarterly.  He had wild hopes of that
one.  The Primrose Quarterly was one of those poisonous literary
papers in which the fashionable Nancy Boy and the professional
Roman Catholic walk bras dessus, bras dessous.  It was also by a
long way the most influential literary paper in England.  You were
a made man once you had had a poem in it.  In his heart Gordon knew
that the Primrose Quarterly would never print his poems.  He wasn't
up to their standard.  Still, miracles sometimes happen; or, if not
miracles, accidents.  After all, they'd had his poem six weeks.
Would they keep it six weeks if they didn't mean to accept it?  He
tried to quell the insane hope.  But at the worst there was a
chance that Rosemary had written.  It was four whole days since she
had written.  She wouldn't do it, perhaps, if she knew how it
disappointed him.  Her letters--long, ill-spelt letters, full of
absurd jokes and protestations of love for him--meant far more to
him than she could ever understand.  They were a reminder that
there was still somebody in the world who cared for him.  They even
made up for the times when some beast had sent back one of his
poems; and, as a matter of fact, the magazines always did send back
his poems, except Antichrist, whose editor, Ravelston, was his
personal friend.

There was a shuffling below.  It was always some minutes before Mrs
Wisbeach brought the letters upstairs.  She liked to paw them
about, feel them to see how thick they were, read their postmarks,
hold them up to the light and speculate on their contents, before
yielding them to their rightful owners.  She exercised a sort of
droit du seigneur over letters.  Coming to her house, they were,
she felt, at least partially hers.  If you had gone to the front
door and collected your own letters she would have resented it
bitterly.  On the other hand, she also resented the labour of
carrying them upstairs.  You would hear her footsteps very slowly
ascending, and then, if there was a letter for you, there would be
loud aggrieved breathing on the landing--this to let you know that
you had put Mrs Wisbeach out of breath by dragging her up all those
stairs.  Finally, with a little impatient grunt, the letters would
be shoved under your door.

Mrs Wisbeach was coming up the stairs.  Gordon listened.  The
footsteps paused on the first floor.  A letter for Flaxman.  They
ascended, paused again on the second floor.  A letter for the
engineer.  Gordon's heart beat painfully.  A letter, please God, a
letter!  More footsteps.  Ascending or descending?  They were
coming nearer, surely!  Ah, no, no!  The sound grew fainter.  She
was going down again.  The footsteps died away.  No letters.

He took up his pen again.  It was a quite futile gesture.  She
hadn't written after all!  The little beast!  He had not the
smallest intention of doing any more work.  Indeed, he could not.
The disappointment had taken all the heart out of him.  Only five
minutes ago his poem had still seemed to him a living thing; now he
knew it unmistakably for the worthless tripe that it was.  With a
kind of nervous disgust he bundled the scattered sheets together,
stacked them in an untidy heap, and dumped them on the other side
of the table, under the aspidistra.  He could not even bear to look
at them any longer.

He got up.  It was too early to go to bed; at least, he was not in
the mood for it.  He pined for a bit of amusement--something cheap
and easy.  A seat in the pictures, cigarettes, beer.  Useless!  No
money to pay for any of them.  He would read King Lear and forget
this filthy century.  Finally, however, it was The Adventures of
Sherlock Holmes that he took from the mantelpiece.  Sherlock Holmes
was his favourite of all books, because he knew it by heart.  The
oil in the lamp was giving out and it was getting beastly cold.
Gordon dragged the quilt from his bed, wrapped it round his legs,
and sat down to read.  His right elbow on the table, his hands
under his coat to keep them warm, he read through 'The Adventure of
the Speckled Band.'  The little gas-mantle sighed above, the
circular flame of the oil lamp burned low, a thin bracket of fire,
giving out no more heat than a candle.

Down in Mrs Wisbeach's lair the clock struck half past ten.  You
could always hear it striking at night.  Ping-ping, ping-ping--a
note of doom!  The ticking of the alarm clock on the mantelpiece
became audible to Gordon again, bringing with it the consciousness
of the sinister passage of time.  He looked about him.  Another
evening wasted.  Hours, days, years slipping by.  Night after
night, always the same.  The lonely room, the womanless bed; dust,
cigarette ash, the aspidistra leaves.  And he was thirty, nearly.
In sheer self-punishment he dragged forth a wad of London
Pleasures, spread out the grimy sheets, and looked at them as one
looks at a skull for a memento mori.  London Pleasures, by Gordon
Comstock, author of Mice.  His magnum opus.  The fruit (fruit,
indeed!) of two years' work--that labyrinthine mess of words!  And
tonight's achievement--two lines crossed out; two lines backward
instead of forward.

The lamp made a sound like a tiny hiccup and went out.  With an
effort Gordon stood up and flung the quilt back on to his bed.
Better get to bed, perhaps, before it got any colder.  He wandered
over towards the bed.  But wait.  Work tomorrow.  Wind the clock,
set the alarm.  Nothing accomplished, nothing done, has earned a
night's repose.

It was some time before he could find the energy to undress.  For a
quarter of an hour, perhaps, he lay on the bed fully dressed, his
hands under his head.  There was a crack on the ceiling that
resembled the map of Australia.  Gordon contrived to work off his
shoes and socks without sitting up.  He held up one foot and looked
at it.  A smallish, delicate foot.  Ineffectual, like his hands.
Also, it was very dirty.  It was nearly ten days since he had a
bath.  Becoming ashamed of the dirtiness of his feet, he sagged
into a sitting position and undressed himself, throwing his clothes
on to the floor.  Then he turned out the gas and slid between the
sheets, shuddering, for he was naked.  He always slept naked.  His
last suit of pyjamas had gone west more than a year ago.

The clock downstairs struck eleven.  As the first coldness of the
sheets wore off, Gordon's mind went back to the poem he had begun
that afternoon.  He repeated in a whisper the single stanza that
was finished:


Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over
The bending poplars, newly bare,
And dark ribbons of the chimneys
Veer downward; flicked by whips of air,
Torn posters flutter.


The octosyllables flicked to and fro.  Click-click, click-click!
The awful, mechanical emptiness of it appalled him.  It was like
some futile little machine ticking over.  Rhyme to rhyme, click-
click, click-click.  Like the nodding of a clock-work doll.
Poetry!  The last futility.  He lay awake, aware of his own
futility, of his thirty years, of the blind alley into which he
had led his life.

The clock struck twelve.  Gordon had stretched his legs out
straight.  The bed had grown warm and comfortable.  The upturned
beam of a car, somewhere in the street parallel to Willowbed Road,
penetrated the blind and threw into silhouette a leaf of the
aspidistra, shaped like Agamemnon's sword.



3


'Gordon Comstock' was a pretty bloody name, but then Gordon came
from a pretty bloody family.  The 'Gordon' part of it was Scotch,
of course.  The prevalence of such names nowadays is merely a part
of the Scotchification of England that has been going on these last
fifty years.  'Gordon', 'Colin', 'Malcolm', 'Donald'--these are the
gifts of Scotland to the world, along with golf, whisky, porridge,
and the works of Barrie and Stevenson.

The Comstocks belonged to the most dismal of all classes, the
middle-middle class, the landless gentry.  In their miserable
poverty they had not even the snobbish consolation of regarding
themselves as an 'old' family fallen on evil days, for they were
not an 'old' family at all, merely one of those families which rose
on the wave of Victorian prosperity and then sank again faster than
the wave itself.  They had had at most fifty years of comparative
wealth, corresponding with the lifetime of Gordon's grandfather,
Samuel Comstock--Gran'pa Comstock, as Gordon was taught to call
him, though the old man died four years before he was born.

Gran'pa Comstock was one of those people who even from the grave
exert a powerful influence.  In life he was a tough old scoundrel.
He plundered the proletariat and the foreigner of fifty thousand
pounds, he built himself a red brick mansion as durable as a
pyramid, and he begot twelve children, of whom eleven survived.
Finally he died quite suddenly, of a cerebral haemorrhage.  In
Kensal Green his children placed over him a monolith with the
following inscription:


IN EVER LOVING MEMORY OF

SAMUEL EZEKIEL COMSTOCK,

A FAITHFUL HUSBAND, A TENDER FATHER AND

AN UPRIGHT AND GODLY MAN,

WHO WAS BORN ON 9 JULY 1828, AND

DEPARTED THIS LIFE 5 SEPTEMBER 1901,

THIS STONE IS ERECTED BY

HIS SORROWING CHILDREN.

HE SLEEPS IN THE ARMS OF JESUS.


No need to repeat the blasphemous comments which everyone who had
known Gran'pa Comstock made on that last sentence.  But it is worth
pointing out that the chunk of granite on which it was inscribed
weighed close on five tons and was quite certainly put there with
the intention, though not the conscious intention, of making sure
that Gran'pa Comstock shouldn't get up from underneath it.  If you
want to know what a dead man's relatives really think of him, a
good rough test is the weight of his tombstone.

The Comstocks, as Gordon knew them, were a peculiarly dull, shabby,
dead-alive, ineffectual family.  They lacked vitality to an extent
that was surprising.  That was Gran'pa Comstock's doing, of course.
By the time when he died all his children were grown up and some of
them were middle-aged, and he had long ago succeeded in crushing
out of them any spirit they might ever have possessed.  He had lain
upon them as a garden roller lies upon daisies, and there was no
chance of their flattened personalities ever expanding again.  One
and all they turned out listless, gutless, unsuccessful sort of
people.  None of the boys had proper professions, because Gran'pa
Comstock had been at the greatest pains to drive all of them into
professions for which they were totally unsuited.  Only one of
them--John, Gordon's father--had even braved Gran'pa Comstock to
the extent of getting married during the latter's lifetime.  It was
impossible to imagine any of them making any sort of mark in the
world, or creating anything, or destroying anything, or being
happy, or vividly unhappy, or fully alive, or even earning a decent
income.  They just drifted along in an atmosphere of semi-genteel
failure.  They were one of those depressing families, so common
among the middle-middle classes, in which NOTHING EVER HAPPENS.

From his earliest childhood Gordon's relatives had depressed him
horribly.  When he was a little boy he still had great numbers of
uncles and aunts living.  They were all more or less alike--grey,
shabby, joyless people, all rather sickly in health and all
perpetually harassed by money-worries which fizzled along without
ever reaching the sensational explosion of bankruptcy.  It was
noticeable even then that they had lost all impulse to reproduce
themselves.  Really vital people, whether they have money or
whether they haven't, multiply almost as automatically as animals.
Gran'pa Comstock, for instance, himself one of a litter of twelve,
had produced eleven progeny.  Yet all those eleven produced only
two progeny between them, and those two--Gordon and his sister
Julia--had produced, by 1934, not even one.  Gordon, last of the
Comstocks, was born in 1905, an unintended child; and thereafter,
in thirty long, long years, there was not a single birth in the
family, only deaths.  And not only in the matter of marrying and
begetting, but in every possible way, NOTHING EVER HAPPENED in the
Comstock family.  Every one of them seemed doomed, as though by a
curse, to a dismal, shabby, hole-and-corner existence.  None of
them ever DID anything.  They were the kind of people who in every
conceivable activity, even if it is only getting on to a bus, are
automatically elbowed away from the heart of things.  All of them,
of course, were hopeless fools about money.  Gran'pa Comstock had
finally divided his money among them more or less equally, so that
each received, after the sale of the red-brick mansion, round about
five thousand pounds.  And no sooner was Gran'pa Comstock underground
than they began to fritter their money away.  None of them had the
guts to lose it in sensational ways such as squandering it on women
or at the races; they simply dribbled it away and dribbled it away,
the women in silly investments and the men in futile little business
ventures that petered out after a year or two, leaving a net loss.
More than half of them went unmarried to their graves.  Some of the
women did make rather undesirable middle-aged marriages after their
father was dead, but the men, because of their incapacity to earn a
proper living, were the kind who 'can't afford' to marry.  None of
them, except Gordon's Aunt Angela, ever had so much as a home to
call their own; they were the kind of people who live in godless
'rooms' and tomb-like boarding-houses.  And year after year they
died off and died off, of dingy but expensive little diseases that
swallowed up the last penny of their capital.  One of the women,
Gordon's Aunt Charlotte, wandered off into the Mental Home at
Clapham in 1916.  The Mental Homes of England, how chock-a-block
they stand!  And it is above all derelict spinsters of the middle-
classes who keep them going.  By 1934 only three of that generation
survived; Aunt Charlotte already mentioned, and Aunt Angela, who by
some happy chance had been induced to buy a house and a tiny annuity
in 1912, and Uncle Walter, who dingily existed on the few hundred
pounds that were left out of his five thousand and by running
short-lived 'agencies' for this and that.

Gordon grew up in the atmosphere of cut-down clothes and stewed
neck of mutton.  His father, like the other Comstocks, was a
depressed and therefore depressing person, but he had some brains
and a slight literary turn.  And seeing that his mind was of the
literary type and he had a shrinking horror of anything to do with
figures, it had seemed only natural to Gran'pa Comstock to make him
into a chartered accountant.  So he practised, ineffectually, as a
chartered accountant, and was always buying his way into
partnerships which were dissolved after a year or two, and his
income fluctuated, sometimes rising to five hundred a year and
sometimes falling to two hundred, but always with a tendency to
decrease.  He died in 1922, aged only fifty-six, but worn out--
he had suffered from a kidney disease for a long time past.

Since the Comstocks were genteel as well as shabby, it was
considered necessary to waste huge sums on Gordon's 'education'.
What a fearful thing it is, this incubus of 'education'!  It means
that in order to send his son to the right kind of school (that is,
a public school or an imitation of one) a middle-class man is
obliged to live for years on end in a style that would be scorned
by a jobbing plumber.  Gordon was sent to wretched, pretentious
schools whose fees were round about 120 pounds a year.  Even these
fees, of course, meant fearful sacrifices at home.  Meanwhile
Julia, who was five years older than he, received as nearly as
possible no education at all.  She was, indeed, sent to one or two
poor, dingy little boarding schools, but she was 'taken away' for
good when she was sixteen.  Gordon was 'the boy' and Julia was 'the
girl', and it seemed natural to everyone that 'the girl' should be
sacrificed to 'the boy'.  Moreover, it had early been decided in
the family that Gordon was 'clever'.  Gordon, with his wonderful
'cleverness', was to win scholarships, make a brilliant success in
life, and retrieve the family fortunes--that was the theory, and no
one believed in it more firmly than Julia.  Julia was a tall,
ungainly girl, much taller than Gordon, with a thin face and a neck
just a little too long--one of those girls who even at their most
youthful remind one irresistibly of a goose.  But her nature was
simple and affectionate.  She was a self-effacing, home-keeping,
ironing, darning, and mending kind of girl, a natural spinster-
soul.  Even at sixteen she had 'old maid' written all over her.
She idolized Gordon.  All through his childhood she watched over
him, nursed him, spoiled him, went in rags so that he might have
the right clothes to go to school in, saved up her wretched pocket-
money to buy him Christmas presents and birthday presents.  And of
course he repaid her, as soon as he was old enough, by despising
her because she was not pretty and not 'clever'.

Even at the third-rate schools to which Gordon was sent nearly all
the boys were richer than himself.  They soon found out his
poverty, of course, and gave him hell because of it.  Probably the
greatest cruelty one can inflict on a child is to send it to school
among children richer than itself.  A child conscious of poverty
will suffer snobbish agonies such as a grown-up person can scarcely
imagine.  In those days, especially at his preparatory school,
Gordon's life had been one long conspiracy to keep his end up and
pretend that his parents were richer than they were.  Ah, the
humiliations of those days!  That awful business, for instance,
at the beginning of each term, when you had to 'give in' to the
headmaster, publicly, the money you had brought back with you; and
the contemptuous, cruel sniggers from the other boys when you
didn't 'give in' ten bob or more.  And the time when the others
found out that Gordon was wearing a ready-made suit which had cost
thirty-five shillings!  The times that Gordon dreaded most of all
were when his parents came down to see him.  Gordon, in those days
still a believer, used actually to pray that his parents wouldn't
come down to school.  His father, especially, was the kind of
father you couldn't help being ashamed of; a cadaverous, despondent
man, with a bad stoop, his clothes dismally shabby and hopelessly
out of date.  He carried about with him an atmosphere of failure,
worry, and boredom.  And he had such a dreadful habit, when he was
saying good-bye, of tipping Gordon half a crown right in front of
the other boys, so that everyone could see that it was only half a
crown and not, as it ought to have been, ten bob!  Even twenty
years afterwards the memory of that school made Gordon shudder.

The first effect of all this was to give him a crawling reverence
for money.  In those days he actually hated his poverty-stricken
relatives--his father and mother, Julia, everybody.  He hated them
for their dingy homes, their dowdiness, their joyless attitude to
life, their endless worrying and groaning over threepences and
sixpences.  By far the commonest phrase in the Comstock household
was, 'We can't afford it.'  In those days he longed for money as
only a child can long.  Why SHOULDN'T one have decent clothes and
plenty of sweets and go to the pictures as often as one wanted to?
He blamed his parents for their poverty as though they had been
poor on purpose.  Why couldn't they be like other boys' parents?
They PREFERRED being poor, it seemed to him.  That is how a child's
mind works.

But as he grew older he grew--not less unreasonable, exactly, but
unreasonable in a different way.  By this time he had found his
feet at school and was less violently oppressed.  He never was very
successful at school--he did no work and won no scholarships--but
he managed to develop his brain along the lines that suited it.  He
read the books which the headmaster denounced from the pulpit, and
developed unorthodox opinions about the C. of E., patriotism, and
the Old Boys' tie.  Also he began writing poetry.  He even, after a
year or two, began to send poems to the Athenaeum, the New Age, and
the Weekly Westminster; but they were invariably rejected.  Of
course there were other boys of similar type with whom he
associated.  Every public school has its small self-conscious
intelligentsia.  And at that moment, in the years just after the
War, England was so full of revolutionary opinion that even the
public schools were infected by it.  The young, even those who had
been too young to fight, were in a bad temper with their elders, as
well they might be; practically everyone with any brains at all was
for the moment a revolutionary.  Meanwhile the old--those over
sixty, say--were running in circles like hens, squawking about
'subversive ideas'.  Gordon and his friends had quite an exciting
time with their 'subversive ideas'.  For a whole year they ran an
unofficial monthly paper called the Bolshevik, duplicated with a
jellygraph.  It advocated Socialism, free love, the dismemberment
of the British Empire, the abolition of the Army and Navy, and so
on and so forth.  It was great fun.  Every intelligent boy of
sixteen is a Socialist.  At that age one does not see the hook
sticking out of the rather stodgy bait.

In a crude, boyish way, he had begun to get the hang of this money-
business.  At an earlier age than most people he grasped that ALL
modern commerce is a swindle.  Curiously enough, it was the
advertisements in the Underground stations that first brought it
home to him.  He little knew, as the biographers say, that he
himself would one day have a job in an advertising firm.  But there
was more to it than the mere fact that business is a swindle.  What
he realized, and more clearly as time went on, was that money-
worship has been elevated into a religion.  Perhaps it is the only
real religion--the only really FELT religion--that is left to us.
Money is what God used to be.  Good and evil have no meaning any
longer except failure and success.  Hence the profoundly
significant phrase, to MAKE GOOD.  The decalogue has been reduced
to two commandments.  One for the employers--the elect, the money-
priesthood as it were--'Thou shalt make money'; the other for the
employed--the slaves and underlings--'Thou shalt not lose thy job.'
It was about this time that he came across The Ragged Trousered
Philanthropists and read about the starving carpenter who pawns
everything but sticks to his aspidistra.  The aspidistra became a
sort of symbol for Gordon after that.  The aspidistra, flower of
England!  It ought to be on our coat of arms instead of the lion
and the unicorn.  There will be no revolution in England while
there are aspidistras in the windows.

He did not hate and despise his relatives now--or not so much, at
any rate.  They still depressed him greatly--those poor old
withering aunts and uncles, of whom two or three had already died,
his father, worn out and spiritless, his mother, faded, nervy, and
'delicate' (her lungs were none too strong), Julia, already, at
one-and-twenty, a dutiful, resigned drudge who worked twelve hours
a day and never had a decent frock.  But he grasped now what was
the matter with them.  It was not MERELY the lack of money.  It was
rather that, having no money, they still lived mentally in the
money-world--the world in which money is virtue and poverty is
crime.  It was not poverty but the down-dragging of RESPECTABLE
poverty that had done for them.  They had accepted the money-code,
and by that code they were failures.  They had never had the sense
to lash out and just LIVE, money or no money, as the lower classes
do.  How right the lower classes are!  Hats off to the factory lad
who with fourpence in the world puts his girl in the family way!
At least he's got blood and not money in his veins.

Gordon thought it all out, in the naive selfish manner of a boy.
There are two ways to live, he decided.  You can be rich, or you
can deliberately refuse to be rich.  You can possess money, or you
can despise money; the one fatal thing is to worship money and fail
to get it.  He took it for granted that he himself would never be
able to make money.  It hardly even occurred to him that he might
have talents which could be turned to account.  That was what his
schoolmasters had done for him; they had rubbed it into him that he
was a seditious little nuisance and not likely to 'succeed' in
life.  He accepted this.  Very well, then, he would refuse the
whole business of 'succeeding'; he would make it his especial
purpose NOT to 'succeed'.  Better to reign in hell than serve in
heaven; better to serve in hell than serve in heaven, for that
matter.  Already, at sixteen, he knew which side he was on.  He was
AGAINST the money-god and all his swinish priesthood.  He had
declared war on money; but secretly, of course.

It was when he was seventeen that his father died, leaving about
two hundred pounds.  Julia had been at work for some years now.
During 1918 and 1919 she had worked in a Government office, and
after that she took a course of cookery and got a job in a nasty,
ladylike little teashop near Earl's Court Underground Station.  She
worked a seventy-two hour week and was given her lunch and tea and
twenty-five shillings; out of this she contributed twelve shillings
a week, often more, to the household expenses.  Obviously the best
thing to do, now that Mr Comstock was dead, would have been to take
Gordon away from school, find him a job, and let Julia have the two
hundred pounds to set up a teashop of her own.  But here the
habitual Comstock folly about money stepped in.  Neither Julia nor
her mother would hear of Gordon leaving school.  With the strange
idealistic snobbishness of the middle classes, they were willing to
go to the workhouse sooner than let Gordon leave school before the
statutory age of eighteen.  The two hundred pounds, or more than
half of it, must be used in completing Gordon's 'education'.
Gordon let them do it.  He had declared war on money but that did
not prevent him from being damnably selfish.  Of course he dreaded
this business of going to work.  What boy wouldn't dread it?  Pen-
pushing in some filthy office--God!  His uncles and aunts were
already talking dismally about 'getting Gordon settled in life'.
They saw everything in terms of 'good' jobs.  Young Smith had got
such a 'good' job in a bank, and young Jones had got such a 'good'
job in an insurance office.  It made him sick to hear them.  They
seemed to want to see every young man in England nailed down in the
coffin of a 'good' job.

Meanwhile, money had got to be earned.  Before her marriage
Gordon's mother had been a music teacher, and even since then she
had taken pupils, sporadically, when the family were in lower water
than usual.  She now decided that she would start giving lessons
again.  It was fairly easy to get pupils in the suburbs--they were
living in Acton--and with the music fees and Julia's contribution
they could probably 'manage' for the next year or two.  But the
state of Mrs Comstock's lungs was now something more than
'delicate'.  The doctor who had attended her husband before his
death had put his stethoscope to her chest and looked serious.  He
had told her to take care of herself, keep warm, eat nourishing
food, and, above all, avoid fatigue.  The fidgeting, tiring job of
giving piano lessons was, of course, the worst possible thing for
her.  Gordon knew nothing of this.  Julia knew, however.  It was a
secret between the two women, carefully kept from Gordon.

A year went by.  Gordon spent it rather miserably, more and more
embarrassed by his shabby clothes and lack of pocket-money, which
made girls an object of terror to him.  However, the New Age
accepted one of his poems that year.  Meanwhile, his mother sat on
comfortless piano stools in draughty drawing-rooms, giving lessons
at two shillings an hour.  And then Gordon left school, and fat
interfering Uncle Walter, who had business connexions in a small
way, came forward and said that a friend of a friend of his could
get Gordon ever such a 'good' job in the accounts department of a
red lead firm.  It was really a splendid job--a wonderful opening
for a young man.  If Gordon buckled to work in the right spirit he
might be a Big Pot one of these days.  Gordon's soul squirmed.
Suddenly, as weak people do, he stiffened, and, to the horror of
the whole family, refused even to try for the job.

There were fearful rows, of course.  They could not understand him.
It seemed to them a kind of blasphemy to refuse such a 'good' job
when you got the chance of it.  He kept reiterating that he didn't
want THAT KIND of job.  Then what DID he want? they all demanded.
He wanted to 'write', he told them sullenly.  But how could he
possibly make a living by 'writing'? they demanded again.  And of
course he couldn't answer.  At the back of his mind was the idea
that he could somehow live by writing poetry; but that was too
absurd even to be mentioned.  But at any rate, he wasn't going into
business, into the money-world.  He would have a job, but not a
'good' job.  None of them had the vaguest idea what he meant.  His
mother wept, even Julia 'went for' him, and all round him there
were uncles and aunts (he still had six or seven of them left)
feebly volleying and incompetently thundering.  And after three
days a dreadful thing happened.  In the middle of supper his mother
was seized by a violent fit of coughing, put her hand to her
breast, fell forward, and began bleeding at the mouth.

Gordon was terrified.  His mother did not die, as it happened, but
she looked deathly as they carried her upstairs.  Gordon rushed for
the doctor.  For several days his mother lay at death's door.  It
was the draughty drawing-rooms and the trudging to and fro in all
weathers that had done it.  Gordon hung helplessly about the house,
a dreadful feeling of guilt mingling with his misery.  He did not
exactly know but he half divined, that his mother had killed
herself in order to pay his school fees.  After this he could not
go on opposing her any longer.  He went to Uncle Walter and told
him that he would take that job in the red lead firm, if they would
give it him.  So Uncle Walter spoke to his friend, and the friend
spoke to his friend, and Gordon was sent for and interviewed by an
old gentleman with badly fitting false teeth, and finally was given
a job, on probation.  He started on twenty-five bob a week.  And
with this firm he remained six years.

They moved away from Acton and took a flat in a desolate red block
of flats somewhere in the Paddington district.  Mrs Comstock had
brought her piano, and when she had got some of her strength back
she gave occasional lessons.  Gordon's wages were gradually raised,
and the three of them 'managed', more or less.  It was Julia and
Mrs Comstock who did most of the 'managing'.  Gordon still had a
boy's selfishness about money.  At the office he got on not
absolutely badly.  It was said of him that he was worth his wages
but wasn't the type that Makes Good.  In a way the utter contempt
that he had for his work made things easier for him.  He could put
up with this meaningless office-life, because he never for an
instant thought of it as permanent.  Somehow, sometime, God knew
how or when, he was going to break free of it.  After all, there
was always his 'writing'.  Some day, perhaps, he might be able to
make a living of sorts by 'writing'; and you'd feel you were free
of the money-stink if you were a 'writer', would you not?  The
types he saw all round him, especially the older men, made him
squirm.  That was what it meant to worship the money-god!  To
settle down, to Make Good, to sell your soul for a villa and an
aspidistra!  To turn into the typical little bowler-hatted sneak--
Strube's 'little man'--the little docile cit who slips home by the
six-fifteen to a supper of cottage pie and stewed tinned pears,
half an hour's listening-in to the B. B. C. Symphony Concert, and
then perhaps a spot of licit sexual intercourse if his wife 'feels
in the mood'!  What a fate!  No, it isn't like that that one was
meant to live.  One's got to get right out of it, out of the money-
stink.  It was a kind of plot that he was nursing.  He was as
though dedicated to this war against money.  But it was still a
secret.  The people at the office never suspected him of unorthodox
ideas.  They never even found out that he wrote poetry--not that
there was much to find out, for in six years he had less than
twenty poems printed in the magazines.  To look at, he was just the
same as any other City clerk--just a soldier in the strap-hanging
army that sways eastward at morning, westward at night in the
carriages of the Underground.

He was twenty-four when his mother died.  The family was breaking
up.  Only four of the older generation of Comstocks were left now--
Aunt Angela, Aunt Charlotte, Uncle Walter, and another uncle who
died a year later.  Gordon and Julia gave up the flat.  Gordon took
a furnished room in Doughty Street (he felt vaguely literary,
living in Bloomsbury), and Julia moved to Earl's Court, to be near
the shop.  Julia was nearly thirty now, and looked much older.  She
was thinner than ever, though healthy enough, and there was grey in
her hair.  She still worked twelve hours a day, and in six years
her wages had only risen by ten shillings a week.  The horribly
ladylike lady who kept the teashop was a semi-friend as well as an
employer, and thus could sweat and bully Julia to the tune of
'dearest' and 'darling'.  Four months after his mother's death
Gordon suddenly walked out of his job.  He gave the firm no
reasons.  They imagined that he was going to 'better himself', and--
luckily, as it turned out--gave him quite good references.  He had
not even thought of looking for another job.  He wanted to burn his
boats.  From now on he would breathe free air, free of the money-
stink.  He had not consciously waited for his mother to die before
doing this; still, it was his mother's death that had nerved him to
it.

Of course there was another and more desolating row in what was
left of the family.  They thought Gordon must have gone mad.  Over
and over again he tried, quite vainly, to explain to them why he
would not yield himself to the servitude of a 'good' job.  'But
what are you going to live on?  What are you going to live on?' was
what they all wailed at him.  He refused to think seriously about
it.  Of course, he still harboured the notion that he could make a
living of sorts by 'writing'.  By this time he had got to know
Ravelston, editor of Antichrist, and Ravelston, besides printing
his poems, managed to get him books to review occasionally.  His
literary prospects were not so bleak as they had been six years
ago.  But still, it was not the desire to 'write' that was his real
motive.  To get out of the money-world--that was what he wanted.
Vaguely he looked forward to some kind of moneyless, anchorite
existence.  He had a feeling that if you genuinely despise money
you can keep going somehow, like the birds of the air.  He forgot
that the birds of the air don't pay room-rent.  The poet starving
in a garret--but starving, somehow, not uncomfortably--that was his
vision of himself.

The next seven months were devastating.  They scared him and almost
broke his spirit.  He learned what it means to live for weeks on
end on bread and margarine, to try to 'write' when you are half
starved, to pawn your clothes, to sneak trembling up the stairs
when you owe three weeks' rent and your landlady is listening for
you.  Moreover, in those seven months he wrote practically nothing.
The first effect of poverty is that it kills thought.  He grasped,
as though it were a new discovery, that you do not escape from
money merely by being moneyless.  On the contrary, you are the
hopeless slave of money until you have enough of it to live on--a
'competence', as the beastly middle-class phrase goes.  Finally he
was turned out of his room, after a vulgar row.  He was three days
and four nights in the street.  It was bloody.  Three mornings, on
the advice of another man he met on the Embankment, he spent in
Billingsgate, helping to shove fish-barrows up the twisty little
hills from Billingsgate into Eastcheap.  'Twopence an up' was what
you got, and the work knocked hell out of your thigh muscles.
There were crowds of people on the same job, and you had to wait
your turn; you were lucky if you made eighteen-pence between four
in the morning and nine.  After three days of it Gordon gave up.
What was the use?  He was beaten.  There was nothing for it but to
go back to his family, borrow some money, and find another job.

But now, of course, there was no job to be had.  For months he
lived by cadging on the family.  Julia kept him going till the last
penny of her tiny savings was gone.  It was abominable.  Here was
the outcome of all his fine attitudes!  He had renounced ambition,
made war on money, and all it led to was cadging from his sister!
And Julia, he knew, felt his failure far more than she felt the
loss of her savings.  She had had such hopes of Gordon.  He alone
of all the Comstocks had had it in him to 'succeed'.  Even now she
believed that somehow, some day, he was going to retrieve the
family fortunes.  He was so 'clever'--surely he could make money if
he tried!  For two whole months Gordon stayed with Aunt Angela in
her little house at Highgate--poor, faded, mummified Aunt Angela,
who even for herself had barely enough to eat.  All this time he
searched desperately for work.  Uncle Walter could not help him.
His influence in the business world, never large, was now
practically nil.  At last, however, in a quite unexpected way, the
luck turned.  A friend of a friend of Julia's employer's brother
managed to get Gordon a job in the accounts department of the New
Albion Publicity Company.

The New Albion was one of those publicity firms which have sprung
up everywhere since the War--the fungi, as you might say, that
sprout from a decaying capitalism.  It was a smallish rising firm
and took every class of publicity it could get.  It designed a
certain number of large-scale posters for oatmeal stout, self-
raising flour, and so forth, but its main line was millinery and
cosmetic advertisements in the women's illustrated papers, besides
minor ads in twopenny weeklies, such as Whiterose Pills for Female
Disorders, Your Horoscope Cast by Professor Raratongo, The Seven
Secrets of Venus, New Hope for the Ruptured, Earn Five Pounds a
Week in your Spare Time, and Cyprolax Hair Lotion Banishes all
Unpleasant Intruders.  There was a large staff of commercial
artists, of course.  It was here that Gordon first made the
acquaintance of Rosemary.  She was in the 'studio' and helped to
design fashion plates.  It was a long time before he actually spoke
to her.  At first he knew her merely as a remote personage, small,
dark, with swift movements, distinctly attractive but rather
intimidating.  When they passed one another in the corridors she
eyed him ironically, as though she knew all about him and
considered him a bit of a joke; nevertheless she seemed to look at
him a little oftener than was necessary.  He had nothing to do with
her side of the business.  He was in the accounts department, a
mere clerk on three quid a week.

The interesting thing about the New Albion was that it was so
completely modern in spirit.  There was hardly a soul in the firm
who was not perfectly well aware that publicity--advertising--is
the dirtiest ramp that capitalism has yet produced.  In the red
lead firm there had still lingered certain notions of commercial
honour and usefulness.  But such things would have been laughed at
in the New Albion.  Most of the employees were the hard-boiled,
Americanized, go-getting type to whom nothing in the world is
sacred, except money.  They had their cynical code worked out.  The
public are swine; advertising is the rattling of a stick inside a
swill-bucket.  And yet beneath their cynicism there was the final
naivete, the blind worship of the money-god.  Gordon studied them
unobtrusively.  As before, he did his work passably well and his
fellow-employees looked down on him.  Nothing had changed in his
inner mind.  He still despised and repudiated the money-code.
Somehow, sooner or later, he was going to escape from it; even now,
after his first fiasco, he still plotted to escape.  He was IN the
money world, but not OF it.  As for the types about him, the little
bowler-hatted worms who never turned, and the go-getters, the
American business-college gutter-crawlers, they rather amused him
than not.  He liked studying their slavish keep-your-job mentality.
He was the chiel amang them takin' notes.

One day a curious thing happened.  Somebody chanced to see a poem
of Gordon's in a magazine, and put it about that they 'had a poet
in the office'.  Of course Gordon was laughed at, not ill-
naturedly, by the other clerks.  They nicknamed him 'the bard' from
that day forth.  But though amused, they were also faintly
contemptuous.  It confirmed all their ideas about Gordon.  A fellow
who wrote poetry wasn't exactly the type to Make Good.  But the
thing had an unexpected sequel.  About the time when the clerks
grew tired of chaffing Gordon, Mr Erskine, the managing director,
who had hitherto taken only the minimum notice of him, sent for him
and interviewed him.

Mr Erskine was a large, slow-moving man with a broad, healthy,
expressionless face.  From his appearance and the slowness of his
speech you would have guessed with confidence that he had something
to do with either agriculture or cattle-breeding.  His wits were as
slow as his movements, and he was the kind of man who never hears
of anything until everybody else has stopped talking about it.  How
such a man came to be in charge of an advertising agency, only the
strange gods of capitalism know.  But he was quite a likeable
person.  He had not that sniffish, buttoned-up spirit that usually
goes with an ability to make money.  And in a way his fat-
wittedness stood him in good stead.  Being insensible to popular
prejudice, he could assess people on their merits; consequently, he
was rather good at choosing talented employees.  The news that
Gordon had written poems, so far from shocking him, vaguely
impressed him.  They wanted literary talents in the New Albion.
Having sent for Gordon, he studied him in a somnolent, sidelong way
and asked him a number of inconclusive questions.  He never
listened to Gordon's answers, but punctuated his questions with a
noise that sounded like 'Hm, hm, hm.'  Wrote poetry, did he?  Oh
yes?  Hm.  And had it printed in the papers?  Hm, hm.  Suppose they
paid you for that kind of thing?  Not much, eh?  No, suppose not.
Hm, hm.  Poetry?  Hm.  A bit difficult, that must be.  Getting the
lines the same length, and all that.  Hm, hm.  Write anything else?
Stories, and so forth?  Hm.  Oh yes?  Very interesting.  Hm!

Then, without further questions, he promoted Gordon to a special
post as secretary--in effect, apprentice--to Mr Clew, the New
Albion's head copywriter.  Like every other advertising agency, the
New Albion was constantly in search of copywriters with a touch of
imagination.  It is a curious fact, but it is much easier to find
competent draughtsmen than to find people who can think of slogans
like 'Q. T. Sauce keeps Hubby Smiling' and 'Kiddies clamour for
their Breakfast Crisps'.  Gordon's wages were not raised for the
moment, but the firm had their eye on him.  With luck he might be a
full-fledged copywriter in a year's time.  It was an unmistakable
chance to Make Good.

For six months he was working with Mr Clew.  Mr Clew was a harassed
man of about forty, with wiry hair into which he often plunged his
fingers.  He worked in a stuffy little office whose walls were
entirely papered with his past triumphs in the form of posters.  He
took Gordon under his wing in a friendly way, showed him the ropes,
and was even ready to listen to his suggestions.  At that time they
were working on a line of magazine ads for April Dew, the great new
deodorant which the Queen of Sheba Toilet Requisites Co. (this was
Flaxman's firm, curiously enough) were putting on the market.
Gordon started on the job with secret loathing.  But now there was
a quite unexpected development.  It was that Gordon showed, almost
from the start, a remarkable talent for copywriting.  He could
compose an ad as though he had been born to it.  The vivid phrase
that sticks and rankles, the neat little para. that packs a world
of lies into a hundred words--they came to him almost unsought.  He
had always had a gift for words, but this was the first time he had
used it successfully.  Mr Clew thought him very promising.  Gordon
watched his own development, first with surprise, then with
amusement, and finally with a kind of horror.  THIS, then, was what
he was coming to!  Writing lies to tickle the money out of fools'
pockets!  There was a beastly irony, too, in the fact that he, who
wanted to be a 'writer', should score his sole success in writing
ads for deodorants.  However, that was less unusual than he
imagined.  Most copywriters, they say, are novelists manques; or is
it the other way about?

The Queen of Sheba were very pleased with their ads.  Mr Erskine
also was pleased.  Gordon's wages were raised by ten shillings a
week.  And it was now that Gordon grew frightened.  Money was
getting him after all.  He was sliding down, down, into the money-
sty.  A little more and he would be stuck in it for life.  It is
queer how these things happen.  You set your face against success,
you swear never to Make Good--you honestly believe that you
couldn't Make Good even if you wanted to; and then something
happens along, some mere chance, and you find yourself Making Good
almost automatically.  He saw that now or never was the time to
escape.  He had got to get out of it--out of the money-world,
irrevocably, before he was too far involved.

But this time he wasn't going to be starved into submission.  He
went to Ravelston and asked his help.  He told him that he wanted
some kind of job; not a 'good' job, but a job that would keep his
body without wholly buying his soul.  Ravelston understood
perfectly.  The distinction between a job and a 'good' job did not
have to be explained to him; nor did he point out to Gordon the
folly of what he was doing.  That was the great thing about
Ravelston.  He could always see another person's point of view.  It
was having money that did it, no doubt; for the rich can afford to
be intelligent.  Moreover, being rich himself, he could find jobs
for other people.  After only a fortnight he told Gordon of
something that might suit him.  A Mr McKechnie, a rather
dilapidated second-hand bookseller with whom Ravelston dealt
occasionally, was looking for an assistant.  He did not want a
trained assistant who would expect full wages; he wanted somebody
who looked like a gentleman and could talk about books--somebody to
impress the more bookish customers.  It was the very reverse of a
'good' job.  The hours were long, the pay was wretched--two pounds
a week--and there was no chance of advancement.  It was a blind-
alley job.  And, of course, a blind-alley job was the very thing
Gordon was looking for.  He went and saw Mr McKechnie, a sleepy,
benign old Scotchman with a red nose and a white beard stained by
snuff, and was taken on without demur.  At this time, too, his
volume of poems, Mice, was going to press.  The seventh publisher
to whom he had sent it had accepted it.  Gordon did not know that
this was Ravelston's doing.  Ravelston was a personal friend of the
publisher.  He was always arranging this kind of thing, stealthily,
for obscure poets.  Gordon thought the future was opening before
him.  He was a made man--or, by Smilesian, aspidistral standards,
UNmade.

He gave a month's notice at the office.  It was a painful business
altogether.  Julia, of course, was more distressed than ever at
this second abandonment of a 'good' job.  By this time Gordon had
got to know Rosemary.  She did not try to prevent him from throwing
up his job.  It was against her code to interfere--'You've got to
live your own life,' was always her attitude.  But she did not in
the least understand why he was doing it.  The thing that most
upset him, curiously enough, was his interview with Mr Erskine.  Mr
Erskine was genuinely kind.  He did not want Gordon to leave the
firm, and said so frankly.  With a sort of elephantine politeness
he refrained from calling Gordon a young fool.  He did, however,
ask him why he was leaving.  Somehow, Gordon could not bring
himself to avoid answering or to say--the only thing Mr Erskine
would have understood--that he was going after a better-paid job.
He blurted out shamefacedly that he 'didn't think business suited
him' and that he 'wanted to go in for writing'.  Mr Erskine was
noncommittal.  Writing, eh?  Hm.  Much money in that sort of thing
nowadays?  Not much, eh?  Hm.  No, suppose not.  Hm.  Gordon,
feeling and looking ridiculous, mumbled that he had 'got a book
just coming out'.  A book of poems, he added with difficulty in
pronouncing the word.  Mr Erskine regarded him sidelong before
remarking:

'Poetry, eh?  Hm.  Poetry?  Make a living out of that sort of
thing, do you think?'

'Well--not a living, exactly.  But it would help.'

'Hm--well!  You know best, I expect.  If you want a job any time,
come back to us.  I dare say we could find room for you.  We can do
with your sort here.  Don't forget.'

Gordon left with a hateful feeling of having behaved perversely and
ungratefully.  But he had got to do it; he had got to get out of
the money-world.  It was queer.  All over England young men were
eating their hearts out for lack of jobs, and here was he, Gordon,
to whom the very word 'job' was faintly nauseous, having jobs
thrust unwanted upon him.  It was an example of the fact that you
can get anything in this world if you genuinely don't want it.
Moreover, Mr Erskine's words stuck in his mind.  Probably he had
meant what he said.  Probably there WOULD be a job waiting for
Gordon if he chose to go back.  So his boats were only half burned.
The New Albion was a doom before him as well as behind.

But how happy had he been, just at first, in Mr McKechnie's
bookshop!  For a little while--a very little while--he had the
illusion of being really out of the money-world.  Of course the
book-trade was a swindle, like all other trades; but how different
a swindle!  Here was no hustling and Making Good, no gutter-
crawling.  No go-getter could put up for ten minutes with the
stagnant air of the book-trade.  As for the work, it was very
simple.  It was mainly a question of being in the shop ten hours a
day.  Mr McKechnie wasn't a bad old stick.  He was a Scotchman, of
course, but Scottish is as Scottish does.  At any rate he was
reasonably free from avarice--his most distinctive trait seemed to
be laziness.  He was also a teetotaller and belonged to some
Nonconformist sect or other, but this did not affect Gordon.
Gordon had been at the shop about a month when Mice was published.
No less than thirteen papers reviewed it!  And The Times Lit. Supp.
said that it showed 'exceptional promise'.  It was not till months
later that he realized what a hopeless failure Mice had really
been.

And it was only now, when he was down to two quid a week and had
practically cut himself off from the prospect of earning more, that
he grasped the real nature of the battle he was fighting.  The
devil of it is that the glow of renunciation never lasts.  Life on
two quid a week ceases to be a heroic gesture and becomes a dingy
habit.  Failure is as great a swindle as success.  He had thrown up
his 'good' job and renounced 'good' jobs for ever.  Well, that was
necessary.  He did not want to go back on it.  But it was no use
pretending that because his poverty was self-imposed he had escaped
the ills that poverty drags in its train.  It was not a question of
hardship.  You don't suffer real physical hardship on two quid a
week, and if you did it wouldn't matter.  It is in the brain and
the soul that lack of money damages you.  Mental deadness,
spiritual squalor--they seem to descend upon you inescapably when
your income drops below a certain point.  Faith, hope, money--only
a saint could have the first two without having the third.

He was growing more mature.  Twenty-seven, twenty-eight, twenty-
nine.  He had reached the age when the future ceases to be a rosy
blur and becomes actual and menacing.  The spectacle of his
surviving relatives depressed him more and more.  As he grew older
he felt himself more akin to them.  That was the way he was going!
A few years more, and he would be like that, just like that!  He
felt this even with Julia, whom he saw oftener than his uncle and
aunt.  In spite of various resolves never to do it again, he still
borrowed money off Julia periodically.  Julia's hair was greying
fast; there was a deep line scored down each of her thin red
cheeks.  She had settled her life into a routine in which she was
not unhappy.  There was her work at the shop, her 'sewing' at
nights in her Earl's Court bed-sitting-room (second floor, back,
nine bob a week unfurnished), her occasional forgatherings with
spinster friends as lonely as herself.  It was the typical
submerged life of the penniless unmarried woman; she accepted it,
hardly realizing that her destiny could ever have been different.
Yet in her way she suffered, more for Gordon than for herself.  The
gradual decay of the family, the way they had died off and died off
and left nothing behind, was a sort of tragedy in her mind.  Money,
money!  'None of us ever seems to make any money!' was her
perpetual lament.  And of them all, Gordon alone had had the chance
to make money; and Gordon had chosen not to.  He was sinking
effortless into the same rut of poverty as the others.  After the
first row was over, she was too decent to 'go for' him again
because he had thrown up his job at the New Albion.  But his
motives were quite meaningless to her.  In her wordless feminine
way she knew that the sin against money is the ultimate sin.

And as for Aunt Angela and Uncle Walter--oh dear, oh dear!  What a
couple!  It made Gordon feel ten years older every time he looked
at them.

Uncle Walter, for example.  Uncle Walter was very depressing.  He
was sixty-seven, and what with his various 'agencies' and the
dwindling remnants of his patrimony his income might have been
nearly three pounds a week.  He had a tiny little cabin of an
office off Cursitor Street, and he lived in a very cheap boarding-
house in Holland Park.  That was quite according to precedent; all
the Comstock men drifted naturally into boarding-houses.  When you
looked at poor old uncle, with his large tremulous belly, his
bronchitic voice, his broad, pale, timidly pompous face, rather
like Sargent' s portrait of Henry James, his entirely hairless
head, his pale, pouchy eyes, and his ever-drooping moustache, to
which he tried vainly to give an upward twirl--when you looked at
him, you found it totally impossible to believe that he had ever
been young.  Was it conceivable that such a being had ever felt
life tingle in his veins?  Had he ever climbed a tree, taken a
header off a springboard, or been in love?  Had he ever had a brain
in working order?  Even back in the early nineties, when he was
arithmetically young, had he ever made any kind of stab at life?  A
few furtive half-hearted frolics, perhaps.  A few whiskies in dull
bars, a visit or two to the Empire promenade, a little whoring on
the Q. T.; the sort of dingy, drabby fornications that you can
imagine happening between Egyptian mummies after the museum is
closed for the night.  And after that the long, long quiet years of
business failure, loneliness, and stagnation in godless boarding-
houses.

And yet uncle in his old age was probably not unhappy.  He had one
hobby of never-failing interest, and that was his diseases.  He
suffered, by his own account, from every disease in the medical
dictionary, and was never weary of talking about them.  Indeed, it
seemed to Gordon that none of the people in his uncle's boarding-
house--he had been there occasionally--ever did talk about anything
except their diseases.  All over the darkish drawing-room, ageing,
discoloured people sat about in couples, discussing symptoms.
Their conversation was like the dripping of stalactite to
stalagmite.  Drip, drip.  'How is your lumbago?' says stalactite to
stalagmite.  'I find my Kruschen Salts are doing me good,' says
stalagmite to stalactite.  Drip, drip, drip.

And then there was Aunt Angela, aged sixty-nine.  Gordon tried not
even to think of Aunt Angela oftener than he could help.

Poor, dear, good, kind, depressing Aunt Angela!

Poor, shrivelled, parchment-yellow, skin-and-bone Aunt Angela!
There in her miserable little semi-detached house in Highgate--
Briarbrae, its name was--there in her palace in the northern
mountains, there dwelleth she, Angela the Ever-virgin, of whom no
man either living or among the shades can say truly that upon her
lips he hath pressed the dear caresses of a lover.  All alone she
dwelleth, and all day long she fareth to and fro, and in her hand
is the feather-mop fashioned from the tail feathers of the
contumacious turkey, and with it she polisheth the dark-leaved
aspidistras and flicketh the hated dust from the resplendent never-
to-be-used Crown Derby china tea-service.  And ever and anon she
comforteth her dear heart with draughts of the dark brown tea, both
Flowery Orange and Pekoe Points, which the small-bearded sons of
Coromandel have ferried to her across the wine-dark sea.  Poor,
dear, good, kind, but on the whole unloveable Aunt Angela!  Her
annuity was ninety-eight pounds a year (thirty-eight bob a week,
but she retained a middle-class habit of thinking of her income as
a yearly and not weekly thing), and out of that, twelve and
sixpence a week went on house rates.  She would probably have
starved occasionally if Julia had not smuggled her packets of cakes
and bread and butter from the shop--always, of course, presented as
'Just a few little things that it seemed a pity to throw away',
with the solemn pretence that Aunt Angela didn't really need them.

Yet she too had her pleasures, poor old aunty.  She had become a
great novel-reader in her old age, the public library being only
ten minutes' walk from Briarbrae.  During his lifetime, on some
whim or other, Gran'pa Comstock had forbidden his daughters to read
novels.  Consequently, having only begun to read novels in 1902,
Aunt Angela was always a couple of decades behind the current mode
in fiction.  But she plodded along in the rear, faint yet pursuing.
In the nineteen-hundreds she was still reading Rhoda Broughton and
Mrs Henry Wood.  In the War years she discovered Hall Caine and Mrs
Humphry Ward.  In the nineteen-twenties she was reading Silas
Hocking and H. Seton Merriman, and by the nineteen-thirties she had
almost, but not quite, caught up with W. B. Maxwell and William J.
Locke.  Further she would never get.  As for the post-War
novelists, she had heard of them afar off, with their immorality
and their blasphemies and their devastating 'cleverness'.  But she
would never live to read them.  Walpole we know, and Hichens we
read, but Hemingway, who are you?

Well, this was 1934, and that was what was left of the Comstock
family.  Uncle Walter, with his 'agencies' and his diseases.  Aunt
Angela, dusting the Crown Derby china tea-service in Briarbrae.
Aunt Charlotte, still preserving a vague vegetable existence in the
Mental Home.  Julia, working a seventy-two-hour week and doing her
'sewing' at nights by the tiny gas-fire in her bedsitting-room.
Gordon, nearly thirty, earning two quid a week in a fool's job, and
struggling, as the sole demonstrable object of his existence, with
a dreadful book that never got any further.

Possibly there were some other, more distantly related Comstocks,
for Gran'pa Comstock had been one of a family of twelve.  But if
any survived they had grown rich and lost touch with their poor
relations; for money is thicker than blood.  As for Gordon's branch
of the family, the combined income of the five of them, allowing
for the lump sum that had been paid down when Aunt Charlotte
entered the Mental Home, might have been six hundred a year.  Their
combined ages were two hundred and sixty-three years.  None of them
had ever been out of England, fought in a war, been in prison,
ridden a horse, travelled in an aeroplane, got married, or given
birth to a child.  There seemed no reason why they should not
continue in the same style until they died.  Year in, year out,
NOTHING EVER HAPPENED in the Comstock family.



4


Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over
The bending poplars, newly bare.


As a matter of fact, though, there was not a breath of wind that
afternoon.  It was almost as mild as spring.  Gordon repeated to
himself the poem he had begun yesterday, in a cadenced whisper,
simply for the pleasure of the sound of it.  He was pleased with
the poem at this moment.  It was a good poem--or would be when it
was finished, anyway.  He had forgotten that last night it had
almost made him sick.

The plane trees brooded motionless, dimmed by faint wreaths of
mist.  A tram boomed in the valley far below.  Gordon walked up
Malkin Hill, rustling instep-deep through the dry, drifted leaves.
All down the pavement they were strewn, crinkly and golden, like
the rustling flakes of some American breakfast cereal; as though
the queen of Brobdingnag had upset her packet of Truweet Breakfast
Crisps down the hillside.

Jolly, the windless winter days!  Best time of all the year--or so
Gordon thought at this moment.  He was as happy as you can be when
you haven't smoked all day and have only three-halfpence and a Joey
in the world.  This was Thursday, early-closing day and Gordon's
afternoon off.  He was going to the house of Paul Doring, the
critic, who lived in Coleridge Grove and gave literary tea-parties.

It had taken him an hour or more to get himself ready.  Social life
is so complicated when your income is two quid a week.  He had had
a painful shave in cold water immediately after dinner.  He had put
on his best suit--three years old but just passable when he
remembered to press the trousers under his mattress.  He had turned
his collar inside out and tied his tie so that the torn place
didn't show.  With the point of a match he had scraped enough
blacking from the tin to polish his shoes.  He had even borrowed a
needle from Lorenheim and darned his socks--a tedious job, but
better than inking the places where your ankle shows through.  Also
he had procured an empty Gold Flake packet and put into it a single
cigarette extracted from the penny-in-the-slot-machine.  That was
just for the look of the thing.  You can't, of course, go to other
people's houses with NO cigarettes.  But if you have even one it's
all right, because when people see one cigarette in a packet they
assume that the packet has been full.  It is fairly easy to pass
the thing off as an accident.

'Have a cigarette?' you say casually to someone.

'Oh--thanks.'

You push the packet open and then register surprise.  'Hell!  I'm
down to my last.  And I could have sworn I had a full packet.'

'Oh, I won't take your last.  Have one of MINE,' says the other.

'Oh--thanks.'

And after that, of course, your host and hostess press cigarettes
upon you.  But you must have ONE cigarette, just for honour's sake.

Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over.  He would finish that poem
presently.  He could finish it whenever he chose.  It was queer,
how the mere prospect of going to a literary tea-party bucked him
up.  When your income is two quid a week you at least aren't jaded
by too much human contact.  Even to see the inside of somebody
else's house is a kind of treat.  A padded armchair under your bum,
and tea and cigarettes and the smell of women--you learn to
appreciate such things when you are starved of them.  In practice,
though, Doring's parties never in the least resembled what Gordon
looked forward to.  Those wonderful, witty, erudite conversations
that he imagined beforehand--they never happened or began to
happen.  Indeed there was never anything that could properly be
called conversation at all; only the stupid clacking that goes on
at parties everywhere, in Hampstead or Hong Kong.  No one really
worth meeting ever came to Doring's parties.  Doring was such a
very mangy lion himself that his followers were hardly even worthy
to be called jackals.  Quite half of them were those hen-witted
middle-aged women who have lately escaped from good Christian homes
and are trying to be literary.  The star exhibits were troops of
bright young things who dropped in for half an hour, formed circles
of their own, and talked sniggeringly about the other bright young
things to whom they referred by nicknames.  For the most part
Gordon found himself hanging about on the edges of conversations.
Doring was kind in a slapdash way and introduced him to everybody
as 'Gordon Comstock--YOU know; the poet.  He wrote that dashed
clever book of poems called Mice.  YOU know.'  But Gordon had never
yet encountered anybody who DID know.  The bright young things
summed him up at a glance and ignored him.  He was thirtyish, moth-
eaten, and obviously penniless.  And yet, in spite of the
invariable disappointment, how eagerly he looked forward to those
literary tea-parties!  They were a break in his loneliness, anyway.
That is the devilish thing about poverty, the ever-recurrent thing--
loneliness.  Day after day with never an intelligent person to
talk to; night after night back to your godless room, always alone.
Perhaps it sounds rather fun if you are rich and sought-after; but
how different it is when you do it from necessity!

Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over.  A stream of cars hummed
easily up the hill.  Gordon eyed them without envy.  Who wants a
car, anyway?  The pink doll-faces of upper-class women gazed at him
through the car window.  Bloody nit-witted lapdogs.  Pampered
bitches dozing on their chains.  Better the lone wolf than the
cringing dogs.  He thought of the Tube stations at early morning.
The black hordes of clerks scurrying underground like ants into a
hole; swarms of little ant-like men, each with dispatch-case in
right hand, newspaper in left hand, and the fear of the sack like a
maggot in his heart.  How it eats at them, that secret fear!
Especially on winter days, when they hear the menace of the wind.
Winter, the sack, the workhouse, the Embankment benches!  Ah!


Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over
The bending poplars, newly bare,
And the dark ribbons of the chimneys
Veer downward; flicked by whips of air,
Torn posters flutter; Coldly sound
The boom of trains and the rattle of hooves,
And the clerks who hurry to the station
Look, shuddering, over the eastern rooves,
Thinking--


What do they think?  Winter's coming.  Is my job safe?  The sack
means the workhouse.  Circumcise ye your foreskins, saith the Lord.
Suck the blacking off the boss's boots.  Yes!


Thinking each one, 'Here comes the winter!
Please God I keep my job this year!'
And bleakly, as the cold strikes through
Their entrails like an icy spear,
They think--


'Think' again.  No matter.  What do they think?  Money, money!
Rent, rates, taxes, school bills, season tickets, boots for the
children.  And the life insurance policy and the skivvy's wages.
And, my God, suppose the wife gets in the family way again!  And
did I laugh loud enough when the boss made that joke yesterday?
And the next instalment on the vacuum cleaner.

Neatly, taking a pleasure in his neatness, with the sensation of
dropping piece after piece of a jigsaw puzzle into place, he
fashioned another stanza:


They think of rent, rates, season tickets,
Insurance, coal, the skivvy's wages,
Boots, school bills, and the next instalment
Upon the two twin beds from Drage's.


Not bad, not bad at all.  Finish it presently.  Four or five more
stanzas.  Ravelston would print it.

A starling sat in the naked boughs of a plane tree, crooning self-
pitifully as starlings do on warm winter days when they believe
spring is in the air.  At the foot of the tree a huge sandy cat sat
motionless, mouth open, gazing upwards with rapt desire, plainly
expecting that the starling would drop into its mouth.  Gordon
repeated to himself the four finished stanzas of his poem.  It was
GOOD.  Why had he thought last night that it was mechanical, weak,
and empty?  He was a poet.  He walked more upright, arrogantly
almost, with the pride of a poet.  Gordon Comstock, author of Mice.
'Of exceptional promise,' The Times Lit. Supp. had said.  Author
also of London Pleasures.  For that too would be finished quite
soon.  He knew now that he could finish it when he chose.  Why had
he ever despaired of it?  Three months it might take; soon enough
to come out in the summer.  In his mind's eye he saw the 'slim'
white buckram shape of London Pleasures; the excellent paper, the
wide margins, the good Caslon type, the refined dust-jacket, and
the reviews in all the best papers.  'An outstanding achievement'--
The Times Lit. Supp.  'A welcome relief from the Sitwell school'--
Scrutiny.

Coleridge Grove was a damp, shadowy, secluded road, a blind alley
and therefore void of traffic.  Literary associations of the wrong
kind (Coleridge was rumoured to have lived there for six weeks in
the summer of 1821) hung heavy upon it.  You could not look at its
antique decaying houses, standing back from the road in dank
gardens under heavy trees, without feeling an atmosphere of
outmoded 'culture' envelop you.  In some of those houses,
undoubtedly, Browning Societies still flourished, and ladies in art
serge sat at the feet of extinct poets talking about Swinburne and
Walter Pater.  In spring the gardens were sprinkled with purple and
yellow crocuses, and later with harebells, springing up in little
Wendy rings among the anaemic grass; and even the trees, it seemed
to Gordon, played up to their environment and twisted themselves
into whimsy Rackhamesque attitudes.  It was queer that a prosperous
hack critic like Paul Doring should live in such a place.  For
Doring was an astonishingly bad critic.  He reviewed novels for the
Sunday Post and discovered the great English novel with Walpolean
regularity once a fortnight.  You would have expected him to live
in a flat on Hyde Park Corner.  Perhaps it was a kind of penance
that he had imposed upon himself, as though by living in the
refined discomfort of Coleridge Grove he propitiated the injured
gods of literature.

Gordon came round the corner, turning over in his mind a line from
London Pleasures.  And then suddenly he stopped short.  There was
something wrong about the look of the Dorings' gate.  What was it?
Ah, of course!  There were no cars waiting outside.

He paused, walked on a step or two, and stopped again, like a dog
that smells danger.  It was all wrong.  There OUGHT to be some
cars.  There were always quite a lot of people at the Dorings'
parties, and half of them came in cars.  Why had nobody else
arrived?  Could he be too early?  But no!  They had said half past
three and it was at least twenty to four.

He hastened towards the gate.  Already he felt practically sure
that the party HAD been put off.  A chill like the shadow of a
cloud had fallen across him.  Suppose the Dorings weren't at home!
Suppose the party had been put off!  And this thought, though it
dismayed him, did not strike him as in the least improbable.  It
was his special bugbear, the especial childish dread he carried
about with him, to be invited to people's houses and then find them
not at home.  Even when there was no doubt about the invitation he
always half expected that there would be some hitch or other.  He
was never quite certain of his welcome.  He took it for granted
that people would snub him and forget about him.  Why not, indeed?
He had no money.  When you have no money your life is one long
series of snubs.

He swung the iron gate open.  It creaked with a lonely sound.  The
dank mossy path was bordered with chunks of some Rackhamesque
pinkish stone.  Gordon inspected the house-front narrowly.  He was
so used to this kind of thing.  He had developed a sort of Sherlock
Holmes technique for finding out whether a house was inhabited or
not.  Ah!  Not much doubt about it this time.  The house had a
deserted look.  No smoke coming from the chimneys, no windows
lighted.  It must be getting darkish indoors--surely they would
have lighted the lamps?  And there was not a single footmark on the
steps; that settled it.  Nevertheless with a sort of desperate hope
he tugged at the bell.  An old-fashioned wire bell, of course.  In
Coleridge Grove it would have been considered low and unliterary to
have an electric bell.

Clang, clang, clang! went the bell.

Gordon's last hope vanished.  No mistaking the hollow clangour of a
bell echoing through an empty house.  He seized the handle again
and gave it a wrench that almost broke the wire.  A frightful,
clamorous peal answered him.  But it was useless, quite useless.
Not a foot stirred within.  Even the servants were out.  At this
moment he became aware of a lace cap, some dark hair, and a pair of
youthful eyes regarding him furtively from the basement of the
house next door.  It was a servant-girl who had come out to see
what all the noise was about.  She caught his eye and gazed into
the middle distance.  He looked a fool and knew it.  One always
does look a fool when one rings the bell of an empty house.  And
suddenly it came to him that that girl knew all about him--knew
that the party had been put off and that everyone except Gordon had
been told of it--knew that it was because he had no money that he
wasn't worth the trouble of telling.  SHE knew.  Servants always
know.

He turned and made for the gate.  Under the servant's eye he had to
stroll casually away, as though this were a small disappointment
that scarcely mattered.  But he was trembling so with anger that it
was difficult to control his movements.  The sods!  The bloody
sods!  To have played a trick like that on him!  To have invited
him, and then changed the day and not even bothered to tell him!
There might be other explanations--he just refused to think of
them.  The sods, the bloody sods!  His eye fell upon one of the
Rackhamesque chunks of stone.  How he'd love to pick that thing up
and bash it through the window!  He grasped the rusty gate-bar so
hard that he hurt his hand and almost tore it.  The physical pain
did him good.  It counteracted the agony at his heart.  It was not
merely that he had been cheated of an evening spent in human
company, though that was much.  It was the feeling of helplessness,
of insignificance, of being set aside, ignored--a creature not
worth worrying about.  They'd changed the day and hadn't even
bothered to tell him.  Told everybody else, but not him.  That's
how people treat you when you've no money!  Just wantonly, cold-
bloodedly insult you.  It was likely enough, indeed, that the
Dorings' had honestly forgotten, meaning no harm; it was even
possible that he himself had mistaken the date.  But no!  He
wouldn't think of it.  The Dorings' had done it on purpose.  Of
COURSE they had done it on purpose!  Just hadn't troubled to tell
him, because he had no money and consequently didn't matter.  The
sods!

He walked rapidly away.  There was a sharp pain in his breast.
Human contact, human voices!  But what was the good of wishing?
He'd have to spend the evening alone, as usual.  His friends were
so few and lived so far away.  Rosemary would still be at work;
besides, she lived at the back of beyond, in West Kensington, in a
women's hostel guarded by female dragons.  Ravelston lived nearer,
in the Regent's Park district.  But Ravelston was a rich man and
had many engagements; the chances were always against his being at
home.  Gordon could not even ring him up, because he hadn't the
necessary two pennies; only three halfpence and the Joey.  Besides,
how could he go and see Ravelston when he had no money?  Ravelston
would be sure to say 'Let's go to a pub,' or something!  He
couldn't let Ravelston pay for his drinks.  His friendship with
Ravelston was only possible on the understanding that he paid his
share of everything.

He took out his single cigarette and lighted it.  It gave him no
pleasure to smoke, walking fast; it was a mere reckless gesture.
He did not take much notice of where he was going.  All he wanted
was to tire himself, to walk and walk till the stupid physical
fatigue had obliterated the Dorings' snub.  He moved roughly
southward--through the wastes of Camden Town, down Tottenham Court
Road.  It had been dark for some time now.  He crossed Oxford
Street, threaded through Covent Garden, found himself in the
Strand, and crossed the river by Waterloo Bridge.  With night the
cold had descended.  As he walked his anger grew less violent, but
his mood could not fundamentally improve.  There was a thought that
kept haunting him--a thought from which he fled, but which was not
to be escaped.  It was the thought of his poems.  His empty, silly,
futile poems!  How could he ever have believed in them?  To think
that actually he had imagined, so short a time ago, that even
London Pleasures might one day come to something!  It made him sick
to think of his poems now.  It was like remembering last night's
debauch.  He knew in his bones that he was no good and his poems
were no good.  London Pleasures would never be finished.  If he
lived to be a thousand he would never write a line worth reading.
Over and over, in self-hatred, he repeated those four stanzas of
the poem he had been making up.  Christ, what tripe!  Rhyme to
rhyme--tinkle, tinkle, tinkle!  Hollow as an empty biscuit tin.
THAT was the kind of muck he had wasted his life on.

He had walked a long way, five or seven miles perhaps.  His feet
were hot and swollen from the pavements.  He was somewhere in
Lambeth, in a slummy quarter where the narrow, puddled street
plunged into blackness at fifty yards' distance.  The few lamps,
mist-ringed, hung like isolated stars, illumining nothing save
themselves.  He was getting devilishly hungry.  The coffee-shops
tempted him with their steamy windows and their chalked signs:
'Good Cup of Tea, 2d.  No Urns Used.'  But it was no use, he
couldn't spend his Joey.  He went under some echoing railway arches
and up the alley on to Hungerford Bridge.  On the miry water, lit
by the glare of skysigns, the muck of East London was racing
inland.  Corks, lemons, barrel-staves, a dead dog, hunks of bread.
Gordon walked along the Embankment to Westminster.  The wind made
the plane trees rattle.  Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over.  He
winced.  That tripe again!  Even now, though it was December, a few
poor draggled old wrecks were settling down on the benches, tucking
themselves up in sort of parcels of newspaper.  Gordon looked at
them callously.  On the bum, they called it.  He would come to it
himself some day.  Better so, perhaps?  He never felt any pity for
the genuine poor.  It is the black-coated poor, the middle-middle
class, who need pitying.

He walked up to Trafalgar Square.  Hours and hours to kill.  The
National Gallery?  Ah, shut long ago, of course.  It would be.  It
was a quarter past seven.  Three, four, five hours before he could
sleep.  He walked seven times round the square, slowly.  Four times
clockwise, three times widdershins.  His feet were sore and most of
the benches were empty, but he would not sit down.  If he halted
for an instant the longing for tobacco would come upon him.  In the
Charing Cross Road the teashops called like sirens.  Once the glass
door of a Lyons swung open, letting out a wave of hot cake-scented
air.  It almost overcame him.  After all, why NOT go in?  You could
sit there for nearly an hour.  A cup of tea twopence, two buns a
penny each.  He had fourpence halfpenny, counting the Joey.  But
no!  That bloody Joey!  The girl at the cash desk would titter.  In
a vivid vision he saw the girl at the cash desk, as she handled his
threepenny-bit, grin sidelong at the girl behind the cake-counter.
They'd KNOW it was your last threepence.  No use.  Shove on.  Keep
moving.

In the deadly glare of the Neon lights the pavements were densely
crowded.  Gordon threaded his way, a small shabby figure, with pale
face and unkempt hair.  The crowd slid past him; he avoided and was
avoided.  There is something horrible about London at night; the
coldness, the anonymity, the aloofness.  Seven million people,
sliding to and fro, avoiding contact, barely aware of one another's
existence, like fish in an aquarium tank.  The street swarmed with
pretty girls.  By scores they streamed past him, their faces
averted or unseeing; cold nymph-creatures, dreading the eyes of the
male.  It was queer how many of them seemed to be alone, or with
another girl.  Far more women alone than women with men, he noted.
That too was money.  How many girls alive wouldn't be manless
sooner than take a man who's moneyless?

The pubs were open, oozing sour whiffs of beer.  People were
trickling by ones and twos into the picture-houses.  Gordon halted
outside a great garish picture-house, under the weary eye of the
commissionaire, to examine the photographs.  Greta Garbo in The
Painted Veil.  He yearned to go inside, not for Greta's sake, but
just for the warmth and the softness of the velvet seat.  He hated
the pictures, of course, seldom went there even when he could
afford it.  Why encourage the art that is destined to replace
literature?  But still, there is a kind of soggy attraction about
it.  To sit on the padded seat in the warm smoke-scented darkness,
letting the flickering drivel on the screen gradually overwhelm
you--feeling the waves of its silliness lap you round till you seem
to drown, intoxicated, in a viscous sea--after all, it's the kind
of drug we need.  The right drug for friendless people.  As he
approached the Palace Theatre a tart on sentry-go under the porch
marked him down, stepped forward, and stood in his path.  A short,
stocky Italian girl, very young, with big black eyes.  She looked
agreeable, and, what tarts so seldom are, merry.  For a moment he
checked his step, even allowing himself to catch her eye.  She
looked up at him, ready to break out into a broad-lipped smile.
Why not stop and talk to her?  She looked as though she might
understand him.  But no!  No money!  He looked away and side-
stepped her with the cold haste of a man whom poverty makes
virtuous.  How furious she'd be if he stopped and then she found he
had no money!  He pressed on.  Even to talk costs money.

Up Tottenham Court Road and Camden Road it was a dreary drudge.  He
walked slower, dragging his feet a little.  He had done ten miles
over pavements.  More girls streamed past, unseeing.  Girls alone,
girls with youths, girls with other girls, girls alone.  Their
cruel youthful eyes went over him and through him as though he had
not existed.  He was too tired to resent it.  His shoulders
surrendered to their weariness; he slouched, not trying any longer
to preserve his upright carriage and his you-be-damned air.  They
flee from me that someone did me seek.  How could you blame them?
He was thirty, moth-eaten, and without charm.  Why should any girl
ever look at him again?

He reflected that he must go home at once if he wanted any food--
for Ma Wisbeach refused to serve meals after nine o'clock.  But the
thought of his cold womanless bedroom sickened him.  To climb the
stairs, light the gas, flop down at the table with hours to kill
and nothing to do, nothing to read, nothing to smoke--no, NOT
endurable.  In Camden Town the pubs were full and noisy, though
this was only Thursday.  Three women, red-armed, squat as the beer
mugs in their hands, stood outside a pub door, talking.  From
within came hoarse voices, fag-smoke, the fume of beer.  Gordon
thought of the Crichton Arms.  Flaxman might be there.  Why not
risk it?  A half of bitter, threepence halfpenny.  He had fourpence
halfpenny counting the Joey.  After all, a Joey IS legal tender.

He felt dreadfully thirsty already.  It had been a mistake to let
himself think of beer.  As he approached the Crichton, he heard
voices singing.  The great garish pub seemed to be more brightly
lighted than usual.  There was a concert of something going on
inside.  Twenty ripe male voices were chanting in unison:


'Fo--or REE'S a jorrigoo' fellow,
For REE'S a jorrigoo' fellow,
For REE'S a jorrigoo' fe--ELL--OW--
And toori oori us!'


At least, that was what it sounded like.  Gordon drew nearer,
pierced by a ravishing thirst.  The voices were so soggy, so
infinitely beery.  When you heard them you saw the scarlet faces of
prosperous plumbers.  There was a private room behind the bar where
the Buffaloes held their secret conclaves.  Doubtless it was they
who were singing.  They were giving some kind of commemorative
booze to their president, secretary, Grand Herbivore, or whatever
he is called.  Gordon hesitated outside the Saloon bar.  Better to
go to the public bar, perhaps.  Draught beer in the public, bottled
beer in the saloon.  He went round to the other side of the pub.
The beer-choked voices followed him:


'With a toori oori ay.
An' a toori oori ay!

'Fo--or REE'S a jorrigoo' fellow,
For REE'S a jorrigoo' fellow--'


He felt quite faint for a moment.  But it was fatigue and hunger as
well as thirst.  He could picture the cosy room where those
Buffaloes were singing; the roaring fire, the big shiny table, the
bovine photographs on the wall.  Could picture also, as the singing
ceased, twenty scarlet faces disappearing into pots of beer.  He
put his hand into his pocket and made sure that the threepenny-bit
was still there.  After all, why not?  In the public bar, who would
comment?  Slap the Joey down on the bar and pass it off as a joke.
'Been saving that up from the Christmas pudding--ha, ha!'  Laughter
all round.  Already he seemed to have the metallic taste of draught
beer on his tongue.

He fingered the tiny disc, irresolute.  The Buffaloes had tuned up
again:


'With a toori oori ay,
An' a toori oori ay!

'Fo--or REE'S a jorrigoo' fellow--'


Gordon moved back to the saloon bar.  The window was frosted, and
also steamy from the heat inside.  Still, there were chinks where
you could see through.  He peeped in.  Yes, Flaxman was there.

The saloon bar was crowded.  Like all rooms seen from the outside,
it looked ineffably cosy.  The fire that blazed in the grate
danced, mirrored, in the brass spittoons.  Gordon thought he could
almost smell the beer through the glass.  Flaxman was propping up
the bar with two fish-faced pals who looked like insurance-touts of
the better type.  One elbow on the bar, his foot on the rail, a
beer-streaked glass in the other hand, he was swapping backchat
with the blonde cutie barmaid.  She was standing on a chair behind
the bar, ranging the bottled beer and talking saucily over her
shoulder.  You couldn't hear what they were saying, but you could
guess.  Flaxman let fall some memorable witticism.  The fish-faced
men bellowed with obscene laughter.  And the blonde cutie,
tittering down at him, half shocked and half delighted, wriggled
her neat little bum.

Gordon's heart sickened.  To be in there, just to be in there!
In the warmth and light, with people to talk to, with beer and
cigarettes and a girl to flirt with!  After all, why NOT go in?
You could borrow a bob off Flaxman.  Flaxman would lend it to you
all right.  He pictured Flaxman's careless assent--'What ho,
chappie!  How's life?  What?  A bob?  Sure!  Take two.  Catch,
chappie!'--and the florin flicked along the beer-wet bar.  Flaxman
was a decent sort, in his way.

Gordon put his hand against the swing door.  He even pushed it open
a few inches.  The warm fog of smoke and beer slipped through the
crack.  A familiar, reviving smell; nevertheless as he smelled it
his nerve failed him.  No!  Impossible to go in.  He turned away.
He couldn't go shoving in that saloon bar with only fourpence
halfpenny in his pocket.  Never let other people buy your drinks
for you!  The first commandment of the moneyless.  He made off,
down the dark pavement.


'For REE'S a jorrigoo' fe--ELL--OW--
And toori oori us!

'With a toori oori, ay!
An' a-'


The voices, diminishing with distance, rolled after him, bearing
faint tidings of beer.  Gordon took the threepenny-bit from his
pocket and sent it skimming away into the darkness.

He was going home, if you could call it 'going'.  At any rate he
was gravitating in that direction.  He did not want to go home, but
he had got to sit down.  His legs ached and his feet were bruised,
and that vile bedroom was the sole place in London where he had
purchased the right to sit down.  He slipped in quietly, but, as
usual, not quite so quietly that Mrs Wisbeach failed to hear him.
She gave him a brief nosy glance round the corner of her door.  It
would be a little after nine.  She might get him a meal if he asked
her.  But she would grizzle and make a favour of it, and he would
go to bed hungry sooner than face that.

He started up the stairs.  He was half way up the first flight when
a double knock behind made him jump.  The post!  Perhaps a letter
from Rosemary!

Forced from outside, the letter flap lifted, and with an effort,
like a heron regurgitating a flatfish, vomited a bunch of letters
on to the mat.  Gordon's heart bounded.  There were six or seven of
them.  Surely among all that lot there must be one for himself!
Mrs Wisbeach, as usual, had darted from her lair at the sound of
the postman's knock.  As a matter of fact, in two years Gordon had
never once succeeded in getting hold of a letter before Mrs
Wisbeach laid hands on it.  She gathered the letters jealously to
her breast, and then, holding them up one at a time, scanned their
addresses.  From her manner you could gather that she suspected
each one of them of containing a writ, an improper love letter, or
an ad for Amen Pills.

'One for you, Mr Comstock,' she said sourly, handing him a letter.

His heart shrank and paused in its beat.  A long-shaped envelope.
Not from Rosemary, therefore.  Ah!  It was addressed in his own
handwriting.  From the editor of a paper, then.  He had two poems
'out' at present.  One with the Californian Review, the other with
the Primrose Quarterly.  But this wasn't an American stamp.  And
the Primrose had had his poem at least six weeks!  Good God,
supposing they'd accepted it!

He had forgotten Rosemary's existence.  He said 'Thanks!', stuck
the letter in his pocket, and started up the stairs with outward
calm, but no sooner was he out of Mrs Wisbeach's sight that he
bounded up three steps at a time.  He had got to be alone to open
that letter.  Even before he reached the door he was feeling for
his matchbox, but his fingers were trembling so that in lighting
the gas he chipped the mantle.  He sat down, took the letter from
his pocket, and then quailed.  For a moment he could not nerve
himself to open it.  He held it up to the light and felt it to see
how thick it was.  His poem had been two sheets.  Then, calling
himself a fool, he ripped the envelope open.  Out tumbled his own
poem, and with it a neat--oh, so neat!--little printed slip of
imitation parchment:


The Editor regrets that he is unable to make use of the enclosed
contribution.


The slip was decorated with a design of funereal laurel leaves.

Gordon gazed at the thing with wordless hatred.  Perhaps no snub in
the world is so deadly as this, because none is so unanswerable.
Suddenly he loathed his own poem and was acutely ashamed of it.  He
felt it the weakest, silliest poem ever written.  Without looking
at it again he tore it into small bits and flung them into the
wastepaper basket.  He would put that poem out of his mind for
ever.  The rejection slip, however, he did not tear up yet.  He
fingered it, feeling its loathly sleekness.  Such an elegant little
thing, printed in admirable type.  You could tell at a glance that
it came from a 'good' magazine--a snooty highbrow magazine with the
money of a publishing house behind it.  Money, money!  Money and
culture!  It was a stupid thing that he had done.  Fancy sending a
poem to a paper like the Primrose!  As though they'd accept poems
from people like HIM.  The mere fact that the poem wasn't typed
would tell them what kind of person he was.  He might as well have
dropped a card on Buckingham Palace.  He thought of the people who
wrote for the Primrose; a coterie of moneyed highbrows--those
sleek, refined young animals who suck in money and culture with
their mother's milk.  The idea of trying to horn in among that
pansy crowd!  But he cursed them all the same.  The sods!  The
bloody sods!  'The Editor regrets!'  Why be so bloody mealy-mouthed
about it?  Why not say outright, 'We don't want your bloody poems.
We only take poems from chaps we were at Cambridge with.  You
proletarians keep your distance'?  The bloody, hypocritical sods!

At last he crumpled up the rejection slip, threw it away, and stood
up.  Better get to bed while he had the energy to undress.  Bed was
the only place that was warm.  But wait.  Wind the clock, set the
alarm.  He went through the familiar action with a sense of deadly
staleness.  His eye fell upon the aspidistra.  Two years he had
inhabited this vile room; two mortal years in which nothing had
been accomplished.  Seven hundred wasted days, all ending in the
lonely bed.  Snubs, failures, insults, all of them unavenged.
Money, money, all is money!  Because he had no money the Dorings'
snubbed him, because he had no money the Primrose had turned down
his poem, because he had no money Rosemary wouldn't sleep with him.
Social failure, artistic failure, sexual failure--they are all the
same.  And lack of money is at the bottom of them all.

He must hit back at somebody or something.  He could not go to bed
with that rejection slip as the last thing in his mind.  He thought
of Rosemary.  It was five days now since she had written.  If there
had been a letter from her this evening even that rap over the
knuckles from the Primrose Quarterly would have mattered less.  She
declared that she loved him, and she wouldn't sleep with him,
wouldn't even write to him!  She was the same as all the others.
She despised him and forgot about him because he had no money and
therefore didn't matter.  He would write her an enormous letter,
telling her what it felt like to be ignored and insulted, making
her see how cruelly she had treated him.

He found a clean sheet of paper and wrote in the top right-hand
corner:

'31 Willowbed Road, NW, 1 December, 9.30 p.m.'

But having written that much, he found that he could write no more.
He was in the defeated mood when even the writing of a letter is
too great an effort.  Besides, what was the use?  She would never
understand.  No woman ever understands.  But he must write
something.  Something to wound her--that was what he most wanted,
at this moment.  He meditated for a long time, and at last wrote,
exactly in the middle of the sheet:


You have broken my heart.


No address, no signature.  Rather neat it looked, all by itself,
there in the middle of the sheet, in his small 'scholarly'
handwriting.  Almost like a little poem in itself.  This thought
cheered him up a little.

He stuck the letter in an envelope and went out and posted it at
the post office on the corner, spending his last three halfpence on
a penny stamp and a halfpenny stamp out of the slot machine.



5


'We're printing that poem of yours in next month's Antichrist,'
said Ravelston from his first-floor window.

Gordon, on the pavement below, affected to have forgotten the poem
Ravelston was speaking about; he remembered it intimately, of
course, as he remembered all his poems.

'Which poem?' he said.

'The one about the dying prostitute.  We thought it was rather
successful.'  Gordon laughed a laugh of gratified conceit, and
managed to pass it off as a laugh of sardonic amusement.

'Aha!  A dying prostitute!  That's rather what you might call one
of my subjects.  I'll do you one about an aspidistra next time.'

Ravelston's over-sensitive, boyish face, framed by nice dark-brown
hair, drew back a little from the window.

'It's intolerably cold,' he said.  'You'd better come up and have
some food, or something.'

'No, you come down.  I've had dinner.  Let's go to a pub and have
some beer.'

'All right then.  Half a minute while I get my shoes on.'

They had been talking for some minutes, Gordon on the pavement,
Ravelston leaning out of the window above.  Gordon had announced
his arrival not by knocking at the door but by throwing a pebble
against the window pane.  He never, if he could help it, set foot
inside Ravelston's flat.  There was something in the atmosphere of
the flat that upset him and made him feel mean, dirty, and out of
place.  It was so overwhelmingly, though unconsciously, upper-
class.  Only in the street or in a pub could he feel himself
approximately Ravelston's equal.  It would have astonished
Ravelston to learn that his four-roomed flat, which he thought of
as a poky little place, had this effect upon Gordon.  To Ravelston,
living in the wilds of Regent's Park was practically the same thing
as living in the slums; he had chosen to live there, en bon
socialiste, precisely as your social snob will live in a mews in
Mayfair for the sake of the 'WI' on his notepaper.  It was part of
a lifelong attempt to escape from his own class and become, as it
were, an honorary member of the proletariat.  Like all such
attempts, it was foredoomed to failure.  No rich man ever succeeds
in disguising himself as a poor man; for money, like murder, will
out.

On the street door there was a brass plate inscribed:


P. W. H. RAVELSTON

ANTICHRIST


Ravelston lived on the first floor, and the editorial offices of
Antichrist were downstairs.  Antichrist was a middle- to high-brow
monthly, Socialist in a vehement but ill-defined way.  In general,
it gave the impression of being edited by an ardent Nonconformist
who had transferred his allegiance from God to Marx, and in doing
so had got mixed up with a gang of vers libre poets.  This was not
really Ravelston's character; merely he was softer-hearted than an
editor ought to be, and consequently was at the mercy of his
contributors.  Practically anything got printed in Antichrist if
Ravelston suspected that its author was starving.

Ravelston appeared a moment later, hatless and pulling on a pair of
gauntlet gloves.  You could tell him at a glance for a rich young
man.  He wore the uniform of the moneyed intelligentsia; an old
tweed coat--but it was one of those coats which have been made by a
good tailor and grow more aristocratic as they grow older--very
loose grey flannel bags, a grey pullover, much-worn brown shoes.
He made a point of going everywhere, even to fashionable houses and
expensive restaurants, in these clothes, just to show his contempt
for upper-class conventions; he did not fully realize that it is
only the upper classes who can do these things.  Though he was a
year older than Gordon he looked much younger.  He was very tall,
with a lean, wide-shouldered body and the typical lounging grace
of the upper-class youth.  But there was something curiously
apologetic in his movements and in the expression of his face.  He
seemed always in the act of stepping out of somebody else's way.
When expressing an opinion he would rub his nose with the back of
his left forefinger.  The truth was that in every moment of his
life he was apologizing, tacitly, for the largeness of his income.
You could make him uncomfortable as easily by reminding him that he
was rich as you could make Gordon by reminding him that he was
poor.

'You've had dinner, I gather?' said Ravelston, in his rather
Bloomsbury voice.

'Yes, ages ago.  Haven't you?'

'Oh, yes, certainly.  Oh, quite!'

It was twenty past eight and Gordon had had no food since midday.
Neither had Ravelston.  Gordon did not know that Ravelston was
hungry, but Ravelston knew that Gordon was hungry, and Gordon knew
that Ravelston knew it.  Nevertheless, each saw good reason for
pretending not to be hungry.  They seldom or never had meals
together.  Gordon would not let Ravelston buy his meals for him,
and for himself he could not afford to go to restaurants, not even
to a Lyons or an A.B.C.  This was Monday and he had five and
ninepence left.  He might afford a couple of pints at a pub, but
not a proper meal.  When he and Ravelston met it was always agreed,
with silent manoeuvrings, that they should do nothing that involved
spending money, beyond the shilling or so one spends in a pub.  In
this way the fiction was kept up that there was no serious
difference in their incomes.

Gordon sidled closer to Ravelston as they started down the
pavement.  He would have taken his arm, only of course one can't do
that kind of thing.  Beside Ravelston's taller, comelier figure he
looked frail, fretful, and miserably shabby.  He adored Ravelston
and was never quite at ease in his presence.  Ravelston had not
merely a charm of manner, but also a kind of fundamental decency,
a graceful attitude to life, which Gordon scarcely encountered
elsewhere.  Undoubtedly it was bound up with the fact that
Ravelston was rich.  For money buys all virtues.  Money suffereth
long and is kind, is not puffed up, doth not behave unseemly,
seeketh not her own.  But in some ways Ravelston was not even like
a moneyed person.  The fatty degeneration of the spirit which goes
with wealth had missed him, or he had escaped it by a conscious
effort.  Indeed his whole life was a struggle to escape it.  It was
for this reason that he gave up his time and a large part of his
income to editing an unpopular Socialist monthly.  And apart from
Antichrist, money flowed from him in all directions.  A tribe of
cadgers ranging from poets to pavement-artists browsed upon him
unceasingly.  For himself he lived upon eight hundred a year or
thereabouts.  Even of this income he was acutely ashamed.  It was
not, he realized, exactly a proletarian income; but he had never
learned to get along on less.  Eight hundred a year was a minimum
living wage to him, as two pounds a week was to Gordon.

'How is your work getting on?' said Ravelston presently.

'Oh, as usual.  It's a drowsy kind of job.  Swapping back-chat with
old hens about Hugh Walpole.  I don't object to it.'

'I meant your own work--your writing.  Is London Pleasures getting
on all right?'

'Oh, Christ!  Don't speak of it.  It's turning my hair grey.'

'Isn't it going forward at all?'

'My books don't go forward.  They go backward.'

Ravelston sighed.  As editor of Antichrist, he was used to
encouraging despondent poets that it had become a second nature to
him.  He did not need telling why Gordon 'couldn't' write, and why
all poets nowadays 'can't' write, and why when they do write it is
something as arid as the rattling of a pea inside a big drum.  He
said with sympathetic gloom:

'Of course I admit this isn't a hopeful age to write poetry in.'

'You bet it isn't.'

Gordon kicked his heel against the pavement.  He wished that London
Pleasures had not been mentioned.  It brought back to him the
memory of his mean, cold bedroom and the grimy papers littered
under the aspidistra.  He said abruptly:

'This writing business!  What b--s it all is!  Sitting in a corner
torturing a nerve which won't even respond any longer.  And who
wants poetry nowadays?  Training performing fleas would be more
useful by comparison.'

'Still, you oughtn't to let yourself be discouraged.  After all,
you do produce something, which is more than one can say for a lot
of poets nowadays.  There was Mice, for instance.'

'Oh, Mice!  It makes me spew to think of it.'

He thought with loathing of that sneaky little foolscap octavo.
Those forty or fifty drab, dead little poems, each like a little
abortion in its labelled jar.  'Exceptional promise', The Times
Lit. Supp. had said.  A hundred and fifty-three copies sold and the
rest remaindered.  He had one of those movements of contempt and
even horror which every artist has at times when he thinks of his
own work.

'It's dead,' he said.  'Dead as a blasted foetus in a bottle.'

'Oh, well, I suppose that happens to most books.  You can't
expect an enormous sale for poetry nowadays.  There's too much
competition.'

'I didn't mean that.  I meant the poems themselves are dead.
There's no life in them.  Everything I write is like that.
Lifeless, gutless.  Not necessarily ugly or vulgar; but dead--just
dead.'  The word 'dead' re-echoed in his mind, setting up its own
train of thought.  He added:  'My poems are dead because I'm dead.
You're dead.  We're all dead.  Dead people in a dead world.'

Ravelston murmured agreement, with a curious air of guilt.  And now
they were off upon their favourite subject--Gordon's favourite
subject, anyway; the futility, the bloodiness, the deathliness of
modern life.  They never met without talking for at least half an
hour in this vein.  But it always made Ravelston feel rather
uncomfortable.  In a way, of course, he knew--it was precisely this
that Antichrist existed to point out--that life under a decaying
capitalism is deathly and meaningless.  But this knowledge was only
theoretical.  You can't really feel that kind of thing when your
income is eight hundred a year.  Most of the time, when he wasn't
thinking of coal-miners, Chinese junk-coolies, and the unemployed
in Middlesbrough, he felt that life was pretty good fun.  Moreover,
he had the naive belief that in a little while Socialism is going
to put things right.  Gordon always seemed to him to exaggerate.
So there was subtle disagreement between them, which Ravelston was
too good-mannered to press home.

But with Gordon it was different.  Gordon's income was two pounds a
week.  Therefore the hatred of modern life, the desire to see our
money-civilization blown to hell by bombs, was a thing he genuinely
felt.  They were walking southward, down a darkish, meanly decent
residential street with a few shuttered shops.  From a hoarding on
the blank end of a house the yard-wide face of Corner Table
simpered, pallid in the lamplight.  Gordon caught a glimpse of a
withering aspidistra in a lower window.  London!  Mile after mile
of mean lonely houses, let off in flats and single rooms; not
homes, not communities, just clusters of meaningless lives drifting
in a sort of drowsy chaos to the grave!  He saw men as corpses
walking.  The thought that he was merely objectifying his own inner
misery hardly troubled him.  His mind went back to Wednesday
afternoon, when he had desired to hear the enemy aeroplanes zooming
over London.  He caught Ravelston's arm and paused to gesticulate
at the Corner Table poster.

'Look at that bloody thing up there!  Look at it, just look at it!
Doesn't it make you spew?'

'It's aesthetically offensive, I grant.  But I don't see that it
matters very greatly.'

'Of course it matters--having the town plastered with things like
that.'

'Oh, well, it's merely a temporary phenomenon.  Capitalism in its
last phase.  I doubt whether it's worth worrying about.'

'But there's more in it than that.  Just look at that fellow's face
gaping down at us!  You can see our whole civilization written
there.  The imbecility, the emptiness, the desolation!  You can't
look at it without thinking of French letters and machine guns.  Do
you know that the other day I was actually wishing war would break
out?  I was longing for it--praying for it, almost.'

'Of course, the trouble is, you see, that about half the young men
in Europe are wishing the same thing.'

'Let's hope they are.  Then perhaps it'll happen.'

'My dear old chap, no!  Once is enough, surely.'

Gordon walked on, fretfully.  'This life we live nowadays!  It's
not life, it's stagnation, death-in-life.  Look at all these bloody
houses, and the meaningless people inside them!  Sometimes I think
we're all corpses.  Just rotting upright.'

'But where you make your mistake, don't you see, is in talking as
if all this was incurable.  This is only something that's got to
happen before the proletariat take over.'

'Oh, Socialism!  Don't talk to me about Socialism.'

'You ought to read Marx, Gordon, you really ought.  Then you'd
realize that this is only a phase.  It can't go on for ever.'

'Can't it?  It FEELS as if it was going on for ever.'

'It's merely that we're at a bad moment.  We've got to die before
we can be reborn, if you take my meaning.'

'We're dying right enough.  I don't see much signs of our being
reborn.'

Ravelston rubbed his nose.  'Oh, well, we must have faith, I
suppose.  And hope.'

'We must have money you mean,' said Gordon gloomily.

'Money?'

'It's the price of optimism.  Give me five quid a week and I'D be a
Socialist, I dare say.'

Ravelston looked away, discomforted.  This money-business!
Everywhere it came up against you!  Gordon wished he had not said
it.  Money is the one thing you must never mention when you are
with people richer than yourself.  Or if you do, then it must be
money in the abstract, money with a big 'M', not the actual
concrete money that's in your pocket and isn't in mine.  But the
accursed subject drew him like a magnet.  Sooner or later,
especially when he had a few drinks inside him, he invariably began
talking with self-pitiful detail about the bloodiness of life on
two quid a week.  Sometimes, from sheer nervous impulse to say the
wrong thing, he would come out with some squalid confession--as,
for instance, that he had been without tobacco for two days, or
that his underclothes were in holes and his overcoat up the spout.
But nothing of that sort should happen tonight, he resolved.  They
veered swiftly away from the subject of money and began talking in
a more general way about Socialism.  Ravelston had been trying for
years to convert Gordon to Socialism, without even succeeding in
interesting him in it.  Presently they passed a low-looking pub on
a corner in a side-street.  A sour cloud of beer seemed to hang
about it.  The smell revolted Ravelston.  He would have quickened
his pace to get away from it.  But Gordon paused, his nostrils
tickled.

'Christ!  I could do with a drink,' he said.

'So could I,' said Ravelston gallantly.

Gordon shoved open the door of the public bar, Ravelston following.
Ravelston persuaded himself that he was fond of pubs, especially
low-class pubs.  Pubs are genuinely proletarian.  In a pub you can
meet the working class on equal terms--or that's the theory,
anyway.  But in practice Ravelston never went into a pub unless he
was with somebody like Gordon, and he always felt like a fish out
of water when he got there.  A foul yet coldish air enveloped them.
It was a filthy, smoky room, low-ceilinged, with a sawdusted floor
and plain deal tables ringed by generations of beer-pots.  In one
corner four monstrous women with breasts the size of melons were
sitting drinking porter and talking with bitter intensity about
someone called Mrs Croop.  The landlady, a tall grim woman with a
black fringe, looking like the madame of a brothel, stood behind
the bar, her powerful forearms folded, watching a game of darts
which was going on between four labourers and a postman.  You had
to duck under the darts as you crossed the room, there was a
moment's hush and people glanced inquisitively at Ravelston.  He
was so obviously a gentleman.  They didn't see his type very often
in the public bar.

Ravelston pretended not to notice that they were staring at him.
He lounged towards the bar, pulling off a glove to feel for the
money in his pocket.  'What's yours?' he said casually.

But Gordon had already shoved his way ahead and was tapping a
shilling on the bar.  Always pay for the first round of drinks!  It
was his point of honour.  Ravelston made for the only vacant table.
A navvy leaning on the bar turned on his elbow and gave him a long,
insolent stare 'A ---- toff!' he was thinking.  Gordon came back
balancing two pint glasses of the dark common ale.  They were thick
cheap glasses, thick as jam jars almost, and dim and greasy.  A
thin yellow froth was subsiding on the beer.  The air was thick
with gunpowdery tobacco-smoke.  Ravelston caught sight of a well-
filled spittoon near the bar and averted his eyes.  It crossed his
mind that this beer had been sucked up from some beetle-ridden
cellar through yards of slimy tube, and that the glasses had never
been washed in their lives, only rinsed in beery water.  Gordon was
very hungry.  He could have done with some bread and cheese, but to
order any would have been to betray the fact that he had had no
dinner.  He took a deep pull at his beer and lighted a cigarette,
which made him forget his hunger a little.  Ravelston also
swallowed a mouthful or so and set his glass gingerly down.  It was
typical London beer, sickly and yet leaving a chemical after-taste.
Ravelston thought of the wines of Burgundy.  They went on arguing
about Socialism.

'You know, Gordon, it's really time you started reading Marx,' said
Ravelston, less apologetically than usual, because the vile taste
of the beer had annoyed him.

'I'd sooner read Mrs Humphry Ward,' said Gordon.

'But don't you see, your attitude is so unreasonable.  You're
always tirading against Capitalism, and yet you won't accept the
only possible alternative.  One can't put things right in a hole-
and-corner way.  One's got to accept either Capitalism or
Socialism.  There's no way out of it.'

'I tell you I can't be bothered with Socialism.  The very thought
of it makes me yawn.'

'But what's your objection to Socialism, anyway?'

'There's only one objection to Socialism, and that is that nobody
wants it.'

'Oh, surely it's rather absurd to say that!'

'That's to say, nobody who could see what Socialism would really
mean.'

'But what WOULD Socialism mean, according to your idea of it?'

'Oh!  Some kind of Aldous Huxley Brave New World: only not so
amusing.  Four hours a day in a model factory, tightening up bolt
number 6003.  Rations served out in grease-proof paper at the
communal kitchen.  Community-hikes from Marx Hostel to Lenin Hostel
and back.  Free abortion-clinics on all the corners.  All very well
in its way, of course.  Only we don' t want it.'

Ravelston sighed.  Once a month, in Antichrist, he repudiated this
version of Socialism.  'Well, what DO we want, then?'

'God knows.  All we know is what we don't want.  That's what's
wrong with us nowadays.  We're stuck, like Buridan's donkey.  Only
there are three alternatives instead of two, and all three of them
make us spew.  Socialism's only one of them.'

'And what are the other two?'

'Oh, I suppose suicide and the Catholic Church.'

Ravelston smiled, anticlerically shocked.  'The Catholic Church!
Do you consider that an alternative?'

'Well, it's a standing temptation to the intelligentsia, isn't it?'

'Not what _I_ should call the intelligentsia.  Though there was
Eliot, of course,' Ravelston admitted.

'And there'll be plenty more, you bet.  I dare say it's fairly cosy
under Mother Church's wing.  A bit insanitary, of course--but you'd
feel safe there, anyway.'

Ravelston rubbed his nose reflectively.  'It seems to me that's
only another form of suicide.'

'In a way.  But so's Socialism.  At least it's a counsel of
despair.  But I couldn't commit suicide, real suicide.  It's too
meek and mild.  I'm not going to give up my share of earth to
anyone else.  I'd want to do in a few of my enemies first.'

Ravelston smiled again.  'And who are your enemies?'

'Oh, anyone with over five hundred a year.'

A momentary uncomfortable silence fell.  Ravelston's income, after
payment of income tax, was probably two thousand a year.  This was
the kind of thing Gordon was always saying.  To cover the
awkwardness of the moment, Ravelston took up his glass, steeled
himself against the nauseous taste, and swallowed about two-thirds
of his beer--enough at any rate, to give the impression that he had
finished it.

'Drink up!' he said with would-be heartiness.  'It's time we had
the other half of that.'

Gordon emptied his glass and let Ravelston take it.  He did not
mind letting Ravelston pay for the drinks now.  He had paid the
first round and honour was satisfied.  Ravelston walked self-
consciously to the bar.  People began staring at him again as soon
as he stood up.  The navvy, still leaning against the bar over his
untouched pot of beer, gazed at him with quiet insolence.
Ravelston resolved that he would drink no more of this filthy
common ale.

'Two double whiskies, would you, please?' he said apologetically.

The grim landlady stared.  'What?' she said.

'Two double whiskies, please.'

'No whisky 'ere.  We don't sell spirits.  Beer 'ouse, we are.'

The navvy smiled flickering under his moustache.  '---- ignorant
toff!' he was thinking.  'Asking for a whisky in a ---- beer
'ouse!'  Ravelston's pale face flushed slightly.  He had not known
till this moment that some of the poorer pubs cannot afford a
spirit licence.

'Bass, then, would you?  Two pint bottles of Bass.'

There were no pint bottles, they had to have four half pints.  It
was a very poor house.  Gordon took a deep, satisfying swallow of
Bass.  More alcoholic than the draught beer, it fizzed and prickled
in his throat, and because he was hungry it went a little to his
head.  He felt at once more philosophic and more self-pitiful.  He
had made up his mind not to begin belly-aching about his poverty;
but now he was going to begin after all.  He said abruptly:

'This is all b--s that we've been talking.'

'What's all b--s?'

'All this about Socialism and Capitalism and the state of the
modern world and God knows what.  I don't give a ---- for the state
of the modern world.  If the whole of England was starving except
myself and the people I care about, I wouldn't give a damn.'

'Don't you exaggerate just a little?'

'No.  All this talk we make--we're only objectifying our own
feelings.  It's all dictated by what we've got in our pockets.
I go up and down London saying it's a city of the dead, and our
civilization's dying, and I wish war would break out, and God knows
what; and all it means is that my wages are two quid a week and I
wish they were five.'

Ravelston, once again reminded obliquely of his income, stroked his
nose slowly with the knuckle of his left forefinger.

'Of course, I'm with you up to a point.  After all, it's only
what Marx said.  Every ideology is a reflection of economic
circumstances.'

'Ah, but you only understand it out of Marx!  You don't know what
it means to have to crawl along on two quid a week.  It isn't a
question of hardship--it's nothing so decent as hardship.  It's the
bloody, sneaking, squalid meaness of it.  Living alone for weeks on
end because when you've no money you've no friends.  Calling
yourself a writer and never even producing anything because you're
always too washed out to write.  It's a sort of filthy sub-world
one lives in.  A sort of spiritual sewer.'

He had started now.  They were never together long without Gordon
beginning to talk in this strain.  It was the vilest manners.  It
embarrassed Ravelston horribly.  And yet somehow Gordon could not
help it.  He had got to retail his troubles to somebody, and
Ravelston was the only person who understood.  Poverty, like every
other dirty wound, has got to be exposed occasionally.  He began to
talk in obscene detail of his life in Willowbed Road.  He dilated
on the smell of slops and cabbage, the clotted sauce-bottles in the
dining-room, the vile food, the aspidistras.  He described his
furtive cups of tea and his trick of throwing used tea-leaves down
the W.C.  Ravelston, guilty and miserable, sat staring at his glass
and revolving it slowly between his hands.  Against his right
breast he could feel, a square accusing shape, the pocket-book in
which, as he knew, eight pound notes and two ten-bob notes nestled
against his fat green cheque-book.  How awful these details of
poverty are!  Not that what Gordon was describing was real poverty.
It was at worst the fringe of poverty.  But what of the real poor?
What of the unemployed in Middlesbrough, seven in a room on twenty-
five bob a week?  When there are people living like that, how dare
one walk the world with pound notes and cheque-books in one's
pocket?

'It's bloody,' he murmured several times, impotently.  In his heart
he wondered--it was his invariable reaction--whether Gordon would
accept a tenner if you offered to lend it to him.

They had another drink, which Ravelston again paid for, and went
out into the street.  It was almost time to part.  Gordon never
spent more than an hour or two with Ravelston.  One's contacts with
rich people, like one's visits to high altitudes, must always be
brief.  It was a moonless, starless night, with a damp wind
blowing.  The night air, the beer, and the watery radiance of the
lamps induced in Gordon a sort of dismal clarity.  He perceived
that it is quite impossible to explain to any rich person, even to
anyone so decent as Ravelston, the essential bloodiness of poverty.
For this reason it became all the more important to explain it.  He
said suddenly:

'Have you read Chaucer's Man of Lawe's Tale?'

'The Man of Lawe's Tale?  Not that I remember.  What's it about?'

'I forget.  I was thinking of the first six stanzas.  Where he
talks about poverty.  The way it gives everyone the right to stamp
on you!  The way everyone WANTS to stamp on you!  It makes people
HATE you, to know that you've no money.  They insult you just for
the pleasure of insulting you and knowing that you can't hit back.'

Ravelston was pained.  'Oh, no, surely not!  People aren't so bad
as all that.'

'Ah, but you don't know the things that happen!'

Gordon did not want to be told that 'people aren't so bad'.  He
clung with a sort of painful joy to the notion that because he was
poor everyone must WANT to insult him.  It fitted in with his
philosophy of life.  And suddenly, with the feeling that he could
not stop himself, he was talking of the thing that had been
rankling in his mind for two days past--the snub he had had from
the Dorings on Thursday.  He poured the whole story out quite
shamelessly.  Ravelston was amazed.  He could not understand what
Gordon was making such a fuss about.  To be disappointed at missing
a beastly literary tea-party seemed to him absurd.  He would not
have gone to a literary tea-party if you had paid him.  Like all
rich people, he spent far more time in avoiding human society than
in seeking it.  He interrupted Gordon:

'Really, you know, you ought not to take offence so easily.  After
all, a thing like that doesn't really matter.'

'It isn't the thing itself that matters, it's the spirit behind it.
The way they snub you as a matter of course, just because you've
got no money.'

'But quite possibly it was all a mistake, or something.  Why should
anyone want to snub you?'

'"If thou be poure, thy brother hateth thee,"' quoted Gordon
perversely.

Ravelston, deferential even to the opinions of the dead, rubbed his
nose.  'Does Chaucer say that?  Then I'm afraid I disagree with
Chaucer.  People don't hate you, exactly.'

'They do.  And they're quite right to hate you.  You ARE hateful.
It's like those ads for Listerine.  "Why is he always alone?
Halitosis is ruining his career."  Poverty is spiritual halitosis.'

Ravelston sighed.  Undoubtedly Gordon was perverse.  They walked
on, arguing, Gordon vehemently, Ravelston deprecatingly.  Ravelston
was helpless against Gordon in an argument of this kind.  He felt
that Gordon exaggerated, and yet he never liked to contradict him.
How could he?  He was rich and Gordon was poor.  And how can you
argue about poverty with someone who is genuinely poor?

'And then the way women treat you when you've no money!' Gordon
went on.  'That's another thing about this accursed money business--
women!'

Ravelston nodded rather gloomily.  This sounded to him more
reasonable than what Gordon had been saying before.  He thought of
Hermione Slater, his own girl.  They had been lovers two years but
had never bothered to get married.  It was 'too much fag', Hermione
always said.  She was rich, of course, or rather her people were.
He thought of her shoulders, wide, smooth, and young, that seemed
to rise out of her clothes like a mermaid rising from the sea; and
her skin and hair, which were somehow warm and sleepy, like a
wheatfield in the sun.  Hermione always yawned at the mention of
Socialism, and refused even to read Antichrist.  'Don't talk to me
about the lower classes,' she used to say.  'I hate them.  They
SMELL.'  And Ravelston adored her.

'Of course women ARE a difficulty,' he admitted.

'They're more than a difficulty, they're a bloody curse.  That is,
if you've got no money.  A woman hates the sight of you if you've
got no money.'

'I think that's putting it a little too strongly.  Things aren't so
crude as all that.'

Gordon did not listen.  'What rot it is to talk about Socialism or
any other ism when women are what they are!  The only thing a woman
ever wants is money; money for a house of her own and two babies
and Drage furniture and an aspidistra.  The only sin they can
imagine is not wanting to grab money.  No woman ever judges a man
by anything except his income.  Of course she doesn't put it to
herself like that.  She says he's SUCH A NICE man--meaning that
he's got plenty of money.  And if you haven't got money you aren't
NICE.  You're dishonoured, somehow.  You've sinned.  Sinned against
the aspidistra.'

'You talk a great deal about aspidistras,' said Ravelston.

'They're a dashed important subject,' said Gordon.

Ravelston rubbed his nose and looked away uncomfortably.

'Look here, Gordon, you don't mind my asking--have you got a girl
of your own?'

'Oh, Christ! don't speak of her!'

He began, nevertheless, to talk about Rosemary.  Ravelston had
never met Rosemary.  At this moment Gordon could not even remember
what Rosemary was like.  He could not remember how fond he was of
her and she of him, how happy they always were together on the rare
occasions when they could meet, how patiently she put up with his
almost intolerable ways.  He remembered nothing save that she would
not sleep with him and that it was now a week since she had even
written.  In the dank night air, with beer inside him, he felt
himself a forlorn, neglected creature.  Rosemary was 'cruel' to
him--that was how he saw it.  Perversely, for the mere pleasure of
tormenting himself and making Ravelston uncomfortable, be began to
invent an imaginary character for Rosemary.  He built up a picture
of her as a callous creature who was amused by him and yet half
despised him, who played with him and kept him at arm's length, and
who would nevertheless fall into his arms if only he had a little
more money.  And Ravelston, who had never met Rosemary, did not
altogether disbelieve him.  He broke in:

'But I say, Gordon, look here.  This girl, Miss--Miss Waterlow, did
you say her name was?--Rosemary; doesn't she care for you at all,
really?'

Gordon's conscience pricked him, though not very deeply.  He could
not say that Rosemary did not care for him.

'Oh, yes, she does care for me.  In her own way, I dare say she
cares for me quite a lot.  But not enough, don't you see.  She
can't, while I've got no money.  It's all money.'

'But surely money isn't so important as all that?  After all, there
ARE other things.'

'What other things?  Don't you see that a man's whole personality
is bound up with his income?  His personality IS his income.  How
can you be attractive to a girl when you've got no money?  You
can't wear decent clothes, you can't take her out to dinner or to
the theatre or away for week-ends, you can't carry a cheery,
interesting atmosphere about with you.  And it's rot to say that
kind of thing doesn't matter.  It does.  If you haven't got money
there isn't even anywhere where you can meet.  Rosemary and I never
meet except in the streets or in picture galleries.  She lives in
some foul women's hostel, and my bitch of a landlady won't allow
women in the house.  Wandering up and down beastly wet streets--
that's what Rosemary associates me with.  Don't you see how it
takes the gilt off everything?'

Ravelston was distressed.  It must be pretty bloody when you
haven't even the money to take your girl out.  He tried to nerve
himself to say something, and failed.  With guilt, and also with
desire, he thought of Hermione's body, naked like a ripe warm
fruit.  With any luck she would have dropped in at the flat this
evening.  Probably she was waiting for him now.  He thought of the
unemployed in Middlesbrough.  Sexual starvation is awful among the
unemployed.  They were nearing the flat.  He glanced up at the
windows.  Yes, they were lighted up.  Hermione must be there.  She
had her own latchkey.

As they approached the flat Gordon edged closer to Ravelston.  Now
the evening was ending, and he must part from Ravelston, whom he
adored, and go back to his foul lonely bedroom.  And all evenings
ended in this way; the return through the dark streets to the
lonely room, the womanless bed.  And Ravelston would say 'Come up,
won't you?' and Gordon, in duty bound, would say, 'No.'  Never stay
too long with those you love--another commandment of the moneyless.

They halted at the foot of the steps.  Ravelston laid his gloved
hand on one of the iron spearheads of the railing.

'Come up, won't you?' he said without conviction.

'No, thanks.  It's time I was getting back.'

Ravelston's fingers tightened round the spearhead.  He pulled as
though to go up, but did not go.  Uncomfortably, looking over
Gordon's head into the distance, he said:

'I say, Gordon, look here.  You won't be offended if I say
something?'

'What?'

'I say, you know, I hate that business about you and your girl.
Not being able to take her out, and all that.  It's bloody, that
kind of thing.'

'Oh, it's nothing really.'

As soon as he heard Ravelston say that it was 'bloody', he knew
that he had been exaggerating.  He wished that he had not talked in
that silly self-pitiful way.  One says these things, with the
feeling that one cannot help saying them, and afterwards one is
sorry.

'I dare say I exaggerate,' he said.

'I say, Gordon, look here.  Let me lend you ten quid.  Take the
girl out to dinner a few times.  Or away for the week-end, or
something.  It might make all the difference.  I hate to think--'

Gordon frowned bitterly, almost fiercely.  He had stepped a pace
back, as though from a threat or an insult.  The terrible thing was
that the temptation to say 'Yes' had almost overwhelmed him.  There
was so much that ten quid would do!  He had a fleeting vision of
Rosemary and himself at a restaurant table--a bowl of grapes and
peaches, a bowing hovering waiter, a wine bottle dark and dusty in
its wicker cradle.

'No fear!' he said.

'I do wish you would.  I tell you I'd LIKE to lend it you.'

'Thanks.  But I prefer to keep my friends.'

'Isn't that rather--well, rather a bourgeois kind of thing to say?'

'Do you think it would be BORROWING if I took ten quid off you?  I
couldn't pay it back in ten years.'

'Oh, well!  It wouldn't matter so very much.'  Ravelston looked
away.  Out it had got to come--the disgraceful, hateful admission
that he found himself forced so curiously often to make!  'You
know, I've got quite a lot of money.'

'I know you have.  That's exactly why I won't borrow off you.'

'You know, Gordon, sometimes you're just a little bit--well,
pigheaded.'

'I dare say.  I can't help it.'

'Oh, well!  Good night, then.'

'Good night.'

Ten minutes later Ravelston rode southwards in a taxi, with
Hermione.  She had been waiting for him, asleep or half asleep in
one of the monstrous armchairs in front of the sitting-room fire.
Whenever there was nothing particular to do, Hermione always fell
asleep as promptly as an animal, and the more she slept the
healthier she became.  As he came across to her she woke and
stretched herself with voluptuous, sleepy writhings, half smiling,
half yawning up at him, one cheek and bare arm rosy in the
firelight.  Presently she mastered her yawns to greet him:

'Hullo, Philip!  Where have you been all this time?  I've been
waiting ages.'

'Oh, I've been out with a fellow.  Gordon Comstock.  I don't expect
you know him.  The poet.'

'Poet!  How much did he borrow off you?'

'Nothing.  He's not that kind of person.  He's rather a fool about
money, as a matter of fact.  But he's very gifted in his way.'

'You and your poets!  You look tired, Philip.  What time did you
have dinner?'

'Well--as a matter of fact I didn't have any dinner.'

'Didn't have any dinner!  Why?'

'Oh, well, you see--I don't know if you'll understand.  It was a
kind of accident.  It was like this.'

He explained.  Hermione burst out laughing and dragged herself into
a more upright position.

'Philip!  You ARE a silly old ass!  Going without your dinner, just
so as not to hurt that little beast's feelings!  You must have some
food at once.  And of course your char's gone home.  Why don't you
keep some proper servants, Philip?  I hate this hole-and-corner way
you live.  We'll go out and have supper at Modigliani's.'

'But it's after ten.  They'll be shut.'

'Nonsense!  They're open till two.  I'll ring up for a taxi.  I'm
not going to have you starving yourself.'

In the taxi she lay against him, still half asleep, her head
pillowed on his breast.  He thought of the unemployed in
Middlesbrough, seven in a room on twenty-five bob a week.  But the
girl's body was heavy against him, and Middlesbrough was very far
away.  Also he was damnably hungry.  He thought of his favourite
corner table at Modigliani's, and of that vile pub with its hard
benches, stale beer-stink, and brass spittoons.  Hermione was
sleepily lecturing him.

'Philip, why do you have to live in such a dreadful way?'

'But I don't live in a dreadful way.'

'Yes, you do.  Pretending you're poor when you're not, and living
in that poky flat with no servants, and going about with all these
beastly people.'

'What beastly people?'

'Oh, people like this poet friend of yours.  All those people who
write for your paper.  They only do it to cadge from you.  Of
course I know you're a Socialist.  So am I.  I mean we're all
Socialists nowadays.  But I don't see why you have to give all your
money away and make friends with the lower classes.  You can be a
Socialist AND have a good time, that's what I say.'

'Hermione, dear, please don't call them the lower classes!'

'Why not?  They ARE the lower classes, aren't they?'

'It's such a hateful expression.  Call them the working class,
can't you?'

'The working class, if you like, then.  But they smell just the
same.'

'You oughtn't to say that kind of thing,' he protested weakly.

'Do you know, Philip, sometimes I think you LIKE the lower
classes.'

'Of course I like them.'

'How disgusting.  How absolutely disgusting.'

She lay quiet, content to argue no longer, her arms round him, like
a sleepy siren.  The woman-scent breathed out of her, a powerful
wordless propaganda against all altruism and all justice.  Outside
Modigliani's they had paid off the taxi and were moving for the
door when a big, lank wreck of a man seemed to spring up from the
paving-stones in front of them.  He stood across their path like
some fawning beast, with dreadful eagerness and yet timorously, as
though afraid that Ravelston would strike him.  His face came close
up to Ravelston's--a dreadful face, fish-white and scrubby-bearded
to the eyes.  The words 'A cup of tea, guv'nor!' were breathed
through carious teeth.  Ravelston shrank from him in disgust.  He
could not help it.  His hand moved automatically to his pocket.
But in the same instant Hermione caught him by the arm and hauled
him inside the restaurant.

'You'd give away every penny you've got if I let you,' she said.

They went to their favourite table in the corner.  Hermione played
with some grapes, but Ravelston was very hungry.  He ordered the
grilled rumpsteak he had been thinking of, and half a bottle of
Beaujolais.  The fat, white-haired Italian waiter, an old friend of
Ravelston's, brought the smoking steak.  Ravelston cut it open.
Lovely, its red-blue heart!  In Middlesbrough the unemployed huddle
in frowzy beds, bread and marg and milkless tea in their bellies.
He settled down to his steak with all the shameful joy of a dog
with a stolen leg of mutton.

Gordon walked rapidly homewards.  It was cold.  The fifth of
December--real winter now.  Circumcise ye your foreskins, saith the
Lord.  The damp wind blew spitefully through the naked trees.
Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over.  The poem he had begun on
Wednesday, of which six stanzas were now finished, came back to his
mind.  He did not dislike it at this moment.  It was queer how
talking with Ravelston always bucked him up.  The mere contact with
Ravelston seemed to reassure him somehow.  Even when their talk had
been unsatisfactory, he came away with the feeling that, after all,
he wasn't quite a failure.  Half aloud he repeated the six finished
stanzas.  They were not bad, not bad at all.

But intermittently he was going over in his mind the things he had
said to Ravelston.  He stuck to everything he had said.  The
humiliation of poverty!  That's what they can't understand and
won't understand.  Not hardship--you don't suffer hardship on two
quid a week, and if you did it wouldn't matter--but just
humiliation, the awful, bloody humiliation.  The way it gives
everyone the right to stamp on you.  The way everyone WANTS to
stamp on you.  Ravelston wouldn't believe it.  He had too much
decency, that was why.  He thought you could be poor and still be
treated like a human being.  But Gordon knew better.  He went into
the house repeating to himself that he knew better.

There was a letter waiting for him on the hall tray.  His heart
jumped.  All letters excited him nowadays.  He went up the stairs
three at a time, shut himself in and lit the gas.  The letter was
from Doring.


DEAR COMSTOCK,--What a pity you didn't turn up on Saturday.  There
were some people I wanted you to meet.  We did tell you it was
Saturday and not Thursday this time, didn't we?  My wife says she's
certain she told you.  Anyway, we're having another party on the
twenty-third, a sort of before-Christmas party, about the same
time.  Won't you come then?  Don't forget the date this time.

Yours

PAUL DORING


A painful convulsion happened below Gordon's ribs.  So Doring was
pretending that it was all a mistake--was pretending not to have
insulted him!  True, he could not actually have gone there on
Saturday, because on Saturday he had to be at the shop; still, it
was the intention that counted.

His heart sickened as he re-read the words 'some people I wanted
you to meet'.  Just like his bloody luck!  He thought of the people
he might have met--editors of highbrow magazines, for instance.
They might have given him books to review or asked to see his poems
or Lord knew what.  For a moment he was dreadfully tempted to
believe that Doring had spoken the truth.  Perhaps after all they
HAD told him it was Saturday and not Thursday.  Perhaps if he
searched his memory he might remember about it--might even find the
letter itself lying among his muddle of papers.  But no!  He
wouldn't think of it.  He fought down the temptation.  The Dorings
HAD insulted him on purpose.  He was poor, therefore they had
insulted him.  If you are poor, people will insult you.  It was his
creed.  Stick to it!

He went across to the table, tearing Doring's letter into small
bits.  The aspidistra stood in its pot, dull green, ailing,
pathetic in its sickly ugliness.  As he sat down, he pulled it
towards him and looked at it meditatively.  There was the intimacy
of hatred between the aspidistra and him.  'I'll beat you yet, you
b--,' he whispered to the dusty leaves.

Then he rummaged among his papers until he found a clean sheet,
took his pen and wrote in his small, neat hand, right in the middle
of the sheet:


DEAR DORING,--With reference to your letter:  Go and ---- yourself.

Yours truly

GORDON COMSTOCK


He stuck it into an envelope, addressed it, and at once went out to
get stamps from the slot machine.  Post it tonight: these things
look different in the morning.  He dropped it into the pillar-box.
So there was another friend gone west.



6


This woman business!  What a bore it is!  What a pity we can't cut
it right out, or at least be like the animals--minutes of ferocious
lust and months of icy chastity.  Take a cock pheasant, for
example.  He jumps up on the hens' backs without so much as a with
your leave or by your leave.  And no sooner it is over than the
whole subject is out of his mind.  He hardly even notices his hens
any longer; he ignores them, or simply pecks them if they come too
near his food.  He is not called upon to support his offspring,
either.  Lucky pheasant!  How different from the lord of creation,
always on the hop between his memory and his conscience!

Tonight Gordon wasn't even pretending to do any work.  He had gone
out again immediately after supper.  He walked southward, rather
slowly, thinking about women.  It was a mild, misty night, more
like autumn than winter.  This was Tuesday and he had four and
fourpence left.  He could go down to the Crichton if he chose.
Doubtless Flaxman and his pals were already boozing there.  But the
Crichton, which had seemed like paradise when he had no money,
bored and disgusted him when it was in his power to go there.  He
hated the stale, beery place, and the sights, sounds, smells, all
so blatantly and offensively male.  There were no women there; only
the barmaid with her lewd smile which seemed to promise everything
and promised nothing.

Women, women!  The mist that hung motionless in the air turned the
passers-by into ghosts at twenty yards' distance; but in the little
pools of light about the lamp-posts there were glimpses of girls'
faces.  He thought of Rosemary, of women in general, and of
Rosemary again.  All afternoon he had been thinking of her.  It was
with a kind of resentment that he thought of her small, strong
body, which he had never yet seen naked.  How damned unfair it is
that we are filled to the brim with these tormenting desires and
then forbidden to satisfy them!  Why should one, merely because
one has no money, be deprived of THAT?  It seems so natural, so
necessary, so much a part of the inalienable rights of a human
being.  As he walked down the dark street, through the cold yet
languorous air, there was a strangely hopeful feeling in his
breast.  He half believed that somewhere ahead in the darkness a
woman's body was waiting for him.  But also he knew that no woman
was waiting, not even Rosemary.  It was eight days now since she
had even written to him.  The little beast!  Eight whole days
without writing!  When she knew how much her letters meant to him!
How manifest it was that she didn't care for him any longer, that
he was merely a nuisance to her with his poverty and his shabbiness
and his everlasting pestering of her to say she loved him!  Very
likely she would never write again.  She was sick of him--sick of
him because he had no money.  What else could you expect?  He had
no hold over her.  No money, therefore no hold.  In the last
resort, what holds a woman to any man, except money?

A girl came down the pavement alone.  He passed her in the light of
the lamp-post.  A working-class girl, eighteen years old it might
be, hatless, with wildrose face.  She turned her head quickly when
she saw him looking at her.  She dreaded to meet his eyes.  Beneath
the thin silky raincoat she was wearing, belted at the waist, her
youthful flanks showed supple and trim.  He could have turned and
followed her, almost.  But what was the use?  She'd run away or
call a policeman.  My golden locks time hath to silver turned, he
thought.  He was thirty and moth-eaten.  What woman worth having
would ever look at him again?

This woman business!  Perhaps you'd feel differently about it if
you were married?  But he had taken an oath against marriage long
ago.  Marriage is only a trap set for you by the money-god.  You
grab the bait; snap goes the trap; and there you are, chained by
the leg to some 'good' job till they cart you to Kensal Green.
And what a life!  Licit sexual intercourse in the shade of the
aspidistra.  Pram-pushing and sneaky adulteries.  And the wife
finding you out and breaking the cut-glass whisky decanter over
your head.

Nevertheless he perceived that in a way it is necessary to marry.
If marriage is bad, the alternative is worse.  For a moment he
wished that he were married; he pined for the difficulty of it, the
reality, the pain.  And marriage must be indissoluble, for better
for worse, for richer for poorer, till death do you part.  The old
Christian ideal--marriage tempered by adultery.  Commit adultery if
you must, but at any rate have the decency to CALL it adultery.
None of that American soul-mate slop.  Have your fun and then sneak
home, juice of the forbidden fruit dripping from your whiskers, and
take the consequences.  Cut-glass whisky decanters broken over your
head, nagging, burnt meals, children crying, clash and thunder of
embattled mothers-in-law.  Better that, perhaps, than horrible
freedom?  You'd know, at least, that it was real life that you were
living.

But anyway, how can you marry on two quid a week?  Money, money,
always money!  The devil of it is, that outside marriage, no decent
relationship with a woman is possible.  His mind moved backwards,
over his ten years of adult life.  The faces of women flowed
through his memory.  Ten or a dozen of them there had been.  Tarts,
also.  Comme au long d'un cadavre un cadavre etendu.  And even when
they were not tarts it had been squalid, always squalid.  Always it
had started in a sort of cold-blooded wilfulness and ended in some
mean, callous desertion.  That, too, was money.  Without money, you
can't be straightforward in your dealings with women.  For without
money, you can't pick and choose, you've got to take what women you
can get; and then, necessarily, you've got to break free of them.
Constancy, like all other virtues, has got to be paid for in money.
And the mere fact that he had rebelled against the money code and
wouldn't settle down in the prison of a 'good' job--a thing no
woman will ever understand--had brought a quality of impermanence,
of deception, into all his affairs with women.  Abjuring money, he
ought to have abjured women to.  Serve the money-god, or do without
women--those are the only alternatives.  And both were equally
impossible.

From the side-street just ahead, a shade of white light cut through
the mist, and there was a bellowing of street hawkers.  It was
Luton Road, where they have the open-air market two evenings a
week.  Gordon turned to his left, into the market.  He often came
this way.  The street was so crowded that you could only with
difficulty thread your way down the cabbage-littered alley between
the stalls.  In the glare of hanging electric bulbs, the stuff on
the stalls glowed with fine lurid colours--hacked, crimson chunks
of meat, piles of oranges and green and white broccoli, stiff,
glassy-eyed rabbits, live eels looping in enamel troughs, plucked
fowls hanging in rows, sticking out their naked breasts like
guardsmen naked on parade.  Gordon's spirits revived a little.  He
liked the noise, the bustle, the vitality.  Whenever you see a
street-market you know there's hope for England yet.  But even here
he felt his solitude.  Girls were thronging everywhere, in knots of
four or five, prowling desirously about the stalls of cheap
underwear and swapping backchat and screams of laughter with the
youths who followed them.  None had eyes for Gordon.  He walked
among them as though invisible, save that their bodies avoided him
when he passed them.  Ah, look there!  Involuntarily he paused.
Over a pile of art-silk undies on a stall, three girls were
bending, intent, their faces close together--three youthful faces,
flower-like in the harsh light, clustering side by side like a
truss of blossom on a Sweet William or phlox.  His heart stirred.
No eyes for him, of course!  One girl looked up.  Ah!  Hurriedly,
with an offended air, she looked away again.  A delicate flush like
a wash of aquarelle flooded her face.  The hard, sexual stare in
his eyes had frightened her.  They flee from me that sometime did
me seek!  He walked on.  If only Rosemary were here!  He forgave
her now for not writing to him.  He could forgive her anything, if
only she were here.  He knew how much she meant to him, because she
alone of all women was willing to save him from the humiliation of
his loneliness.

At this moment he looked up, and saw something that made his heart
jump.  He changed the focus of his eyes abruptly.  For a moment he
thought he was imagining it.  But no!  It WAS Rosemary!

She was coming down the alley between the stalls, twenty or thirty
yards away.  It was as though his desire had called her into being.
She had not seen him yet.  She came towards him, a small debonair
figure, picking her way nimbly through the crowd and the muck
underfoot, her face scarcely visible because of a flat black hat
which she wore cocked down over her eyes like a Harrow boy's straw
hat.  He started towards her and called her name.

'Rosemary!  Hi, Rosemary!'

A blue-aproned man thumbing codfish on a stall turned to stare at
him.  Rosemary did not hear him because of the din.  He called
again.

'Rosemary!  I say, Rosemary!'

They were only a few yards apart now.  She started and looked up.

'Gordon!  What are you doing here?'

'What are YOU doing here?'

'I was coming to see you.'

'But how did you know I was here?'

'I didn't.  I always come this way.  I get out of the tube at
Camden Town.'

Rosemary sometimes came to see Gordon at Willowbed Road.  Mrs
Wisbeach would inform him sourly that 'there was a young woman to
see him', and he would come downstairs and they would go out for a
walk in the streets.  Rosemary was never allowed indoors, not even
into the hall.  That was a rule of the house.  You would have
thought 'young women' were plague-rats by the way Mrs Wisbeach
spoke of them.  Gordon took Rosemary by the upper arm and made to
pull her against him.

'Rosemary!  Oh, what a joy to see you again!  I was so vilely
lonely.  Why didn't you come before?'

She shook off his hand and stepped back out of his reach.  Under
her slanting hat-brim she gave him a glance that was intended to be
angry.

'Let me go, now!  I'm very angry with you.  I very nearly didn't
come after that beastly letter you sent me.'

'What beastly letter?'

'You know very well.'

'No, I don't.  Oh, well, let's get out of this.  Somewhere where we
can talk.  This way.'

He took her arm, but she shook him off again, continuing however,
to walk at his side.  Her steps were quicker and shorter than his.
And walking beside him she had the appearance of something
extremely small, nimble, and young, as though he had had some
lively little animal, a squirrel for instance, frisking at his
side.  In reality she was not very much smaller than Gordon, and
only a few months younger.  But no one would ever have described
Rosemary as a spinster of nearly thirty, which in fact she was.
She was a strong, agile girl, with stiff black hair, a small
triangular face, and very pronounced eyebrows.  It was one of those
small, peaky faces, full of character, which one sees in sixteenth-
century portraits.  The first time you saw her take her hat off you
got a surprise, for on her crown three white hairs glittered among
the black ones like silver wires.  It was typical of Rosemary that
she never bothered to pull the white hairs out.  She still thought
of herself as a very young girl, and so did everybody else.  Yet if
you looked closely the marks of time were plain enough on her face.

Gordon walked more boldly with Rosemary at his side.  He was proud
of her.  People were looking at her, and therefore at him as well.
He was no longer invisible to women.  As always, Rosemary was
rather nicely dressed.  It was a mystery how she did it on four
pounds a week.  He liked particularly the hat she was wearing--one
of those flat felt hats which were then coming into fashion and
which caricatured a clergyman's shovel hat.  There was something
essentially frivolous about it.  In some way difficult to be
described, the angle at which it was cocked forward harmonized
appealingly with the curve of Rosemary's behind.

'I like your hat,' he said.

In spite of herself, a small smile flickered at the corner of her
mouth.

'It IS rather nice,' she said, giving the hat a little pat with her
hand.

She was still pretending to be angry, however.  She took care that
their bodies should not touch.  As soon as they had reached the end
of the stalls and were in the main street she stopped and faced him
sombrely.

'What do you mean by writing me letters like that?' she said.

'Letters like what?'

'Saying I'd broken your heart.'

'So you have.'

'It looks like it, doesn't it!'

'I don't know.  It certainly feels like it.'

The words were spoken half jokingly, and yet they made her look
more closely at him--at his pale, wasted face, his uncut hair, his
general down-at-heel, neglected appearance.  Her heart softened
instantly, and yet she frowned.  Why WON'T he take care of himself?
was the thought in her mind.  They had moved closer together.  He
took her by the shoulders.  She let him do it, and, putting her
small arms round him, squeezed him very hard, partly in affection,
partly in exasperation.

'Gordon, you ARE a miserable creature!' she said.

'Why am I a miserable creature?'

'Why can't you look after yourself properly?  You're a perfect
scarecrow.  Look at these awful old clothes you're wearing!'

'They're suited to my station.  One can't dress decently on two
quid a week, you know.'

'But surely there's no need to go about looking like a rag-bag?
Look at this button on your coat, broken in half!'

She fingered the broken button, then suddenly lifted his
discoloured Woolworth's tie aside.  In some feminine way she had
divined that he had no buttons on his shirt.

'Yes, AGAIN!  Not a single button.  You are awful, Gordon!'

'I tell you I can't be bothered with things like that.  I've got a
soul above buttons.'

'But why not give them to ME and let me sew them on for you?  And,
oh, Gordon!  You haven't even shaved today.  How absolutely beastly
of you.  You might at least take the trouble to shave every
morning.'

'I can't afford to shave every morning,' he said perversely.

'What DO you mean, Gordon?  It doesn't cost money to shave, does
it?'

'Yes, it does.  Everything costs money.  Cleanness, decency,
energy, self-respect--everything.  It's all money.  Haven't I told
you that a million times?'

She squeezed his ribs again--she was surprisingly strong--and
frowned up at him, studying his face as a mother looks at some
peevish child of which she is unreasonably fond.

'WHAT a fool I am!' she said.

'In what way a fool?'

'Because I'm so fond of you.'

'Are you fond of me?'

'Of course I am.  You know I am.  I adore you.  It's idiotic of
me.'

'Then come somewhere where it's dark.  I want to kiss you.'

'Fancy being kissed by a man who hasn't even shaved!'

'Well, that'll be a new experience for you.'

'No, it won't, Gordon.  Not after knowing YOU for two years.'

'Oh, well, come on, anyway.'

They found an almost dark alley between the backs of houses.  All
their lovemaking was done in such places.  The only place where
they could ever be private was the streets.  He pressed her
shoulders against the rough damp bricks of the wall.  She turned
her face readily up to his and clung to him with a sort of eager
violent affection, like a child.  And yet all the while, though
they were body to body, it was as though there were a shield
between them.  She kissed him as a child might have done, because
she knew that he expected to be kissed.  It was always like this.
Only at very rare moments could he awake in her the beginnings of
physical desire; and these she seemed afterwards to forget, so that
he always had to begin at the beginning over again.  There was
something defensive in the feeling of her small, shapely body.  She
longed to know the meaning of physical love, but also she dreaded
it.  It would destroy her youth, the youthful, sexless world in
which she chose to live.

He parted his mouth from hers in order to speak to her.

'Do you love me?' he said.

'Of course, silly.  Why do you always ask me that?'

'I like to hear you say it.  Somehow I never feel sure of you till
I've heard you say it.'

'But why?'

'Oh, well, you might have changed your mind.  After all, I'm not
exactly the answer to a maiden's prayer.  I'm thirty, and moth-
eaten at that.'

'Don't be so absurd, Gordon!  Anyone would think you were a
hundred, to hear you talk.  You know I'm the same age as you are.'

'Yes, but not moth-eaten.'

She rubbed her cheek against his, feeling the roughness of his day-
old beard.  Their bellies were close together.  He thought of the
two years he had wanted her and never had her.  With his lips
almost against her ear he murmured:

'Are you EVER going to sleep with me?'

'Yes, some day I will.  Not now.  Some day.'

'It's always "some day".  It's been "some day" for two years now.'

'I know.  But I can't help it.'

He pressed her back against the wall, pulled off the absurd flat
hat, and buried his face in her hair.  It was tormenting to be so
close to her and all for nothing.  He put a hand under her chin and
lifted her small face up to his, trying to distinguish her features
in the almost complete darkness.

'Say you will, Rosemary.  There's a dear!  Do!'

'You know I'm going to SOME time.'

'Yes, but not SOME time--now.  I don't mean this moment, but soon.
When we get an opportunity.  Say you will!'

'I can't.  I can't promise.'

'Say "yes," Rosemary.  PLEASE do!'

'No.'

Still stroking her invisible face, he quoted:


'Veuillez le dire donc selon
Que vous estes benigne et doulche,
Car ce doulx mot n'est pas si long
Qu'il vous face mal en la bouche.'


'What does that mean?'

He translated it.

'I can't, Gordon.  I just can't.'

'Say "yes," Rosemary, there's a dear.  Surely it's as easy to say
"yes" as "no"?'

'No, it isn't, it's easy enough for you.  You're a man.  It's
different for a woman.'

'Say "yes," Rosemary!  "Yes"--it's such an easy word.  Go on, now;
say it.  "Yes!"'

'Anyone would think you were teaching a parrot to talk, Gordon.'

'Oh, damn!  Don't make jokes about it.'

It was not much use arguing.  Presently they came out into the
street and walked on, southward.  Somehow, from Rosemary's swift,
neat movements, from her general air of a girl who knows how to
look after herself and who yet treats life mainly as a joke, you
could make a good guess at her upbringing and her mental background.
She was the youngest child of one of those huge hungry families
which still exist here and there in the middle classes.  There had
been fourteen children all told--the father was a country solicitor.
Some of Rosemary's sisters were married, some of them were
schoolmistresses or running typing bureaux; the brothers were
farming in Canada, on tea-plantations in Ceylon, in obscure
regiments of the Indian Army.  Like all women who have had an
eventful girlhood, Rosemary wanted to remain a girl.  That was why,
sexually, she was so immature.  She had kept late into life the
high-spirited sexless atmosphere of a big family.  Also she had
absorbed into her very bones the code of fair play and live-and-
let-live.  She was profoundly magnanimous, quite incapable of
spiritual bullying.  From Gordon, whom she adored, she put up with
almost anything.  It was the measure of her magnanimity that never
once, in the two years that she had known him, had she blamed him
for not attempting to earn a proper living.

Gordon was aware of all this.  But at the moment he was thinking of
other things.  In the pallid circles of light about the lamp-posts,
beside Rosemary's smaller, trimmer figure, he felt graceless,
shabby, and dirty.  He wished very much that he had shaved that
morning.  Furtively he put a hand into his pocket and felt his
money, half afraid--it was a recurrent fear with him--that he might
have dropped a coin.  However, he could feel the milled edge of a
form, his principal coin at the moment.  Four and fourpence left.
He couldn't possibly take her out to supper, he reflected.  They'd
have to trail dismally up and down the streets, as usual, or at
best go to a Lyons for a coffee.  Bloody!  How can you have any fun
when you've got no money?  He said broodingly:

'Of course it all comes back to money.'

This remark came out of the blue.  She looked up at him in surprise.

'What do you mean, it all comes back to money?'

'I mean the way nothing ever goes right in my life.  It's always
money, money, money that's at the bottom of everything.  And
especially between me and you.  That's why you don't really love
me.  There's a sort of film of money between us.  I can feel it
every time I kiss you.'

'Money!  What HAS money got to do with it, Gordon?'

'Money's got to do with everything.  If I had more money you'd love
me more.'

'Of course, I wouldn't!  Why should I?'

'You couldn't help it.  Don't you see that if I had more money I'd
be more worth loving?  Look at me now!  Look at my face, look at
these clothes I'm wearing, look at everything else about me.  Do
you suppose I'd be like that if I had two thousand a year?  If I
had more money I should be a different person.'

'If you were a different person I shouldn't love you.'

'That's nonsense, too.  But look at it like this.  If we were
married would you sleep with me?'

'What questions you do ask!  Of course I would.  Otherwise, where
would be the sense of being married?'

'Well then, suppose I was decently well off, WOULD you marry me?'

'What's the good of talking about it, Gordon?  You know we can't
afford to marry.'

'Yes, but IF we could.  Would you?'

'I don't know.  Yes, I would, I dare say.'

'There you are, then!  That's what I said--money!'

'No, Gordon, no!  That's not fair!  You're twisting my words
round.'

'No, I'm not.  You've got this money-business at the bottom of your
heart.  Every woman's got it.  You wish I was in a GOOD job now,
don't you?'

'Not in the way you mean it.  I'd like you to be earning more
money--yes.'

'And you think I ought to have stayed on at the New Albion, don't
you?  You'd like me to go back there now and write slogans for
Q. T. Sauce and Truweet Breakfast Crisps.  Wouldn't you?'

'No, I wouldn't.  I NEVER said that.'

'You thought it, though.  It's what any woman would think.'

He was being horribly unfair, and he knew it.  The one thing
Rosemary had never said, the thing she was probably quite incapable
of saying, was that he ought to go back to the New Albion.  But
for the moment he did not even want to be fair.  His sexual
disappointment still pricked him.  With a sort of melancholy triumph
he reflected that, after all, he was right.  It was money that stood
between them.  Money, money, all is money!  He broke into a
half-serious tirade:

'Women!  What nonsense they make of all our ideas!  Because one
can't keep free of women, and every woman makes one pay the same
price.  "Chuck away your decency and make more money"--that's what
women say.  "Chuck away your decency, suck the blacking off the
boss's boots, and buy me a better fur coat than the woman next
door."  Every man you can see has got some blasted woman hanging
round his neck like a mermaid, dragging him down and down--down to
some beastly little semi-detached villa in Putney, with hire-
purchase furniture and a portable radio and an aspidistra in the
window.  It's women who make all progress impossible.  Not that I
believe in progress,' he added rather unsatisfactorily.

'What absolute NONSENSE you do talk, Gordon!  As though women were
to blame for everything!'

'They are to blame, finally.  Because it's the women who really
believe in the money-code.  The men obey it; they have to, but they
don't believe in it.  It's the women who keep it going.  The women
and their Putney villas and their fur coats and their babies and
their aspidistras.'

'It is NOT the women, Gordon!  Women didn't invent money, did
they?'

'It doesn't matter who invented it, the point is that it's women
who worship it.  A woman's got a sort of mystical feeling towards
money.  Good and evil in a women's mind mean simply money and no
money.  Look at you and me.  You won't sleep with me, simply and
solely because I've got no money.  Yes, that IS the reason.  (He
squeezed her arm to silence her.)  You admitted it only a minute
ago.  And if I had a decent income you'd go to bed with me
tomorrow.  It's not because you're mercenary.  You don't want me
to PAY you for sleeping with me.  It's not so crude as that.  But
you've got that deep-down mystical feeling that somehow a man
without money isn't worthy of you.  He's a weakling, a sort of
half-man--that's how you feel.  Hercules, god of strength and god
of money--you'll find that in Lempriere.  It's women who keep all
mythologies going.  Women!'

'Women!' echoed Rosemary on a different note.  'I hate the way men
are always talking about WOMEN.  "Women do this," and "WOMEN do
that"--as though all women were exactly the same!'

'Of course all women are the same!  What does any woman want except
a safe income and two babies and a semi-detached villa in Putney
with an aspidistra in the window?'

'Oh, you and your aspidistras!'

'On the contrary, YOUR aspidistras.  You're the sex that cultivates
them.'

She squeezed his arm and burst out laughing.  She was really
extraordinarily good-natured.  Besides, what he was saying was such
palpable nonsense that it did not even exasperate her.  Gordon's
diatribes against women were in reality a kind of perverse joke;
indeed, the whole sex-war is at bottom only a joke.  For the same
reason it is great fun to pose as a feminist or an anti-feminist
according to your sex.  As they walked on they began a violent
argument upon the eternal and idiotic question of Man versus Woman.
The moves in this argument--for they had it as often as they met--
were always very much the same.  Men are brutes and women are
soulless, and women have always been kept in subjection and they
jolly well ought to be kept in subjection, and look at Patient
Griselda and look at Lady Astor, and what about polygamy and Hindu
widows, and what about Mother Pankhurst's piping days when every
decent woman wore mousetraps on her garters and couldn't look at a
man without feeling her right hand itch for a castrating knife?
Gordon and Rosemary never grew tired of this kind of thing.  Each
laughed with delight at the other's absurdities.  There was a merry
war between them.  Even as they disputed, arm in arm, they pressed
their bodies delightedly together.  They were very happy.  Indeed,
they adored one another.  Each was to the other a standing joke and
an object infinitely precious.  Presently a red and blue haze of
Neon lights appeared in the distance.  They had reached the
beginning of the Tottenham Court Road.  Gordon put his arm round
her waist and turned her to the right, down a darkish side-street.
They were so happy together that they had got to kiss.  They stood
clasped together under the lamp-post, still laughing, two enemies
breast to breast.  She rubbed her cheek against his.

'Gordon, you are such a dear old ass!  I can't help loving you,
scrubby jaw and all.'

'Do you really?'

'Really and truly.'

Her arms still round him, she leaned a little backwards, pressing
her belly against his with a sort of innocent voluptuousness.

'Life IS worth living, isn't it, Gordon?'

'Sometimes.'

'If only we could meet a bit oftener!  Sometimes I don't see you
for weeks.'

'I know.  It's bloody.  If you knew how I hate my evenings alone!'

'One never seems to have time for anything.  I don't even leave
that beastly office till nearly seven.  What do you do with
yourself on Sundays, Gordon?'

'Oh, God!  Moon about and look miserable, like everyone else.'

'Why not let's go out for a walk in the country sometimes.  Then we
would have all day together.  Next Sunday, for instance?'

The words chilled him.  They brought back the thought of money,
which he had succeeded in putting out of his mind for half an hour
past.  A trip into the country would cost money, far more than he
could possibly afford.  He said in a non-committal tone that
transferred the whole thing to the realm of abstraction:

'Of course, it's not too bad in Richmond Park on Sundays.  Or even
Hampstead Heath.  Especially if you go in the mornings before the
crowds get there.'

'Oh, but do let's go right out into the country!  Somewhere in
Surrey, for instance, or to Burnham Beeches.  It's so lovely at
this time of year, with all the dead leaves on the ground, and you
can walk all day and hardly meet a soul.  We'll walk for miles and
miles and have dinner at a pub.  It would be such fun.  Do let's!'

Blast!  The money-business was coming back.  A trip even as far as
Burnham Beeches would cost all of ten bob.  He did some hurried
arithmetic.  Five bob he might manage, and Julia would 'lend' him
five; GIVE him five, that was.  At the same moment he remembered
his oath, constantly renewed and always broken, not to 'borrow'
money off Julia.  He said in the same casual tone as before:

'It WOULD be rather fun.  I should think we might manage it.  I'll
let you know later in the week, anyway.'

They came out of the side-street, still arm in arm.  There was a
pub on the corner.  Rosemary stood on tiptoe, and, clinging to
Gordon's arm to support herself, managed to look over the frosted
lower half of the window.

'Look, Gordon, there's a clock in there.  It's nearly half past
nine.  Aren't you getting frightfully hungry?'

'No,' he said instantly and untruthfully.

'I am.  I'm simply starving.  Let's go and have something to eat
somewhere.'  Money again!  One moment more, and he must confess
that he had only four and fourpence in the world--four and
fourpence to last till Friday.

'I couldn't eat anything,' he said.  'I might manage a drink, I
dare say.  Let's go and have some coffee or something.  I expect
we'll find a Lyons open.'

'Oh, don't let's go to a Lyons!  I know such a nice little Italian
restaurant, only just down the road.  We'll have Spaghetti
Napolitaine and a bottle of red wine.  I adore spaghetti.  Do
let's!'

His heart sank.  It was no good.  He would have to own up.  Supper
at the Italian Restaurant could not possibly cost less than five
bob for the two of them.  He said almost sullenly:

'It's about time I was getting home, as a matter of fact.'

'Oh, Gordon!  Already?  Why?'

'Oh, well!  If you MUST know, I've only got four and fourpence in
the world.  And it's got to last till Friday.'

Rosemary stopped short.  She was so angry that she pinched his arm
with all her strength, meaning to hurt him and punish him.

'Gordon, you ARE an ass!  You're a perfect idiot!  You're the most
unspeakable idiot I've ever seen!'

'Why am I an idiot?'

'Because what does it matter whether you've got any money!  I'm
asking YOU to have supper with ME.'

He freed his arm from hers and stood away from her.  He did not
want to look her in the face.

'What!  Do you think I'd go to a restaurant and let you pay for my
food?'

'But why not?'

'Because one can't do that sort of thing.  It isn't done.'

'It "isn't done"!  You'll be saying it's "not cricket" in another
moment.  WHAT "isn't done"?'

'Letting you pay for my meals.  A man pays for a woman, a woman
doesn't pay for a man.'

'Oh, Gordon!  Are we living in the reign of Queen Victoria?'

'Yes, we are, as far as that kind of thing's concerned.  Ideas
don't change so quickly.'

'But MY ideas have changed.'

'No, they haven't.  You think they have, but they haven't.  You've
been brought up as a woman, and you can't help behaving like a
woman, however much you don't want to.'

'But what do you mean by BEHAVING LIKE A WOMAN, anyway?'

'I tell you every woman's the same when it comes to a thing like
this.  A woman despises a man who's dependent on her and sponges on
her.  She may say she doesn't, she may THINK she doesn't, but she
does.  She can't help it.  If I let you pay for my meals YOU'D
despise me.'

He had turned away.  He knew how abominably he was behaving.  But
somehow he had got to say these things.  The feeling that people--
even Rosemary--MUST despise him for his poverty was too strong to
be overcome.  Only by rigid, jealous independence could he keep his
self-respect.  Rosemary was really distressed this time.  She
caught his arm and pulled him round, making him face her.  With an
insistent gesture, angrily and yet demanding to be loved, she
pressed her breast against him.

'Gordon!  I won't let you say such things.  How can you say I'd
ever despise you?'

'I tell you you couldn't help it if I let myself sponge on you.'

'Sponge on me!  What expressions you do use!  How is it sponging on
me to let me pay for your supper just for once!'

He could feel the small breasts, firm and round, just beneath his
own.  She looked up at him, frowning and yet not far from tears.
She thought him perverse, unreasonable, cruel.  But her physical
nearness distracted him.  At this moment all he could remember was
that in two years she had never yielded to him.  She had starved
him of the one thing that mattered.  What was the good of pretending
that she loved him when in the last essential she recoiled?  He
added with a kind of deadly joy:

'In a way you do despise me.  Oh, yes, I know you're fond of me.
But after all, you can't take me quite seriously.  I'm a kind of
joke to you.  You're fond of me, and yet I'm not quite your equal--
that's how you feel.'

It was what he had said before, but with this difference, that now
he meant it, or said it as if he meant it.  She cried out with
tears in her voice:

'I don't, Gordon, I don't!  You KNOW I don't!'

'You do.  That's why you won't sleep with me.  Didn't I tell you
that before?'

She looked up at him an instant longer, and then buried her face in
his breast as suddenly as though ducking from a blow.  It was
because she had burst into tears.  She wept against his breast,
angry with him, hating him, and yet clinging to him like a child.
It was the childish way in which she clung to him, as a mere male
breast to weep on, that hurt him most.  With a sort of self-hatred
he remembered the other women who in just the same way had cried
against his breast.  It seemed the only thing he could do with
women, to make them cry.  With his arm round her shoulders he
caressed her clumsily, trying to console her.

'You've gone and made me cry!' she whimpered in self-contempt.

'I'm sorry!  Rosemary, dear one!  Don't cry, PLEASE don't cry.'

'Gordon, dearest!  WHY do you have to be so beastly to me?'

'I'm sorry, I'm sorry!  Sometimes I can't help it.'

'But why?  Why?'

She had got over her crying.  Rather more composed, she drew away
from him and felt for something to wipe her eyes.  Neither of them
had a handkerchief.  Impatiently, she wrung the tears out of her
eyes with her knuckles.

'How silly we always are!  Now, Gordon, BE nice for once.  Come
along to the restaurant and have some supper and let me pay for
it.'

'No.'

'Just this once.  Never mind about the old money-business.  Do it
just to please me.'

'I tell you I can't do that kind of thing.  I've got to keep my end
up.'

'But what do you mean, keep your end up?'

'I've made a war on money, and I've got to keep the rules.  The
first rule is never to take charity.'

'Charity!  Oh, Gordon, I DO think you're silly!'

She squeezed his ribs again.  It was a sign of peace.  She did not
understand him, probably never would understand him; yet she
accepted him as he was, hardly even protesting against his
unreasonableness.  As she put her face up to be kissed he noticed
that her lips were salt.  A tear had trickled here.  He strained
her against him.  The hard defensive feeling had gone out of her
body.  She shut her eyes and sank against him and into him as
though her bones had grown weak, and her lips parted and her small
tongue sought for his.  It was very seldom that she did that.  And
suddenly, as he felt her body yielding, he seemed to know with
certainty that their struggle was ended.  She was his now when he
chose to take her, and yet perhaps she did not fully understand
what it was that she was offering; it was simply an instinctive
movement of generosity, a desire to reassure him--to smooth away
that hateful feeling of being unloveable and unloved.  She said
nothing of this in words.  It was the feeling of her body that
seemed to say it.  But even if this had been the time and the place
he could not have taken her.  At this moment he loved her but did
not desire her.  His desire could only return at some future time
when there was no quarrel fresh in his mind and no consciousness of
four and fourpence in his pocket to daunt him.

Presently they separated their mouths, though still clinging
closely together.

'How stupid it is, the way we quarrel, isn't it Gordon?  When we
meet so seldom.'

'I know.  It's all my fault.  I can't help it.  Things rub me up.
It's money at the bottom of it, always money.'

'Oh, money!  You let it worry you too much, Gordon.'

'Impossible.  It's the only thing worth worrying about.'

'But, anyway, we WILL go out into the country next Sunday, won't
we?  To Burnham Beeches or somewhere.  It would be so nice if we
could.'

'Yes, I'd love to.  We'll go early and be out all day.  I'll raise
the train fares somehow.'

'But you'll let me pay my own fare, won't you?'

'No, I'd rather I paid them, but we'll go, anyway.'

'And you really won't let me pay for your supper--just this once,
just to show you trust me?'

'No, I can't.  I'm sorry.  I've told you why.'

'Oh, dear!  I suppose we shall have to say good night.  It's
getting late.'

They stayed talking a long time, however, so long that Rosemary got
no supper after all.  She had to be back at her lodgings by eleven,
or the she-dragons were angry.  Gordon went to the top of the
Tottenham Court Road and took the tram.  It was a penny cheaper
than taking the bus.  On the wooden seat upstairs he was wedged
against a small dirty Scotchman who read the football finals and
oozed beer.  Gordon was very happy.  Rosemary was going to be his
mistress.  Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over.  To the music of
the tram's booming he whispered the seven completed stanzas of his
poem.  Nine stanzas there would be in all.  It was GOOD.  He
believed in it and in himself.  He was a poet.  Gordon Comstock,
author of Mice.  Even in London Pleasures he once again believed.

He thought of Sunday.  They were to meet at nine o'clock at
Paddington Station.  Ten bob or so it would cost; he would raise
the money if he had to pawn his shirt.  And she was going to become
his mistress; this very Sunday, perhaps, if the right chance
offered itself.  Nothing had been said.  Only, somehow, it was
agreed between them.

Please God it kept fine on Sunday!  It was deep winter now.  What
luck if it turned out one of those splendid windless days--one of
those days that might almost be summer, when you can lie for hours
on the dead bracken and never feel cold!  But you don't get many
days like that; a dozen at most in every winter.  As likely as not
it would rain.  He wondered whether they would get a chance to do
it after all.  They had nowhere to go, except the open air.  There
are so many pairs of lovers in London with 'nowhere to go'; only
the streets and the parks, where there is no privacy and it is
always cold.  It is not easy to make love in a cold climate when
you have no money.  The 'never the time and the place' motif is not
made enough of in novels.



7


The plumes of the chimneys floated perpendicular against skies of
smoky rose.

Gordon caught the 27 bus at ten past eight.  The streets were still
locked in their Sunday sleep.  On the doorsteps the milk bottles
waited ungathered like little white sentinels.  Gordon had fourteen
shillings in his hand--thirteen and nine, rather, because the bus
fare was threepence.  Nine bob he had set aside from his wages--God
knew what that was going to mean, later in the week!--and five he
had borrowed from Julia.

He had gone round to Julia's place on Thursday night.  Julia's room
in Earl's Court, though only a second-floor back, was not just a
vulgar bedroom like Gordon's.  It was a bed-sitting with the accent
on the sitting.  Julia would have died of starvation sooner than
put up with such squalor as Gordon lived in.  Indeed every one of
her scraps of furniture, collected over intervals of years,
represented a period of semi-starvation.  There was a divan bed that
could very nearly be mistaken for a sofa, and a little round fumed
oak table, and two 'antique' hardwood chairs, and an ornamental
footstool and a chintz-covered armchair--Drage's: thirteen monthly
payments--in front of the tiny gas-fire; and there were various
brackets with framed photos of father and mother and Gordon and Aunt
Angela, and a birchwood calendar--somebody's Christmas present--with
'It's a long lane that has no turning' done on it in pokerwork.
Julia depressed Gordon horribly.  He was always telling himself that
he ought to go and see her oftener; but in practice he never went
near her except to 'borrow' money.

When Gordon had given three knocks--three knocks for second floor--
Julia took him up to her room and knelt down in front of the gas-
fire.

'I'll light the fire again,' she said.  'You'd like a cup of tea,
wouldn't you?'

He noted the 'again'.  The room was beastly cold--no fire had been
lighted in it this evening.  Julia always 'saved gas' when she was
alone.  He looked at her long narrow back as she knelt down.  How
grey her hair was getting!  Whole locks of it were quite grey.  A
little more, and it would be 'grey hair' tout court.

'You like your tea strong, don't you?' breathed Julia, hovering
over the tea-caddy with tender, goose-like movements.

Gordon drank his cup of tea standing up, his eye on the birchwood
calendar.  Out with it!  Get it over!  Yet his heart almost failed
him.  The meanness of this hateful cadging!  What would it all tot
up to, the money he had 'borrowed' from her in all these years?

'I say, Julia, I'm damned sorry--I hate asking you; but look here--'

'Yes, Gordon?' she said quietly.  She knew what was coming.

'Look here, Julia, I'm damned sorry, but could you lend me five
bob?'

'Yes, Gordon, I expect so.'

She sought out the small, worn black leather purse that was hidden
at the bottom of her linen drawer.  He knew what she was thinking.
It meant less for Christmas presents.  That was the great event of
her life nowadays--Christmas and the giving of presents: hunting
through the glittering streets, late at night after the teashop was
shut, from one bargain counter to another, picking out the trash
that women are so curiously fond of.  Handkerchief sachets, letter
racks, teapots, manicure sets, birchwood calendars with mottoes in
pokerwork.  All through the year she was scraping from her wretched
wages for 'So-and-so's Christmas present', or 'So-and-so's birthday
present'.  And had she not, last Christmas, because Gordon was
'fond of poetry', given him the Selected Poems of John Drinkwater
in green morocco, which he had sold for half a crown?  Poor Julia!
Gordon made off with his five bob as soon as he decently could.
Why is it that one can't borrow from a rich friend and can from a
half-starved relative?  But one's family, of course, 'don't count'.

On the top of the bus he did mental arithmetic.  Thirteen and nine
in hand.  Two day-returns to Slough, five bob.  Bus fares, say two
bob more, seven bob.  Bread and cheese and beer at a pub, say a bob
each, nine bob.  Tea, eightpence each, twelve bob.  A bob for
cigarettes, thirteen bob.  That left ninepence for emergencies.
They would manage all right.  And how about the rest of the week?
Not a penny for tobacco!  But he refused to let it worry him.
Today would be worth it, anyway.

Rosemary met him on time.  It was one of her virtues that she was
never late, and even at this hour of the morning she was bright and
debonair.  She was rather nicely dressed, as usual.  She was
wearing her mock-shovel hat again, because he had said he liked it.
They had the station practically to themselves.  The huge grey
place, littered and deserted, had a blowsy, unwashed air, as though
it were still sleeping off a Saturday night debauch.  A yawning
porter in need of a shave told them the best way to get to Burnham
Beeches, and presently they were in a third-class smoker, rolling
westward, and the mean wilderness of London was opening out and
giving way to narrow sooty fields dotted with ads for Carter's
Little Liver Pills.  The day was very still and warm.  Gordon's
prayer had come true.  It was one of those windless days which you
can hardly tell from summer.  You could feel the sun behind the
mist; it would break through presently, with any luck.  Gordon and
Rosemary were profoundly and rather absurdly happy.  There was a
sense of wild adventure in getting out of London, with the long day
in 'the country' stretching out ahead of them.  It was months since
Rosemary and a year since Gordon had set foot in 'the country'.
They sat close together with the Sunday Times open across their
knees; they did not read it, however, but watched the fields and
cows and houses and the empty goods trucks and great sleeping
factories rolling past.  Both of them enjoyed the railway journey
so much that they wished it had been longer.

At Slough they got out and travelled to Farnham Common in an absurd
chocolate-coloured bus with no top.  Slough was still half asleep.
Rosemary remembered the way now that they had got to Farnham
Common.  You walked down a rutted road and came out on to stretches
of fine, wet, tussocky grass dotted with little naked birches.  The
beech woods were beyond.  Not a bough or a blade was stirring.  The
trees stood like ghosts in the still, misty air.  Both Rosemary and
Gordon exclaimed at the loveliness of everything.  The dew, the
stillness, the satiny stems of the birches, the softness of the
turf under your feet!  Nevertheless, at first they felt shrunken
and out of place, as Londoners do when they get outside London.
Gordon felt as though he had been living underground for a long
time past.  He felt etiolated and unkempt.  He slipped behind
Rosemary as they walked, so that she should not see his lined,
colourless face.  Also, they were out of breath before they had
walked far, because they were only used to London walking, and for
the first half hour they scarcely talked.  They plunged into the
woods and started westward, with not much idea of where they were
making for--anywhere, so long as it was away from London.  All
round them the beech-trees soared, curiously phallic with their
smooth skin-like bark and their flutings at the base.  Nothing grew
at their roots, but the dried leaves were strewn so thickly that in
the distance the slopes looked like folds of copper-coloured silk.
Not a soul seemed to be awake.  Presently Gordon came level with
Rosemary.  They walked on hand in hand, swishing through the dry
coppery leaves that had drifted into the ruts.  Sometimes they came
out on to stretches of road where they passed huge desolate houses--
opulent country houses, once, in the carriage days, but now
deserted and unsaleable.  Down the road the mist-dimmed hedges wore
that strange purplish brown, the colour of brown madder, that naked
brushwood takes on in winter.  There were a few birds about--jays,
sometimes, passing between the trees with dipping flight, and
pheasants that loitered across the road with long tails trailing,
almost as tame as hens, as though knowing they were safe on Sunday.
But in half an hour Gordon and Rosemary had not passed a human
being.  Sleep lay upon the countryside.  It was hard to believe
that they were only twenty miles out of London.

Presently they had walked themselves into trim.  They had got their
second wind and the blood glowed in their veins.  It was one of
those days when you feel you could walk a hundred miles if
necessary.  Suddenly, as they came out on to the road again, the
dew all down the hedge glittered with a diamond flash.  The sun had
pierced the clouds.  The light came slanting and yellow across the
fields, and delicate unexpected colours sprang out in everything,
as though some giant's child had been let loose with a new
paintbox.  Rosemary caught Gordon's arm and pulled him against her.

'Oh, Gordon, what a LOVELY day!'

'Lovely.'

'And, oh, look, look!  Look at all the rabbits in that field!'

Sure enough, at the other end of the field, innumerable rabbits
were browsing, almost like a flock of sheep.  Suddenly there was a
flurry under the hedge.  A rabbit had been lying there.  It leapt
from its nest in the grass with a flirt of dew and dashed away down
the field, its white tail lifted.  Rosemary threw herself into
Gordon's arms.  It was astonishingly warm, as warm as summer.  They
pressed their bodies together in a sort of sexless rapture, like
children.  Here in the open air he could see the marks of time
quite clearly upon her face.  She was nearly thirty, and looked it,
and he was nearly thirty, and looked more; and it mattered nothing.
He pulled off the absurd flat hat.  The three white hairs gleamed
on her crown.  At the moment he did not wish them away.  They were
part of her and therefore lovable.

'What fun to be here alone with you!  I'm so glad we came!'

'And, oh, Gordon, to think we've got all day together!  And it
might so easily have rained.  How lucky we are!'

'Yes.  We'll burn a sacrifice to the immortal gods, presently.'

They were extravagantly happy.  As they walked on they fell into
absurd enthusiasms over everything they saw: over a jay's feather
that they picked up, blue as lapis lazuli; over a stagnant pool
like a jet mirror, with boughs reflected deep down in it; over the
fungi that sprouted from the trees like monstrous horizontal ears.
They discussed for a long time what would be the best epithet to
describe a beech-tree.  Both agreed that beeches look more like
sentient creatures than other trees.  It is because of the
smoothness of their bark, probably, and the curious limb-like way
in which the boughs sprout from the trunk.  Gordon said that the
little knobs on the bark were like the nipples of breasts and that
the sinuous upper boughs, with their smooth sooty skin, were like
the writhing trunks of elephants.  They argued about similes and
metaphors.  From time to time they quarrelled vigorously, according
to their custom.  Gordon began to tease her by finding ugly similes
for everything they passed.  He said that the russet foliage of the
hornbeams was like the hair of Burne-Jones maidens, and that the
smooth tentacles of the ivy that wound about the trees were like
the clinging arms of Dickens heroines.  Once he insisted upon
destroying some mauve toadstools because he said they reminded him
of a Rackham illustration and he suspected fairies of dancing round
them.  Rosemary called him a soulless pig.  She waded through a bed
of drifted beech leaves that rustled about her, knee-deep, like a
weightless red-gold sea.

'Oh, Gordon, these leaves!  Look at them with the sun on them!
They're like gold.  They really are like gold.'

'Fairy gold.  You'll be going all Barrie in another moment.  As a
matter of fact, if you want an exact simile, they're just the
colour of tomato soup.'

'Don't be a pig, Gordon!  Listen how they rustle.  "Thick as
autumnal leaves that strow the brooks in Vallombrosa."'

'Or like one of those American breakfast cereals.  Truweet
Breakfast Crisps.  "Kiddies clamour for their Breakfast Crisps."'

'You are a beast!'

She laughed.  They walked on hand in hand, swishing ankle-deep
through the leaves and declaiming:


   'Thick as the Breakfast Crisps that strow the plates
   In Welwyn Garden City!'


It was great fun.  Presently they came out of the wooded area.
There were plenty of people abroad now, but not many cars if you
kept away from the main roads.  Sometimes they heard church bells
ringing and made detours to avoid the churchgoers.  They began to
pass through straggling villages on whose outskirts pseudo-Tudor
villas stood sniffishly apart, amid their garages, their laurel
shrubberies and their raw-looking lawns.  And Gordon had some fun
railing against the villas and the godless civilization of which
they were part--a civilization of stockbrokers and their lip-
sticked wives, of golf, whisky, ouija-boards, and Aberdeen terriers
called Jock.  So they walked another four miles or so, talking and
frequently quarrelling.  A few gauzy clouds were drifting across
the sky, but there was hardly a breath of wind.

They were growing rather footsore and more and more hungry.  Of its
own accord the conversation began to turn upon food.  Neither of
them had a watch, but when they passed through a village they saw
that the pubs were open, so that it must be after twelve o'clock.
They hesitated outside a rather low-looking pub called the Bird in
Hand.  Gordon was for going in; privately he reflected that in a
pub like that your bread and cheese and beer would cost you a bob
at the very most.  But Rosemary said that it was a nasty-looking
place, which indeed it was, and they went on, hoping to find a
pleasanter pub at the other end of the village.  They had visions
of a cosy bar-parlour, with an oak settle and perhaps a stuffed
pike in a glass case on the wall.

But there were no more pubs in the village, and presently they were
in open country again, with no houses in sight and not even any
signposts.  Gordon and Rosemary began to be alarmed.  At two the
pubs would shut, and then there would be no food to be had, except
perhaps a packet of biscuits from some village sweetshop.  At this
thought a ravening hunger took possession of them.  They toiled
exhaustedly up an enormous hill, hoping to find a village on the
other side.  There was no village, but far below a dark green river
wound, with what seemed quite like a large town scattered along its
edge and a grey bridge crossing it.  They did not even know what
river it was--it was the Thames, of course.

'Thank God!' said Gordon.  'There must be plenty of pubs down
there.  We'd better take the first one we can find.'

'Yes, do let's.  I'm starving.'

But when they neared the town it seemed strangely quiet.  Gordon
wondered whether the people were all at church or eating their
Sunday dinners, until he realized that the place was quite
deserted.  It was Crickham-on-Thames, one of those riverside towns
which live for the boating season and go into hibernation for the
rest of the year.  It straggled along the bank for a mile or more,
and it consisted entirely of boat-houses and bungalows, all of them
shut up and empty.  There were no signs of life anywhere.  At last,
however, they came upon a fat, aloof, red-nosed man, with a ragged
moustache, sitting on a camp-stool beside a jar of beer on the
towpath.  He was fishing with a twenty-foot roach pole, while on
the smooth green water two swans circled about his float, trying to
steal his bait as often as he pulled it up.

'Can you tell us where we can get something to eat?' said Gordon.

The fat man seemed to have been expecting this question and to
derive a sort of private pleasure from it.  He answered without
looking at Gordon.

'YOU won't get nothing to eat.  Not here you won't,' he said.

'But dash it!  Do you mean to say there isn't a pub in the whole
place?  We've walked all the way from Farnham Common.'

The fat man sniffed and seemed to reflect, still keeping his eye on
the float.  'I dessay you might try the Ravenscroft Hotel,' he
said.  'About half a mile along, that is.  I dessay they'd give you
something; that is, they would if they was open.'

'But ARE they open?'

'They might be and they might not,' said the fat man comfortably.

'And can you tell us what time it is?' said Rosemary.

'It's jest gone ten parse one.'

The two swans followed Gordon and Rosemary a little way along the
towpath, evidently expecting to be fed.  There did not seem much
hope that the Ravenscroft Hotel would be open.  The whole place had
that desolate flyblown air of pleasure resorts in the off-season.
The woodwork of the bungalows was cracking, the white paint was
peeling off, the dusty windows showed bare interiors.  Even the
slot machines that were dotted along the bank were out of order.
There seemed to be another bridge at the other end of the town.
Gordon swore heartily.

'What bloody fools we were not to go in that pub when we had the
chance!'

'Oh, dear!  I'm simply STARVING.  Had we better turn back, do you
think?'

'It's no use, there were no pubs the way we came.  We must keep on.
I suppose the Ravenscroft Hotel's on the other side of that bridge.
If that's a main road there's just a chance it'll be open.
Otherwise we're sunk.'

They dragged their way as far as the bridge.  They were thoroughly
footsore now.  But behold! here at last was what they wanted, for
just beyond the bridge, down a sort of private road, stood a
biggish, smartish hotel, its back lawns running down to the river.
It was obviously open.  Gordon and Rosemary started eagerly towards
it, and then paused, daunted.

'It looks frightfully expensive,' said Rosemary.

It did look expensive.  It was a vulgar pretentious place, all gilt
and white paint--one of those hotels which have overcharging and
bad service written on every brick.  Beside the drive, commanding
the road, a snobbish board announced in gilt lettering:


THE RAVENSCROFT HOTEL

OPEN TO NON-RESIDENTS

LUNCHEONS-TEAS-DINNERS

DANCE HALL AND TENNIS COURTS

PARTIES CATERED FOR


Two gleaming two-seater cars were parked in the drive.  Gordon
quailed.  The money in his pocket seemed to shrink to nothing, this
was the very opposite to the cosy pub they had been looking for.
But he was very hungry.  Rosemary tweaked at his arm.

'It looks a beastly place.  I vote we go on.'

'But we've got to get some food.  It's our last chance.  We shan't
find another pub.'

'The food's always so disgusting in these places.  Beastly cold
beef that tastes as if it had been saved up from last year.  And
they charge you the earth for it.'

'Oh, well, we'll just order bread and cheese and beer.  It always
costs about the same.'

'But they hate you doing that.  They'll try to bully us into having
a proper lunch, you'll see.  We must be firm and just say bread and
cheese.'

'All right, we'll be firm.  Come on.'

They went in, resolved to be firm.  But there was an expensive
smell in the draughty hallway--a smell of chintz, dead flowers,
Thames water, and the rinsings of wine bottles.  It was the
characteristic smell of a riverside hotel.  Gordon's heart sank
lower.  He knew the type of place this was.  It was one of those
desolate hotels which exist all along the motor roads and are
frequented by stockbrokers airing their whores on Sunday
afternoons.  In such places you are insulted and overcharged almost
as a matter of course.  Rosemary shrank nearer to him.  She too was
intimidated.  They saw a door marked 'Saloon' and pushed it open,
thinking it must be the bar.  It was not a bar, however, but a
large, smart, chilly room with corduroy-upholstered chairs and
settees.  You could have mistaken it for an ordinary drawing-room
except that all the ashtrays advertised White Horse whisky.  And
round one of the tables the people from the cars outside--two
blond, flat-headed, fattish men, over-youthfully dressed, and two
disagreeable elegant young women--were sitting, having evidently
just finished lunch.  A waiter, bending over their table, was
serving them with liqueurs.

Gordon and Rosemary had halted in the doorway.  The people at the
table were already eyeing them with offensive upper-middle-class
eyes.  Gordon and Rosemary looked tired and dirty, and they knew
it.  The notion of ordering bread and cheese and beer had almost
vanished from their minds.  In such a place as this you couldn't
possibly say 'Bread and cheese and beer'; 'Lunch' was the only
thing you could say.  There was nothing for it but 'Lunch' or
flight.  The waiter was almost openly contemptuous.  He had summed
them up at a glance as having no money; but also he had divined
that it was in their minds to fly and was determined to stop them
before they could escape.

'Sare?' he demanded, lifting his tray off the table.

Now for it!  Say 'Bread and cheese and beer', and damn the
consequences!  Alas! his courage was gone.  'Lunch' it would have
to be.  With a seeming-careless gesture he thrust his hand into his
pocket.  He was feeling his money to make sure that it was still
there.  Seven and elevenpence left, he knew.  The waiter's eye
followed the movement; Gordon had a hateful feeling that the man
could actually see through the cloth and count the money in his
pocket.  In a tone as lordly as he could make it, he remarked:

'Can we have some lunch, please?'

'Luncheon, sare?  Yes, sare.  Zees way.'

The waiter was a black-haired young man with a very smooth, well-
featured, sallow face.  His dress clothes were excellently cut and
yet unclean-looking, as though he seldom took them off.  He looked
like a Russian prince; probably he was an Englishman and had
assumed a foreign accent because this was proper in a waiter.
Defeated, Rosemary and Gordon followed him to the dining-room,
which was at the back, giving on to the lawn.  It was exactly like
an aquarium.  It was built entirely of greenish glass, and it was
so damp and chilly that you could almost have fancied yourself
under water.  You could both see and smell the river outside.  In
the middle of each of the small round tables there was a bowl of
paper flowers, but at one side, to complete the aquarium effect,
there was a whole florist's stand of evergreens, palms, and
aspidistras and so forth, like dreary water-plants.  In summer such
a room might be pleasant enough; at present, when the sun had gone
behind a cloud, it was merely dank and miserable.  Rosemary was
almost as much afraid of the waiter as Gordon was.  As they sat
down and he turned away for a moment she made a face at his back.

'I'm going to pay for my own lunch,' she whispered to Gordon,
across the table.

'No, you're not.'

'What a horrible place!  The food's sure to be filthy.  I do wish
we hadn't come.'

'Sh!'

The waiter had come back with a flyblown printed menu.  He handed
it to Gordon and stood over him with the menacing air of a waiter
who knows that you have not much money in your pocket.  Gordon's
heart pounded.  If it was a table d'hote lunch at three and
sixpence or even half a crown, they were sunk.  He set his teeth
and looked at the menu.  Thank God!  It was a la carte.  The
cheapest thing on the list was cold beef and salad for one and
sixpence.  He said, or rather mumbled:

'We'll have some cold beef, please.'

The waiter's delicate eyebrows lifted.  He feigned surprise.

'ONLY ze cold beef, sare?'

'Yes that'll do to go on with, anyway.'

'But you will not have ANYSING else, sare?'

'Oh, well.  Bring us some bread, of course.  And butter.'

'But no soup to start wiz, sare?'

'No.  No soup.'

'Nor any fish, sare?  Only ze cold beef?'

'Do we want any fish, Rosemary?  I don't think we do.  No.  No
fish.'

'Nor any sweet to follow, sare?  ONLY ze cold beef?'

Gordon had difficulty in controlling his features.  He thought he
had never hated anyone so much as he hated this waiter.

'We'll tell you afterwards if we want anything else,' he said.

'And you will drink sare?'

Gordon had meant to ask for beer, but he hadn't the courage now.
He had got to win back his prestige after this affair of the cold
beef.

'Bring me the wine list,' he said flatly.

Another flyblown list was produced.  All the wines looked
impossibly expensive.  However, at the very top of the list there
was some nameless table claret at two and nine a bottle.  Gordon
made hurried calculations.  He could just manage two and nine.  He
indicated the wine with his thumbnail.

'Bring us a bottle of this,' he said.

The waiter's eyebrows rose again.  He essayed a stroke of irony.

'You will have ze WHOLE bottle, sare?  You would not prefare ze
half bottle?'

'A whole bottle,' said Gordon coldly.

All in a single delicate movement of contempt the waiter inclined
his head, shrugged his left shoulder, and turned away.  Gordon
could not stand it.  He caught Rosemary's eye across the table.
Somehow or other they had got to put that waiter in his place!  In
a moment the waiter came back, carrying the bottle of cheap wine by
the neck, and half concealing it behind his coat tails, as though
it were something a little indecent or unclean.  Gordon had thought
of a way to avenge himself.  As the waiter displayed the bottle he
put out a hand, felt it, and frowned.

'That's not the way to serve red wine,' he said.

Just for a moment the waiter was taken aback.  'Sare?' he said.

'It's stone cold.  Take the bottle away and warm it.'

'Very good, sare.'

But it was not really a victory.  The waiter did not look abashed.
Was the wine worth warming? his raised eyebrow said.  He bore the
bottle away with easy disdain, making it quite clear to Rosemary
and Gordon that it was bad enough to order the cheapest wine on the
list without making this fuss about it afterwards.

The beef and salad were corpse-cold and did not seem like real food
at all.  They tasted like water.  The rolls, also, though stale,
were damp.  The reedy Thames water seemed to have got into
everything.  It was no surprise that when the wine was opened it
tasted like mud.  But it was alcoholic, that was the great thing.
It was quite a surprise to find how stimulating it was, once you
had got it past your gullet and into your stomach.  After drinking
a glass and a half Gordon felt very much better.  The waiter stood
by the door, ironically patient, his napkin over his arm, trying to
make Gordon and Rosemary uncomfortable by his presence.  At first
he succeeded, but Gordon's back was towards him, and he disregarded
him and presently almost forgot him.  By degrees their courage
returned.  They began to talk more easily and in louder voices.

'Look,' said Gordon.  'Those swans have followed us all the way up
here.'

Sure enough, there were the two swans sailing vaguely to and fro
over the dark green water.  And at this moment the sun burst out
again and the dreary aquarium of a dining-room was flooded with
pleasant greenish light.  Gordon and Rosemary felt suddenly warm
and happy.  They began chattering about nothing, almost as though
the waiter had not been there, and Gordon took up the bottle and
poured out two more glasses of wine.  Over their glasses their eyes
met.  She was looking at him with a sort of yielding irony.  'I'm
your mistress,' her eyes said; 'what a joke!'  Their knees were
touching under the small table; momentarily she squeezed his knee
between her own.  Something leapt inside him; a warm wave of
sensuality and tenderness crept up his body.  He had remembered!
She was his girl, his mistress.  Presently, when they were alone,
in some hidden place in the warm, windless air, he would have her
naked body all for his own at last.  True, all the morning he had
known this, but somehow the knowledge had been unreal.  It was only
now that he grasped it.  Without words said, with a sort of bodily
certainty, he knew that within an hour she would be in his arms,
naked.  As they sat there in the warm light, their knees touching,
their eyes meeting, they felt as though already everything had been
accomplished.  There was deep intimacy between them.  They could
have sat there for hours, just looking at one another and talking
of trivial things that had meanings for them and for nobody else.
They did sit there for twenty minutes or more.  Gordon had
forgotten the waiter--had even forgotten, momentarily, the disaster
of being let in for this wretched lunch that was going to strip him
of every penny he had.  But presently the sun went in, the room
grew grey again, and they realized that it was time to go.

'The bill,' said Gordon, turning half round.

The waiter made a final effort to be offensive.

'Ze bill, sare?  But you do not wish any coffee, sare?'

'No, no coffee.  The bill.'

The waiter retired and came back with a folded slip on a salver.
Gordon opened it.  Six and threepence--and he had exactly seven and
elevenpence in the world!  Of course he had known approximately
what the bill must be, and yet it was a shock now that it came.  He
stood up, felt in his pocket, and took out all his money.  The
sallow young waiter, his salver on his arm, eyed the handful of
money; plainly he divined that it was all Gordon had.  Rosemary
also had got up and come round the table.  She pinched Gordon's
elbow; this was a signal that she would like to pay her share.
Gordon pretended not to notice.  He paid the six and threepence,
and, as he turned away, dropped another shilling on to the salver.
The waiter balanced it for a moment on his hand, flicked it over,
and then slipped it into his waistcoat pocket with the air of
covering up something unmentionable.

As they went down the passage, Gordon felt dismayed, helpless--
dazed, almost.  All his money gone at a single swoop!  It was a
ghastly thing to happen.  If only they had not come to this
accursed place!  The whole day was ruined now--and all for the sake
of a couple of plates of cold beef and a bottle of muddy wine!
Presently there would be tea to think about, and he had only six
cigarettes left, and there were the bus fares back to Slough and
God knew what else; and he had just eightpence to pay for the lot!
They got outside the hotel feeling as if they had been kicked out
and the door slammed behind them.  All the warm intimacy of a
moment ago was gone.  Everything seemed different now that they
were outside.  Their blood seemed to grow suddenly cooler in the
open air.  Rosemary walked ahead of him, rather nervous, not
speaking.  She was half frightened now by the thing she had
resolved to do.  He watched her strong delicate limbs moving.
There was her body that he had wanted so long; but now when the
time had come it only daunted him.  He wanted her to be his, he
wanted to HAVE HAD her, but he wished it were over and done with.
It was an effort--a thing he had got to screw himself up to.  It
was strange that that beastly business of the hotel bill could have
upset him so completely.  The easy carefree mood of the morning was
shattered; in its place there had come back the hateful, harassing,
familiar thing--worry about money.  In a minute he would have to
own up that he had only eightpence left; he would have to borrow
money off her to get them home; it would be squalid and shameful.
Only the wine inside him kept up his courage.  The warmth of the
wine, and the hateful feeling of having only eightpence left,
warred together in his body, neither getting the better of the
other.

They walked rather slowly, but soon they were away from the river
and on higher ground again.  Each searched desperately for
something to say and could think of nothing.  He came level with
her, took her hand, and wound her fingers within his own.  Like
that they felt better.  But his heart beat painfully, his entrails
were constricted.  He wondered whether she felt the same.

'There doesn't seem to be a soul about,' she said at last.

'It's Sunday afternoon.  They're all asleep under the aspidistra,
after roast beef and Yorkshire.'

There was another silence.  They walked on fifty yards or so.  With
difficulty mastering his voice, he managed to say:

'It's extraordinarily warm.  We might sit down for a bit if we can
find a place.'

'Yes, all right.  If you like.'

Presently they came to a small copse on the left of the road.  It
looked dead and empty, nothing growing under the naked trees.  But
at the corner of the copse, on the far side, there was a great
tangled patch of sloe or blackthorn bushes.  He put his arm round
her without saying anything and turned her in that direction.
There was a gap in the hedge with some barbed wire strung across
it.  He held the wire up for her and she slipped nimbly under it.
His heart leapt again.  How supple and strong she was!  But as he
climbed over the wire to follow her, the eightpence--a sixpence and
two pennies--clinked in his pocket, daunting him anew.

When they got to the bushes they found a natural alcove.  On three
sides were beds of thorns, leafless but impenetrable, and on the
other side you looked downhill over a sweep of naked ploughed
fields.  At the bottom of the hill stood a low-roofed cottage, tiny
as a child's toy, its chimneys smokeless.  Not a creature was
stirring anywhere.  You could not have been more alone than in such
a place.  The grass was the fine mossy stuff that grows under
trees.

'We ought to have brought a mackintosh,' he said.  He had knelt
down.

'It doesn't matter.  The ground's fairly dry.'

He pulled her to the ground beside him, kissed her, pulled off the
flat felt hat, lay upon her breast to breast, kissed her face all
over.  She lay under him, yielding rather than responding.  She did
not resist when his hand sought her breasts.  But in her heart she
was still frightened.  She would do it--oh, yes! she would keep her
implied promise, she would not draw back; but all the same she was
frightened.  And at heart he too was half reluctant.  It dismayed
him to find how little, at this moment, he really wanted her.  The
money-business still unnerved him.  How can you make love when you
have only eightpence in your pocket and are thinking about it all
the time?  Yet in a way he wanted her.  Indeed, he could not do
without her.  His life would be a different thing when once they
were really lovers.  For a long time he lay on her breast, her head
turned sideways, his face against her neck and hair, attempting
nothing further.

Then the sun came out again.  It was getting low in the sky now.
The warm light poured over them as though a membrane across the sky
had broken.  It had been a little cold on the grass, really, with
the sun behind the clouds; but now once again it was almost as warm
as summer.  Both of them sat up to exclaim at it.

'Oh, Gordon, look!  Look how the sun's lighting everything up!'

As the clouds melted away a widening yellow beam slid swiftly
across the valley, gilding everything in its path.  Grass that had
been dull green shone suddenly emerald.  The empty cottage below
sprang out into warm colours, purply-blue of tiles, cherry-red of
brick.  Only the fact that no birds were singing reminded you that
it was winter.  Gordon put his arm round Rosemary and pulled her
hard against him.  They sat cheek to cheek, looking down the hill.
He turned her round and kissed her.

'You do like me, don't you?'

'Adore you, silly.'

'And you're going to be nice to me, aren't you?'

'Nice to you?'

'Let me do what I want with you?'

'Yes, I expect so.'

'Anything?'

'Yes, all right.  Anything.'

He pressed her back upon the grass.  It was quite different now.
The warmth of the sun seemed to have got into their bones.  'Take
your clothes off, there's a dear,' he whispered.  She did it
readily enough.  She had no shame before him.  Besides, it was so
warm and the place was so solitary that it did not matter how many
clothes you took off.  They spread her clothes out and made a sort
of bed for her to lie on.  Naked, she lay back, her hands behind
her head, her eyes shut, smiling slightly, as though she had
considered everything and were at peace in her mind.  For a long
time he knelt and gazed at her body.  Its beauty startled him.  She
looked much younger naked than with her clothes on.  Her face,
thrown back, with eyes shut, looked almost childish.  He moved
closer to her.  Once again the coins clinked in his pocket.  Only
eightpence left!  Trouble coming presently.  But he wouldn't think
of it now.  Get on with it, that's the great thing, get on with it
and damn the future!  He put an arm beneath her and laid his body
to hers.

'May I?--now?'

'Yes.  All right.'

'You're not frightened?'

'No.'

'I'll be as gentle as I can with you.'

'It doesn't matter.'

A moment later:

'Oh, Gordon, no!  No, no, no!'

'What?  What is it?'

'No, Gordon, no!  You mustn't!  NO!'

She put her hands against him and pushed him violently back.  Her
face looked remote, frightened, almost hostile.  It was terrible to
feel her push him away at such a moment.  It was as though cold
water had been dashed all over him.  He fell back from her,
dismayed, hurriedly rearranging his clothes.

'What is it?  What's the matter?'

'Oh, Gordon!  I thought you--oh, dear!'

She threw her arm over her face and rolled over on her side, away
from him, suddenly ashamed.

'What is it?' he repeated.

'How could you be so THOUGHTLESS?'

'What do you mean--thoughtless?'

'Oh! you know what I mean!'

His heart shrank.  He did know what she meant; but he had never
thought of it till this moment.  And of course--oh, yes!--he ought
to have thought of it.  He stood up and turned away from her.
Suddenly he knew that he could go no further with this business.
In a wet field on a Sunday afternoon--and in mid-winter at that!
Impossible!  It seemed so right, so natural only a minute ago; now
it seemed merely squalid and ugly.

'I didn't expect THIS,' he said bitterly.

'But I couldn't help it, Gordon!  You ought to have--you know.'

'You don't think I go in for that kind of thing, do you?'

'But what else can we do?  I can't have a baby, can I?'

'You must take your chance.'

'Oh, Gordon, how impossible you are!'

She lay looking up at him, her face full of distress, too overcome
for the moment even to remember that she was naked.  His
disappointment had turned to anger.  There you are, you see!  Money
again!  Even the most secret action of your life you don't escape
it; you've still got to spoil everything with filthy cold-blooded
precautions for money's sake.  Money, money, always money!  Even in
the bridal bed, the finger of the money-god intruding!  In the
heights or in the depths, he is there.  He walked a pace or two up
and down, his hands in his pockets.

'Money again, you see!' he said.  'Even at a moment like this it's
got the power to stand over us and bully us.  Even when we're alone
and miles from anywhere, with not a soul to see us.'

'What's MONEY got to do with it?'

'I tell you it'd never enter your head to worry about a baby if it
wasn't for the money.  You'd WANT the baby if it wasn't for that.
You say you "can't" have a baby.  What do you mean, you "can't"
have a baby?  You mean you daren't; because you'd lose your job and
I've got no money and all of us would starve.  This birth-control
business!  It's just another way they've found out of bullying us.
And you want to acquiesce in it, apparently.'

'But what am I to do, Gordon?  What am I to do?'

At this moment the sun disappeared behind the clouds.  It became
perceptibly colder.  After all, the scene was grotesque--the naked
woman lying in the grass, the dressed man standing moodily by with
his hands in his pockets.  She'd catch her death of cold in another
moment, lying there like that.  The whole thing was absurd and
indecent.

'But what else am I to do?' she repeated.

'I should think you might start by putting your clothes on,' he
said coldly.

He had only said it to avenge his irritation; but its result was to
make her so painfully and obviously embarrassed that he had to turn
his back on her.  She had dressed herself in a very few moments.
As she knelt lacing up her shoes he heard her sniff once or twice.
She was on the point of crying and was struggling to restrain
herself.  He felt horribly ashamed.  He would have liked to throw
himself on his knees beside her, put his arms round her, and ask
her pardon.  But he could do nothing of the kind; the scene had
left him lumpish and awkward.  It was with difficulty that he could
command his voice even for the most banal remark.

'Are you ready?' he said flatly.

'Yes.'

They went back to the road, climbed through the wire, and started
down the hill without another word.  Fresh clouds were rolling
across the sun.  It was getting much colder.  Another hour and the
early dusk would have fallen.  They reached the bottom of the hill
and came in sight of the Ravenscroft Hotel, scene of their
disaster.

'Where are we going?' said Rosemary in a small sulky voice.

'Back to Slough, I suppose.  We must cross the bridge and have a
look at the signposts.'

They scarcely spoke again till they had gone several miles.
Rosemary was embarrassed and miserable.  A number of times she
edged closer to him, meaning to take his arm, but he edged away
from her; and so they walked abreast with almost the width of the
road between them.  She imagined that she had offended him
mortally.  She supposed that it was because of his disappointment--
because she had pushed him away at the critical moment--that he was
angry with her; she would have apologized if he had given her a
quarter of a chance.  But as a matter of fact he was scarcely
thinking of this any longer.  His mind had turned away from that
side of things.  It was the money-business that was troubling him
now--the fact that he had only eightpence in his pocket.  In a very
little while he would have to confess it.  There would be the bus
fares from Farnham to Slough, and tea in Slough, and cigarettes,
and more bus fares and perhaps another meal when they got back to
London; and just eightpence to cover the lot!  He would have to
borrow from Rosemary after all.  And that was so damned humiliating.
It is hateful to have to borrow money off someone you have just been
quarrelling with.  What nonsense it made of all his fine attitudes!
There was he, lecturing her, putting on superior airs, pretending to
be shocked because she took contraception for granted; and the next
moment turning round and asking her for money!  But there you are,
you see, that's what money can do. There is no attitude that money
or the lack of it cannot puncture.

By half past four it was almost completely dark.  They tramped
along misty roads where there was no illumination save the cracks
of cottage windows and the yellow beam of an occasional car.  It
was getting beastly cold, too, but they had walked four miles and
the exercise had warmed them.  It was impossible to go on being
unsociable any longer.  They began to talk more easily and by
degrees they edged closer together.  Rosemary took Gordon's arm.
Presently she stopped him and swung him round to face her.

'Gordon, WHY are you so beastly to me?'

'How am I beastly to you?'

'Coming all this way without speaking a word!'

'Oh, well!'

'Are you still angry with me because of what happened just now?'

'No.  I was never angry with you.  YOU'RE not to blame.'

She looked up at him, trying to divine the expression of his face
in the almost pitch darkness.  He drew her against him, and, as she
seemed to expect it, tilted her face back and kissed her.  She
clung to him eagerly; her body melted against his.  She had been
waiting for this, it seemed.

'Gordon, you do love me, don't you?'

'Of course I do.'

'Things went wrong somehow.  I couldn't help it.  I got frightened
suddenly.'

'It doesn't matter.  Another time it'll be all right.'

She was lying limp against him, her head on his breast.  He could
feel her heart beating.  It seemed to flutter violently, as though
she were taking some decision.

'I don't care,' she said indistinctly, her face buried in his coat.

'Don't care about what?'

'The baby.  I'll risk it.  You can do what you like with me.'

At these surrendering words a weak desire raised itself in him and
died away at once.  He knew why she had said it.  It was not
because, at this moment, she really wanted to be made love to.  It
was from a mere generous impulse to let him know that she loved him
and would take a dreaded risk rather than disappoint him.

'Now?' he said.

'Yes, if you like.'

He considered.  He so wanted to be sure that she was his!  But the
cold night air flowed over them.  Behind the hedges the long grass
would be wet and chill.  This was not the time or the place.
Besides, that business of the eightpence had usurped his mind.  He
was not in the mood any longer.

'I can't,' he said finally.

'You can't!  But, Gordon!  I thought--'

'I know.  But it's all different now.'

'You're still upset?'

'Yes.  In a way.'

'Why?'

He pushed her a little away from him.  As well have the explanation
now as later.  Nevertheless he was so ashamed that he mumbled
rather than said:

'I've got a beastly thing to say to you.  It's been worrying me all
the way along.'

'What is it?'

'It's this.  Can you lend me some money?  I'm absolutely cleaned
out.  I had just enough money for today, but that beastly hotel
bill upset everything.  I've only eightpence left.'

Rosemary was amazed.  She broke right out of his arms in her
amazement.

'Only eightpence left!  What ARE you talking about?  What does it
matter if you've only eightpence left?'

'Don't I tell you I shall have to borrow money off you in another
minute?  You'll have to pay for your own bus fares, and my bus
fares, and your tea and Lord knows what.  And I asked you to come
out with me!  You're supposed to be my guest.  It's bloody.'

'Your GUEST!  Oh, Gordon.  Is THAT what's been worrying you all
this time?'

'Yes.'

'Gordon, you ARE a baby!  How can you let yourself be worried by a
thing like that?  As though I minded lending you money!  Aren't I
always telling you I want to pay my share when we go out together?'

'Yes, and you know how I hate your paying.  We had that out the
other night.'

'Oh, how absurd, how absurd you are!  Do you think there's anything
to be ashamed of in having no money?'

'Of course there is!  It's the only thing in the world there IS to
be ashamed of.'

'But what's it got to do with you and me making love, anyway?  I
don't understand you.  First you want to and then you don't want
to.  What's money got to do with it?'

'Everything.'

He wound her arm in his and started down the road.  She would never
understand.  Nevertheless he had got to explain.

'Don't you understand that one isn't a full human being--that one
doesn't FEEL a human being--unless one's got money in one's
pocket?'

'No.  I think that's just silly.'

'It isn't that I don't want to make love to you.  I do.  But I tell
you I can't make love to you when I've only eightpence in my
pocket.  At least when you know I've only eightpence.  I just can't
do it.  It's physically impossible.'

'But why?  Why?'

'You'll find it in Lempriere,' he said obscurely.

That settled it.  They talked no more about it.  For the second
time he had behaved grossly badly and yet he had made her feel as
if it were she who was in the wrong.  They walked on.  She did not
understand him; on the other hand, she forgave him everything.
Presently they reached Farnham Common, and, after a wait at the
cross road, got a bus to Slough.  In the darkness, as the bus
loomed near, Rosemary found Gordon's hand and slipped half a crown
into it, so that he might pay the fares and not be shamed in public
by letting a woman pay for him.

For his own part Gordon would sooner have walked to Slough and
saved the bus fares, but he knew Rosemary would refuse.  In Slough,
also, he was for taking the train straight back to London, but
Rosemary said indignantly that she wasn't going to go without her
tea, so they went to a large, dreary, draughty hotel near the
station.  Tea, with little wilting sandwiches and rock cakes like
balls of putty, was two shillings a head.  It was torment to Gordon
to let her pay for his food.  He sulked, ate nothing, and, after a
whispered argument, insisted on contributing his eightpence towards
the cost of the tea.

It was seven o'clock when they took the train back to London.  The
train was full of tired hikers in khaki shorts.  Rosemary and
Gordon did not talk much.  They sat close together, Rosemary with
her arm twined through his, playing with his hand, Gordon looking
out of the window.  People in the carriage eyed them, wondering
what they had quarrelled about.  Gordon watched the lamp-starred
darkness streaming past.  So the day to which he had looked forward
was ended.  And now back to Willowbed Road, with a penniless week
ahead.  For a whole week, unless some miracle happened, he wouldn't
even be able to buy himself a cigarette.  What a bloody fool he had
been!  Rosemary was not angry with him.  By the pressure of her
hand she tried to make it clear to him that she loved him.  His
pale discontented face, turned half away from her, his shabby coat,
and his unkempt mouse-coloured hair that wanted cutting more than
ever, filled her with profound pity.  She felt more tenderly
towards him than she would have done if everything had gone well,
because in her feminine way she grasped that he was unhappy and
that life was difficult for him.

'See me home, will you?' she said as they got out at Paddington.

'If you don't mind walking.  I haven't got the fare.'

'But let ME pay the fare.  Oh, dear!  I suppose you won't.  But how
are you going to get home yourself?'

'Oh, I'll walk.  I know the way.  It's not very far.'

'I hate to think of you walking all that way.  You look so tired.
Be a dear and let me pay your fare home.  DO!'

'No.  You've paid quite enough for me already.'

'Oh, dear!  You are so silly!'

They halted at the entrance to the Underground.  He took her hand.
'I suppose we must say good-bye for the present,' he said.

'Good-bye, Gordon dear.  Thanks ever so much for taking me out.  It
was such fun this morning.'

'Ah, this morning!  It was different then.'  His mind went back to
the morning hours, when they had been alone on the road together
and there was still money in his pocket.  Compunction seized him.
On the whole he had behaved badly.  He pressed her hand a little
tighter.  'You're not angry with me, are you?'

'No, silly, of course not.'

'I didn't mean to be beastly to you.  It was the money.  It's
always the money.'

'Never mind, it'll be better next time.  We'll go to some better
place.  We'll go down to Brighton for the week-end, or something.'

'Perhaps, when I've got the money.  You will write soon, won't
you?'

'Yes.'

'Your letters are the only things that keep me going.  Tell me when
you'll write, so that I can have your letter to look forward to.'

'I'll write tomorrow night and post it on Tuesday.  Then you'll get
it last post on Tuesday night.'

'Then good-bye, Rosemary dear.'

'Good-bye, Gordon darling.'

He left her at the booking-office.  When he had gone twenty yards
he felt a hand laid on his arm.  He turned sharply.  It was
Rosemary.  She thrust a packet of twenty Gold Flake, which she had
bought at the tobacco kiosk, into his coat pocket and ran back to
the Underground before he could protest.

He trailed homeward through the wastes of Marylebone and Regent's
Park.  It was the fag-end of the day.  The streets were dark and
desolate, with that strange listless feeling of Sunday night when
people are more tired after a day of idleness than after a day of
work.  It was vilely cold, too.  The wind had risen when the night
fell.  Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over.  Gordon was footsore,
having walked a dozen or fifteen miles, and also hungry.  He had
had little food all day.  In the morning he had hurried off without
a proper breakfast, and the lunch at the Ravenscroft Hotel wasn't
the kind of meal that did you much good; since then he had had no
solid food.  However, there was no hope of getting anything when he
got home.  He had told Mother Wisbeach that he would be away all
day.

When he reached the Hampstead Road he had to wait on the kerb to
let a stream of cars go past.  Even here everything seemed dark and
gloomy, in spite of the glaring lamps and the cold glitter of the
jewellers' windows.  The raw wind pierced his thin clothes, making
him shiver.  Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over The bending
poplars, newly bare.  He had finished that poem, all except the
last two lines.  He thought again of those hours this morning--the
empty misty roads, the feeling of freedom and adventure, of having
the whole day and the whole country before you in which to wander
at will.  It was having money that did it, of course.  Seven and
elevenpence he had had in his pocket this morning.  It had been a
brief victory over the money-god; a morning's apostasy, a holiday
in the groves of Ashtaroth.  But such things never last.  Your
money goes and your freedom with it.  Circumcise ye your foreskins,
saith the Lord.  And back we creep, duly snivelling.

Another shoal of cars swam past.  One in particular caught his eye,
a long slender thing, elegant as a swallow, all gleaming blue and
silver; a thousand guineas it would have cost, he thought.  A blue-
clad chauffeur sat at the wheel, upright, immobile, like some
scornful statue.  At the back, in the pink-lit interior, four
elegant young people, two youths, and two girls, were smoking
cigarettes and laughing.  He had a glimpse of sleek bunny-faces;
faces of ravishing pinkness and smoothness, lit by that peculiar
inner glow that can never be counterfeited, the soft warm radiance
of money.

He crossed the road.  No food tonight.  However, there was still
oil in the lamp, thank God; he would have a secret cup of tea when
he got back.  At this moment he saw himself and his life without
saving disguises.  Every night the same--back to the cold lonely
bedroom and the grimy littered sheets of the poem that never got
any further.  It was a blind alley.  He would never finish London
Pleasures, he would never marry Rosemary, he would never set his
life in order.  He would only drift and sink, drift and sink, like
the others of his family; but worse than them--down, down into some
dreadful sub-world that as yet he could only dimly imagine.  It was
what he had chosen when he declared war on money.  Serve the money-
god or go under; there is no other rule.

Something deep below made the stone street shiver.  The tube-train,
sliding through middle earth.  He had a vision of London, of the
western world; he saw a thousand million slaves toiling and
grovelling about the throne of money.  The earth is ploughed, ships
sail, miners sweat in dripping tunnels underground, clerks hurry
for the eight-fifteen with the fear of the boss eating at their
vitals.  And even in bed with their wives they tremble and obey.
Obey whom?  The money-priesthood, the pink-faced masters of the
world.  The Upper Crust.  A welter of sleek young rabbits in
thousand guinea motor cars, of golfing stockbrokers and
cosmopolitan financiers, of Chancery lawyers and fashionable Nancy
boys, of bankers, newspaper peers, novelists of all four sexes,
American pugilists, lady aviators, film stars, bishops, titled
poets, and Chicago gorillas.

When he had gone another fifty yards the rhyme for the final stanza
of his poem occurred to him.  He walked homeward, repeating the
poem to himself:


Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over
The bending poplars, newly bare,
And the dark ribbons of the chimneys
Veer downward; flicked by whips of air,

Torn posters flutter; coldly sound
The boom of trains and the rattle of hooves,
And the clerks who hurry to the station
Look, shuddering, over the eastern rooves,

Thinking, each one, 'Here comes the winter!
Please God I keep my job this year!'
And bleakly, as the cold strikes through
Their entrails like an icy spear,

They think of rent, rates, season tickets,
Insurance, coal, the skivvy's wages,
Boots, school-bills, and the next instalment
Upon the two twin beds from Drage's.

For if in careless summer days
In groves of Ashtaroth we whored,
Repentant now, when winds blow cold,
We kneel before our rightful lord;

The lord of all, the money-god,
Who rules us blood and hand and brain,
Who gives the roof that stops the wind,
And, giving, takes away again;

Who spies with jealous, watchful care,
Our thoughts, our dreams, our secret ways,
Who picks our words and cuts our clothes,
And maps the pattern of our days;

Who chills our anger, curbs our hope,
And buys our lives and pays with toys,
Who claims as tribute broken faith,
Accepted insults, muted joys;

Who binds with chains the poet's wit,
The navvy's strength, the soldier's pride,
And lays the sleek, estranging shield
Between the lover and his bride.



8


As the clock struck one Gordon slammed the shop door to and
hurried, almost ran, to the branch of the Westminster Bank down the
street.

With a half-conscious gesture of caution he was clutching the lapel
of his coat, holding it tight against him.  In there, stowed away
in his right-hand inner pocket, was an object whose very existence
he partly doubted.  It was a stout blue envelope with an American
stamp; in the envelope was a cheque for fifty dollars; and the
cheque was made out to 'Gordon Comstock'!

He could feel the square shape of the envelope outlined against his
body as clearly as though it had been red hot.  All the morning he
had felt it there, whether he touched it or whether he did not; he
seemed to have developed a special patch of sensitiveness in the
skin below his right breast.  As often as once in ten minutes he
had taken the cheque out of its envelope and anxiously examined it.
After all, cheques are tricky things.  It would be frightful if
there turned out to be some hitch about the date or the signature.
Besides, he might lose it--it might even vanish of its own accord
like fairy gold.

The cheque had come from the Californian Review, that American
magazine to which, weeks or months ago, he had despairingly sent a
poem.  He had almost forgotten about the poem, it had been so long
away, until this morning their letter had come sailing out of the
blue.  And what a letter!  No English editor ever writes letters
like that.  They were 'very favorably impressed' by his poem.  They
would 'endeavor' to include it in their next number.  Would he
'favor' them by showing them some more of his work?  (Would he?
Oh, boy!--as Flaxman would say.)  And the cheque had come with it.
It seemed the most monstrous folly, in this year of blight 1934,
that anyone should pay fifty dollars for a poem.  However, there
it was; and there was the cheque, which looked perfectly genuine
however often he inspected it.

He would have no peace of mind till the cheque was cashed--for
quite possibly the bank would refuse it--but already a stream of
visions was flowing through his mind.  Visions of girls' faces,
visions of cobwebby claret bottles and quart pots of beer, visions
of a new suit and his overcoat out of pawn, visions of a week-end
at Brighton with Rosemary, visions of the crisp, crackling five
pound note which he was going to give to Julia.  Above all, of
course, that fiver for Julia.  It was almost the first thing he had
thought of when the cheque came.  Whatever else he did with the
money, he must give Julia half of it.  It was only the barest
justice, considering how much he had 'borrowed' from her in all
these years.  All the morning the thought of Julia and the money he
owed her had been cropping up in his mind at odd moments.  It was a
vaguely distasteful thought, however.  He would forget about it for
half an hour at a time, would plan a dozen ways of spending his ten
pounds to the uttermost farthing, and then suddenly he would
remember about Julia.  Good old Julia!  Julia should have her
share.  A fiver at the very least.  Even that was not a tenth of
what he owed her.  For the twentieth time, with a faint malaise, he
registered the thought: five quid for Julia.

The bank made no trouble about the cheque.  Gordon had no banking
account, but they knew him well, for Mr McKechnie banked there.
They had cashed editors' cheques for Gordon before.  There was only
a minute's consultation, and then the cashier came back.

'Notes, Mr Comstock?'

'One five pound, and the rest pounds, please.'

The flimsy luscious fiver and the five clean pound notes slid
rustling under the brass rail.  And after them the cashier pushed a
little pile of half-crowns and pennies.  In lordly style Gordon
shot the coins into his pocket without even counting them.  That
was a bit of backsheesh.  He had only expected ten pounds for fifty
dollars.  The dollar must be above par.  The five pound note,
however, he carefully folded up and stowed away in the American
envelope.  That was Julia's fiver.  It was sacrosanct.  He would
post it to her presently.

He did not go home for dinner.  Why chew leathery beef in the
aspidistral dining-room when he had ten quid in pocket--five quid,
rather?  (He kept forgetting that half the money was already
mortgaged to Julia.)  For the moment he did not bother to post
Julia's five pounds.  This evening would be soon enough.  Besides,
he rather enjoyed the feeling of it in his pocket.  It was queer
how different you felt with all that money in your pocket.  Not
opulent, merely, but reassured, revivified, reborn.  He felt a
different person from what he had been yesterday.  He WAS a
different person.  He was no longer the downtrodden wretch who made
secret cups of tea over the oil stove at 31 Willowbed Road.  He was
Gordon Comstock, the poet, famous on both sides of the Atlantic.
Publications:  Mice (1932), London Pleasures (1935).  He thought
with perfect confidence of London Pleasures now.  In three months
it should see the light.  Demy octavo, white buckram covers.  There
was nothing that he did not feel equal to now that his luck had
turned.

He strolled into the Prince of Wales for a bite of food.  A cut
off the joint and two veg., one and twopence, a pint of pale ale
ninepence, twenty Gold Flakes a shilling.  Even after that
extravagance he still had well over ten pounds in hand--or rather,
well over five pounds.  Beer-warmed, he sat and meditated on the
things you can do with five pounds.  A new suit, a week-end in the
country, a day-trip to Paris, five rousing drunks, ten dinners in
Soho restaurants.  At this point it occurred to him that he and
Rosemary and Ravelston must certainly have dinner together tonight.
Just to celebrate his stroke of luck; after all, it isn't every day
that ten pounds--five pounds--drops out of the sky into your lap.
The thought of the three of them together, with good food and wine
and money no object took hold of him as something not to be
resisted.  He had just a tiny twinge of caution.  Mustn't spend ALL
his money, of course.  Still, he could afford a quid--two quid.  In
a couple of minutes he had got Ravelston on the pub phone.

'Is that you, Ravelston?  I say, Ravelston!  Look here, you've got
to have dinner with me tonight.'

From the other end of the line Ravelston faintly demurred.  'No,
dash it!  You have dinner with ME.'  But Gordon overbore him.
Nonsense!  Ravelston had got to have dinner with HIM tonight.
Unwillingly, Ravelston assented.  All right, yes, thanks; he'd like
it very much.  There was a sort of apologetic misery in his voice.
He guessed what had happened.  Gordon had got hold of money from
somewhere and was squandering it immediately; as usual, Ravelston
felt he hadn't the right to interfere.  Where should they go?
Gordon was demanding.  Ravelston began to speak in praise of those
jolly little Soho restaurants where you get such a wonderful dinner
for half a crown.  But the Soho restaurants sounded beastly as soon
as Ravelston mentioned them.  Gordon wouldn't hear of it.  Nonsense!
They must go somewhere decent.  Let's do it all regardless, was his
private thought; might as well spend two quid--three quid, even.
Where did Ravelston generally go?  Modigliani's, admitted Ravelston.
But Modigliani's was very--but no! not even over the phone could
Ravelston frame that hateful word 'expensive'.  How remind Gordon
of his poverty?  Gordon mightn't care for Modigliani's, he
euphemistically said.  But Gordon was satisfied.  Modigliani's?
Right you are--half past eight.  Good!  After all, if he spent even
three quid on the dinner he'd still have two quid to buy himself a
new pair of shoes and a vest and a pair of pants.

He had fixed it up with Rosemary in another five minutes.  The New
Albion did not like their employees being rung up on the phone, but
it did not matter once in a way.  Since that disastrous Sunday
journey, five days ago, he had heard from her once but had not seen
her.  She answered eagerly when she heard whose voice it was.
Would she have dinner with him tonight?  Of course!  What fun!
And so in ten minutes the whole thing was settled.  He had always
wanted Rosemary and Ravelston to meet, but somehow had never been
able to contrive it.  These things are so much easier when you've
got a little money to spend.

The taxi bore him westward through the darkling streets.  A three-
mile journey--still, he could afford it.  Why spoil the ship for a
ha'porth of tar?  He had dropped that notion of spending only two
pounds tonight.  He would spend three pounds, three pounds ten--
four pounds if he felt like it.  Slap up and regardless--that was
the idea.  And, oh! by the way! Julia's fiver.  He hadn't sent it
yet.  No matter.  Send it first thing in the morning.  Good old
Julia!  She should have her fiver.

How voluptuous were the taxi cushions under his bum!  He lolled
this way and that.  He had been drinking, of course--had had two
quick ones, or possibly three, before coming away.  The taxi-driver
was a stout philosophic man with a weather-beaten face and a
knowing eye.  He and Gordon understood one another.  They had
palled up in the bar where Gordon was having his quick ones.  As
they neared the West End the taximan drew up, unbidden, at a
discreet pub on a corner.  He knew what was in Gordon's mind.
Gordon could do with a quick one.  So could the taximan.  But the
drinks were on Gordon--that too was understood.

'You anticipated my thoughts,' said Gordon, climbing out.

'Yes, sir.'

'I could just about do with a quick one.'

'Thought you might, sir.'

'And could you manage one yourself, do you think?'

'Where there's a will there's a way,' said the taximan.

'Come inside,' said Gordon.

They leaned matily on the brass-edged bar, elbow to elbow, lighting
two of the taximan's cigarettes.  Gordon felt witty and expansive.
He would have liked to tell the taximan the history of his life.
The white-aproned barman hastened towards them.

'Yes sir?' said the barman.

'Gin,' said Gordon.

'Make it two,' said the taximan.

More matily than ever, they clinked glasses.

'Many happy returns,' said Gordon.

'Your birthday today, sir?'

'Only metaphorically.  My re-birthday, so to speak.'

'I never had much education,' said the taximan.

'I was speaking in parables,' said Gordon.

'English is good enough for me,' said the taximan.

'It was the tongue of Shakespeare,' said Gordon.

'Literary gentleman, are you, sir, by any chance?'

'Do I look as moth-eaten as all that?'

'Not moth-eaten, sir.  Only intellectual-like.'

'You're quite right.  A poet.'

'Poet!  It takes all sorts to make a world, don't it now?' said the
taximan.

'And a bloody good world it is,' said Gordon.

His thoughts moved lyrically tonight.  They had another gin and
presently went back to the taxi all but arm in arm, after yet
another gin.  That made five gins Gordon had had this evening.
There was an ethereal feeling in his veins; the gin seemed to be
flowing there, mingled with his blood.  He lay back in the corner
of the seat, watching the great blazing skysigns swim across the
bluish dark.  The evil red and blue of the Neon lights pleased him
at this moment.  How smoothly the taxi glided!  More like a gondola
than a car.  It was having money that did that.  Money greased the
wheels.  He thought of the evening ahead of him; good food, good
wine, good talk--above all, no worrying about money.  No damned
niggling with sixpences and 'We can't afford this' and 'We can't
afford that!'  Rosemary and Ravelston would try to stop him being
extravagant.  But he would shut them up.  He'd spend every penny he
had if he felt like it.  Ten whole quid to bust!  At least, five
quid.  The thought of Julia passed flickeringly through his mind
and disappeared again.

He was quite sober when they got to Modigliani's.  The monstrous
commissionaire, like a great glittering waxwork with the minimum of
joints, stepped stiffly forward to open the taxi door.  His grim
eye looked askance at Gordon's clothes.  Not that you were expected
to 'dress' at Modigliani's.  They were tremendously Bohemian at
Modigliani's, of course; but there are ways and ways of being
Bohemian, and Gordon's way was the wrong way.  Gordon did not care.
He bade the taximan an affectionate farewell, and tipped him half a
crown over his fare, whereat the commissionaire's eye looked a
little less grim.  At this moment Ravelston emerged from the
doorway.  The commissionaire knew Ravelston, of course.  He lounged
out on to the pavement, a tall distinguished figure, aristocratically
shabby, his eye rather moody.  He was worrying already about the
money this dinner was going to cost Gordon.

'Ah, there you are, Gordon!'

'Hullo, Ravelston!  Where's Rosemary?'

'Perhaps she's waiting inside.  I don't know her by sight, you
know.  But I say, Gordon, look here!  Before we go in, I wanted--'

'Ah, look, there she is!'

She was coming towards them, swift and debonair.  She threaded her
way through the crowd with the air of some neat little destroyer
gliding between large clumsy cargo-boats.  And she was nicely
dressed, as usual.  The sub-shovel hat was cocked at its most
provocative angle.  Gordon's heart stirred.  There was a girl for
you!  He was proud that Ravelston should see her.  She was very gay
tonight.  It was written all over her that she was not going to
remind herself or Gordon of their last disastrous encounter.
Perhaps she laughed and talked just a little too vivaciously as
Gordon introduced them and they went inside.  But Ravelston had
taken a liking to her immediately.  Indeed, everyone who met her
did take a liking to Rosemary.  The inside of the restaurant
overawed Gordon for a moment.  It was so horribly, artistically
smart.  Dark gate-leg tables, pewter candlesticks, pictures by
modern French painters on the walls.  One, a street scene, looked
like a Utrillo.  Gordon stiffened his shoulders.  Damn it, what was
there to be afraid of?  The five pound note was tucked away in its
envelope in his pocket.  It was Julia's five pounds, of course;
he wasn't going to spend it.  Still, its presence gave him moral
support.  It was a kind of talisman.  They were making for the
corner table--Ravelston's favourite table--at the far end.
Ravelston took Gordon by the arm and drew him a little back,
out of Rosemary's hearing.

'Gordon, look here!'

'What?'

'Look here, you're going to have dinner with ME tonight.'

'Bosh!  This is on me.'

'I do wish you would.  I hate to see you spending all that money.'

'We won't talk about money tonight,' said Gordon.

'Fifty-fifty, then,' pleaded Ravelston.

'It's on me,' said Gordon firmly.

Ravelston subsided.  The fat, white-haired Italian waiter was
bowing and smiling beside the corner table.  But it was at
Ravelston, not at Gordon, that he smiled.  Gordon sat down with the
feeling that he must assert himself quickly.  He waved away the
menu which the waiter had produced.

'We must settle what we're going to drink first,' he said.

'Beer for me,' said Ravelston, with a sort of gloomy haste.
'Beer's the only drink I care about.'

'Me too,' echoed Rosemary.

'Oh, rot!  We've got to have some wine.  What do you like, red or
white?  Give me the wine list,' he said to the waiter.

'Then let's have a plain Bordeaux.  Medoc or St Julien or
something,' said Ravelston.

'I adore St Julien,' said Rosemary, who thought she remembered that
St Julien was always the cheapest wine on the list.

Inwardly, Gordon damned their eyes.  There you are, you see!  They
were in league against him already.  They were trying to prevent
him from spending his money.  There was going to be that deadly,
hateful atmosphere of 'You can't afford it' hanging over everything.
It made him all the more anxious to be extravagant.  A moment ago he
would have compromised on Burgundy.  Now he decided that they must
have something really expensive--something fizzy, something with a
kick in it.  Champagne?  No, they'd never let him have champagne.
Ah!

'Have you got any Asti?' he said to the waiter.

The waiter suddenly beamed, thinking of his corkage.  He had
grasped now that Gordon and not Ravelston was the host.  He
answered in the peculiar mixture of French and English which he
affected.

'Asti, sir?  Yes, sir.  Very nice Asti!  Asti Spumanti.  Tres fin!
Tres vif!'

Ravelston's worried eye sought Gordon's across the table.  You
can't afford it! his eye pleaded.

'Is that one of those fizzy wines?' said Rosemary.

'Very fizzy, madame.  Very lively wine.  Tres vif!  Pop!'  His fat
hands made a gesture, picturing cascades of foam.

'Asti,' said Gordon, before Rosemary could stop him

Ravelston looked miserable.  He knew that Asti would cost Gordon
ten or fifteen shillings a bottle.  Gordon pretended not to notice.
He began talking about Stendhal--association with Duchesse de
Sanseverina and her 'force vin d'Asti'.  Along came the Asti in a
pail of ice--a mistake, that, as Ravelston could have told Gordon.
Out came the cork.  Pop!  The wild wine foamed into the wide flat
glasses.  Mysteriously the atmosphere of the table changed.
Something had happened to all three of them.  Even before it was
drunk the wine had worked its magic.  Rosemary had lost her
nervousness, Ravelston his worried preoccupation with the expense,
Gordon his defiant resolve to be extravagant.  They were eating
anchovies and bread and butter, fried sole, roast pheasant with
bread sauce and chipped potatoes; but principally they were
drinking and talking.  And how brilliantly they were talking--or so
it seemed to them, anyway!  They talked about the bloodiness of
modern life and the bloodiness of modern books.  What else is there
to talk about nowadays?  As usual (but, oh! how differently, now
that there was money in his pocket and he didn't really believe
what he was saying) Gordon descanted on the deadness, the
dreadfulness of the age we live in.  French letters and machine-
guns!  The movies and the Daily Mail!  It was a bone-deep truth
when he walked the streets with a couple of coppers in his pocket;
but it was a joke at this moment.  It was great fun--it IS fun when
you have good food and good wine inside you--to demonstrate that we
live in a dead and rotting world.  He was being witty at the
expense of the modern literature; they were all being witty.  With
the fine scorn of the unpublished Gordon knocked down reputation
after reputation.  Shaw, Yeats, Eliot, Joyce, Huxley, Lewis,
Hemingway--each with a careless phrase or two was shovelled into
the dustbin.  What fun it all was, if only it could last!  And of
course, at this particular moment, Gordon believed that it COULD
last.  Of the first bottle of Asti, Gordon drank three glasses,
Ravelston two, and Rosemary one.  Gordon became aware that a girl
at the table opposite was watching him.  A tall elegant girl with a
shell-pink skin and wonderful, almond-shaped eyes.  Rich, obviously;
one of the moneyed intelligentsia.  She thought him interesting--was
wondering who he was.  Gordon found himself manufacturing special
witticisms for her benefit.  And he WAS being witty, there was no
doubt about that.  That too was money.  Money greasing the wheels--
wheels of thought as well as wheels of taxis.

But somehow the second bottle of Asti was not such a success as
the first.  To begin with there was uncomfortableness over its
ordering.  Gordon beckoned to the waiter.

'Have you got another bottle of this?'

The waiter beamed fatly.  'Yes, sir!  Mais certainement, monsieur!'

Rosemary frowned and tapped Gordon's foot under the table.  'No,
Gordon, NO!  You're not to.'

'Not to what?'

'Order another bottle.  We don't want it.'

'Oh, bosh!  Get another bottle, waiter.'

'Yes, sir.'

Ravelston rubbed his nose.  With eyes too guilty to meet Gordon's
he looked at his wine glass.  'Look here, Gordon.  Let ME stand
this bottle.  I'd like to.'

'Bosh!' repeated Gordon.

'Get half a bottle, then,' said Rosemary.

'A whole bottle, waiter,' said Gordon.

After that nothing was the same.  They still talked, laughed,
argued, but things were not the same.  The elegant girl at the
table opposite had ceased watching Gordon.  Somehow, Gordon wasn't
being witty any longer.  It is almost always a mistake to order a
second bottle.  It is like bathing for a second time on a summer
day.  However warm the day is, however much you have enjoyed your
first bathe, you are always sorry for it if you go in a second
time.  The magic had departed from the wine.  It seemed to foam and
sparkle less, it was merely a clogging sourish liquid which you
gulped down half in disgust and half in hopes of getting drunk
quicker.  Gordon was now definitely though secretly drunk.  One
half of him was drunk and the other half sober.  He was beginning
to have that peculiar blurred feeling, as though your features had
swollen and your fingers grown thicker, which you have in the
second stage of drunkenness.  But the sober half of him was still
in command to outward appearance, anyway.  The conversation grew
more and more tedious.  Gordon and Ravelston talked in the detached
uncomfortable manner of people who have had a little scene and are
not going to admit it.  They talked about Shakespeare.  The
conversation tailed off into a long discussion about the meaning
of Hamlet.  It was very dull.  Rosemary stifled a yawn.  While
Gordon's sober half talked, his drunken half stood aside and
listened.  Drunken half was very angry.  They'd spoiled his
evening, damn them! with their arguing about that second bottle.
All he wanted now was to be properly drunk and have done with it.
Of the six glasses in the second bottle he drank four--for Rosemary
refused more wine.  But you couldn't do much on this weak stuff.
Drunken half clamoured for more drink, and more, and more.  Beer by
the quart and the bucket!  A real good rousing drink!  And by God!
he was going to have it later on.  He thought of the five pound
note stowed away in his inner pocket.  He still had that to blow,
anyway.

The musical clock that was concealed somewhere in Modigliani's
interior struck ten.

'Shall we shove off?' said Gordon.

Ravelston's eyes looked pleadingly, guiltily across the table.  Let
me share the bill! his eyes said.  Gordon ignored him.

'I vote we go to the Cafe Imperial,' he said.

The bill failed to sober him.  A little over two quid for the
dinner, thirty bob for the wine.  He did not let the others see the
bill, of course, but they saw him paying.  He threw four pound
notes on to the waiter's salver and said casually, 'Keep the
change.'  That left him with about ten bob besides the fiver.
Ravelston was helping Rosemary on with her coat; as she saw Gordon
throw notes to the waiter her lips parted in dismay.  She had had
no idea that the dinner was going to cost anything like four
pounds.  It horrified her to see him throwing money about like
that.  Ravelston looked gloomy and disapproving.  Gordon damned
their eyes again.  Why did they have to keep on worrying?  He could
afford it, couldn't he?  He still had that fiver.  But by God, it
wouldn't be his fault if he got home with a penny left!

But outwardly he was quite sober, and much more subdued than he
had been half an hour ago.  'We'd better have a taxi to the Cafe
Imperial,' he said.

'Oh, let's walk!' said Rosemary.  'It's only a step.'

'No, we'll have a taxi.'

They got into the taxi and were driven away, Gordon sitting next to
Rosemary.  He had half a mind to put his arm round her, in spite of
Ravelston's presence.  But at that moment a swirl of cold night air
came in at the window and blew against Gordon's forehead.  It gave
him a shock.  It was like one of those moments in the night when
suddenly from deep sleep you are broad awake and full of some
dreadful realization--as that you are doomed to die, for instance,
or that your life is a failure.  For perhaps a minute he was cold
sober.  He knew all about himself and the awful folly he was
committing--knew that he had squandered five pounds on utter
foolishness and was now going to squander the other five that
belonged to Julia.  He had a fleeting but terribly vivid vision of
Julia, with her thin face and her greying hair, in the cold of her
dismal bed-sitting room.  Poor, good Julia!  Julia who had been
sacrificed to him all her life, from whom he had borrowed pound
after pound after pound; and now he hadn't even the decency to keep
her five intact!  He recoiled from the thought; he fled back into
his drunkenness as into a refuge.  Quick, quick, we're getting
sober!  Booze, more booze!  Recapture that first fine careless
rapture!  Outside, the multi-coloured window of an Italian grocery,
still open, swam towards them.  He tapped sharply on the glass.
The taxi drew up.  Gordon began to climb out across Rosemary's
knees.

'Where are you going, Gordon?'

'To recapture that first fine careless rapture,' said Gordon, on
the pavement.

'What?'

'It's time we laid in some more booze.  The pubs'll be shutting in
half an hour.'

'No, Gordon, no!  You're not to get anything more to drink.  You've
had quite enough already.'

'Wait!'

He came out of the shop nursing a litre bottle of Chianti.  The
grocer had taken the cork out for him and put it in loosely again.
The others had grasped now that he was drunk--that he must have
been drinking before he met them.  It made them both embarrassed.
They went into the Cafe Imperial, but the chief thought in both
their minds was to get Gordon away and to bed as quickly as
possible.  Rosemary whispered behind Gordon's back, 'PLEASE don't
let him drink any more!'  Ravelston nodded gloomily.  Gordon was
marching ahead of them to a vacant table, not in the least troubled
by the stares everyone was casting at the wine-bottle which he
carried on his arm.  They sat down and ordered coffee, and with
some difficulty Ravelston restrained Gordon from ordering brandy as
well.  All of them were ill at ease.  It was horrible in the great
garish cafe, stuffily hot and deafeningly noisy with the jabber of
several hundred voices, the clatter of plates and glasses, and the
intermittent squalling of the band.  All three of them wanted to
get away.  Ravelston was still worrying about the expense, Rosemary
was worried because Gordon was drunk, Gordon was restless and
thirsty.  He had wanted to come here, but he was no sooner here
than he wanted to escape.  Drunken half was clamouring for a bit
of fun.  And drunken half wasn't going to be kept in check much
longer.  Beer, beer! cried drunken half.  Gordon hated this stuffy
place.  He had visions of a pub taproom with great oozy barrels and
quart pots topped with foam.  He kept an eye on the clock.  It was
nearly half past ten and the pubs even in Westminster would shut at
eleven.  Mustn't miss his beer!  The bottle of wine was for
afterwards, when the pubs were shut.  Rosemary was sitting opposite
him, talking to Ravelston, uncomfortably but with a sufficient
pretence that she was enjoying herself and there was nothing the
matter.  They were still talking in a rather futile way about
Shakespeare.  Gordon hated Shakespeare.  As he watched Rosemary
talking there came over him a violent, perverse desire for her.
She was leaning forward, her elbows on the table; he could see her
small breasts clearly through her dress.  It came to him with a
kind of shock, a catch of breath, which once again almost sobered
him, that he had seen her naked.  She was his girl!  He could have
her whenever he wanted her!  And by God, he was going to have her
tonight!  Why not?  It was a fitting end to the evening.  They
could find a place easily enough; there are plenty of hotels round
Shaftesbury Avenue where they don't ask questions if you can pay
the bill.  He still had his fiver.  He felt her foot under the
table, meaning to imprint a delicate caress upon it, and only
succeeded in treading on her toe.  She drew her foot away from him.

'Let's get out of this,' he said abruptly, and at once stood up.

'Oh, let's!' said Rosemary with relief.

They were in Regent Street again.  Down on the left Piccadilly
Circus blazed, a horrible pool of light.  Rosemary's eyes turned
towards the bus stop opposite.

'It's half past ten,' she said doubtfully.  'I've got to be back by
eleven.'

'Oh, rot!  Let's look for a decent pub.  I mustn't miss my beer.'

'Oh, no, Gordon!  No more pubs tonight.  I couldn't drink any more.
Nor ought you.'

'It doesn't matter.  Come this way.'

He took her by the arm and began to lead her down towards the
bottom of Regent Street, holding her rather tight as though afraid
she would escape.  For the moment he had forgotten about Ravelston.
Ravelston followed, wondering whether he ought to leave them to
themselves or whether he ought to stay and keep an eye on Gordon.
Rosemary hung back, not liking the way Gordon was pulling at her
arm.

'Where are you taking me, Gordon?'

'Round the corner, where it's dark.  I want to kiss you.'

'I don't think I want to be kissed.'

'Of course you do.'

'No!'

'Yes!'

She let him take her.  Ravelston waited on the corner by the Regent
Palace, uncertain what to do.  Gordon and Rosemary disappeared
round the corner and were almost immediately in darker, narrower
streets.  The appalling faces of tarts, like skulls coated with
pink powder, peered meaningly from several doorways.  Rosemary
shrank from them.  Gordon was rather amused.

'They think you're one of them,' he explained to her.

He stood his bottle on the pavement, carefully, against the wall,
then suddenly seized her and twisted her backwards.  He wanted her
badly, and he did not want to waste time over preliminaries.  He
began to kiss her face all over, clumsily but very hard.  She let
him do it for a moment, but it frightened her; his face, so close
to hers, looked pale, strange, and distracted.  He smelt very
strongly of wine.  She struggled, turning her face away so that he
was only kissing her hair and neck.

'Gordon, you mustn't!'

'Why mustn't I?'

'What are you doing?'

'What do you suppose I'm doing?'

He shoved her back against the wall, and with the careful,
preoccupied movements of a drunken man, tried to undo the front of
her dress.  It was of a kind that did not undo, as it happened.
This time she was angry.  She struggled violently, fending his hand
aside.

'Gordon, stop that at once!'

'Why?'

'If you do it again I'll smack your face.'

'Smack my face!  Don't you come the Girl Guide with me.'

'Let me go, will you!'

'Think of last Sunday,' he said lewdly.

'Gordon, if you go on I'll hit you, honestly I will.'

'Not you.'

He thrust his hand right into the front of her dress.  The movement
was curiously brutal, as though she had been a stranger to him.
She grasped that from the expression of his face.  She was not
Rosemary to him any longer, she was just a girl, a girl's body.
That was the thing that upset her.  She struggled and managed to
free herself from him.  He came after her again and clutched her
arm.  She smacked his face as hard as she could and dodged neatly
out of his reach.

'What did you do that for?' he said, feeling his cheek but not hurt
by the blow.

'I'm not going to stand that sort of thing.  I'm going home.
You'll be different tomorrow.'

'Rot!  You come along with me.  You're going to bed with me.'

'Good night!' she said, and fled up the dark side street.

For a moment he thought of following her, but found his legs too
heavy.  It did not seem worth while, anyway.  He wandered back to
where Ravelston was still waiting, looking moody and alone, partly
because he was worried about Gordon and partly because he was
trying not to notice two hopeful tarts who were on patrol just
behind him.  Gordon looked properly drunk, Ravelston thought.  His
hair was tumbling down over his forehead, one side of his face was
very pale and on the other there was a red smudge where Rosemary
had slapped him.  Ravelston thought this must be the flush of
drunkenness.

'What have you done with Rosemary?' he said.

'She's gone,' said Gordon, with a wave of his hand which was meant
to explain everything.  'But the night's still young.'

'Look here, Gordon, it's time you were in bed.'

'In bed, yes.  But not alone.'

He stood on the kerb gazing out into the hideous midnight-noon.
For a moment he felt quite deathly.  His face was burning.  His
whole body had a dreadful, swollen, fiery feeling.  His head in
particular seemed on the point of bursting.  Somehow the baleful
light was bound up with his sensations.  He watched the skysigns
flicking on and off, glaring red and blue, arrowing up and down--
the awful, sinister glitter of a doomed civilization, like the
still blazing lights of a sinking ship.  He caught Ravelston's arm
and made a gesture that comprehended the whole of Piccadilly
Circus.

'The lights down in hell will look just like that.'

'I shouldn't wonder.'

Ravelston was looking out for a disengaged taxi.  He must get
Gordon home to bed without further delay.  Gordon wondered whether
he was in joy or in agony.  That burning, bursting feeling was
dreadful.  The sober half of him was not dead yet.  Sober half
still knew with ice-cold clarity what he had done and what he was
doing.  He had committed follies for which tomorrow he would feel
like killing himself.  He had squandered five pounds in senseless
extravagance, he had robbed Julia, he had insulted Rosemary.  And
tomorrow--oh, tomorrow, we'll be sober!  Go home, go home! cried
sober half.  ---- to you! said drunken half contemptuously.  Drunken
half was still clamouring for a bit of fun.  And drunken half was
the stronger.  A fiery clock somewhere opposite caught his eye.
Twenty to eleven.  Quick, before the pubs are shut!  Haro! la gorge
m'ard!  Once again his thoughts moved lyrically.  He felt a hard
round shape under his arm, discovered that it was the Chianti
bottle, and tweaked out the cork.  Ravelston was waving to a taxi-
driver without managing to catch his eye.  He heard a shocked
squeal from the tarts behind.  Turning, he saw with horror that
Gordon had up-ended the bottle and was drinking from it.

'Hi!  Gordon!'

He sprang towards him and forced his arm down.  A gout of wine went
down Gordon's collar.

'For God's sake be careful!  You don't want the police to get hold
of you, do you?'

'I want a drink,' complained Gordon.

'But dash it!  You can't start drinking here.'

'Take me to a pub,' said Gordon.

Ravelston rubbed his nose helplessly.  'Oh, God!  I suppose that's
better than drinking on the pavement.  Come on, we'll go to a pub.
You shall have your drink there.'

Gordon recorked his bottle carefully.  Ravelston shepherded him
across the circus, Gordon clinging to his arm, but not for support,
for his legs were still quite steady.  They halted on the island,
then managed to find a gap in the traffic and went down the
Haymarket.

In the pub the air seemed wet with beer.  It was all a mist of beer
shot through with the sickly tang of whisky.  Along the bar a press
of men seethed, downing with Faustlike eagerness their last drinks
before eleven should sound its knell.  Gordon slid easily through
the crowd.  He was not in a mood to worry about a few jostlings and
elbowings.  In a moment he had fetched up at the bar between a
stout commercial traveller drinking Guinness and a tall, lean,
decayed major type of man with droopy moustaches, whose entire
conversation seemed to consist of 'What ho!' and 'What, what!'
Gordon threw half a crown on to the beer-wet bar.

'A quart of bitter, please!'

'No quart pots here!' cried the harassed barmaid, measuring pegs of
whisky with one eye on the clock.

'Quart pots on the top shelf, Effie!' shouted the landlord over his
shoulder, from the other side of the bar.

The barmaid hauled the beer-handle three times hurriedly.  The
monstrous glass pot was set before him.  He lifted it.  What a
weight!  A pint of pure water weighs a pound and a quarter.
Down with it!  Swish--gurgle!  A long, long sup of beer flowed
gratefully down his gullet.  He paused for breath, and felt a
little sickish.  Come on, now for another.  Swish--gurgle!  It
almost choked him this time.  But stick it out, stick it out!
Through the cascade of beer that poured down his throat and seemed
to drown his ears he heard the landlord's shout:  'Last orders,
gentlemen, please!'  For a moment he removed his face from the pot,
gasped, and got his breath back.  Now for the last.  Swish--gurgle!
A-a-ah!  Gordon set down the pot.  Emptied in three gulps--not bad.
He clattered it on the bar.

'Hi!  Give me the other half of that--quick!'

'What ho!' said the major.

'Coming it a bit, aren't you?' said the commercial traveller.

Ravelston, farther down the bar and hemmed in by several men, saw
what Gordon was doing.  He called to him, 'Hi, Gordon!', frowned
and shook his head, too shy to say in front of everybody, 'Don't
drink any more.'  Gordon settled himself on his legs.  He was still
steady, but consciously steady.  His head seemed to have swollen to
an immense size, his whole body had the same horrible, swollen,
fiery feeling as before.  Languidly he lifted the refilled beerpot.
He did not want it now.  Its smell nauseated him.  It was just a
hateful, pale yellow, sickly-tasting liquid.  Like urine, almost!
That bucketful of stuff to be forced down into his bursting guts--
horrible!  But come on, no flinching!  What else are we here for?
Down with it!  Here she is so near my nose.  So tip her up and down
she goes.  Swish--gurgle!

In the same moment something dreadful happened.  His gullet had
shut up of its own accord, or the beer had missed his mouth.  It
was pouring all over him, a tidal wave of beer.  He was drowning in
beer like lay-brother Peter in the Ingoldsby Legends.  Help!  He
tried to shout, choked, and let fall the beer-pot.  There was a
flurry all round him.  People were leaping aside to avoid the jet
of beer.  Crash! went the pot.  Gordon stood rocking.  Men,
bottles, mirrors were going round and round.  He was falling,
losing consciousness.  But dimly visible before him was a black
upright shape, sole point of stability in a reeling world--the
beer-handle.  He clutched it, swung, held tight.  Ravelston started
towards him.

The barmaid leaned indignantly over the bar.  The roundabout world
slowed down and stopped.  Gordon's brain was quite clear.

'Here!  What are you hanging on to the beer-handle for?'

'All over my bloody trousers!' cried the commercial traveller.

'What am I hanging on to the beer-handle for?'

'YES!  What are you hanging on to the beer-handle for?'

Gordon swung himself sideways.  The elongated face of the major
peered down at him, with wet moustaches drooping.

'She says, "What am I hanging on to the beer-handle for?"'

'What ho!  What?'

Ravelston had forced his way between several men and reached him.
He put a strong arm round Gordon's waist and hoisted him to his
feet.

'Stand up, for God's sake!  You're drunk.'

'Drunk?' said Gordon.

Everyone was laughing at them.  Ravelston's pale face flushed.

'Two and three those mugs cost,' said the barmaid bitterly.

'And what about my bloody trousers?' said the commercial traveller.

'I'll pay for the mug,' said Ravelston.  He did so.  'Now come on
out of it.  You're drunk.'

He began to shepherd Gordon towards the door, one arm round his
shoulder, the other holding the Chianti bottle, which he had taken
from him earlier.  Gordon freed himself.  He could walk with
perfect steadiness.  He said in a dignified manner:

'Drunk did you say I was?'

Ravelston took his arm again.  'Yes, I'm afraid you are.  Decidedly.'

'Swan swam across the sea, well swam swan,' said Gordon.

'Gordon, you ARE drunk.  The sooner you're in bed the better.'

'First cast out the beam that is in thine own eye before thou
castest out the mote that is in thy brother's,' said Gordon.

Ravelston had got him out on to the pavement by this time.  'We'd
better get hold of a taxi,' he said, looking up and down the
street.

There seemed to be no taxis about, however.  The people were
streaming noisily out of the pub, which was on the point of
closing.  Gordon felt better in the open air.  His brain had never
been clearer.  The red satanic gleam of a Neon light, somewhere in
the distance, put a new and brilliant idea into his head.  He
plucked at Ravelston's arm.

'Ravelston!  I say, Ravelston!'

'What?'

'Let's pick up a couple of tarts.'

In spite of Gordon's drunken state, Ravelston was scandalized.  'My
dear old chap!  You can't do that kind of thing.'

'Don't be so damned upper-class.  Why not?'

'But how could you, dash it!  After you've just said good night to
Rosemary--a really charming girl like that!'

'At night all cats are grey,' said Gordon, with the feeling that he
voiced a profound and cynical wisdom.

Ravelston decided to ignore this remark.  'We'd better walk up to
Piccadilly Circus,' he said.  'There'll be plenty of taxis there.'

The theatres were emptying.  Crowds of people and streams of cars
flowed to and fro in the frightful corpse-light.  Gordon's brain
was marvellously clear.  He knew what folly and evil he had
committed and was about to commit.  And yet after all it hardly
seemed to matter.  He saw as something far, far away, like
something seen through the wrong end of the telescope, his thirty
years, his wasted life, the blank future, Julia's five pounds,
Rosemary.  He said with a sort of philosophic interest:

'Look at the Neon lights!  Look at those awful blue ones over the
rubber shop.  When I see those lights I know that I'm a damned
soul.'

'Quite,' said Ravelston, who was not listening.  'Ah, there's a
taxi!'  He signalled.  'Damn!  He didn't see me.  Wait here a
second.'

He left Gordon by the Tube station and hurried across the street.
For a little while Gordon's mind receded into blankness.  Then he
was aware of two hard yet youthful faces, like the faces of young
predatory animals, that had come close up to his own.  They had
blackened eye-brows and hats that were like vulgarer versions of
Rosemary's.  He was exchanging badinage with them.  This seemed to
him to have been going on for several minutes.

'Hullo, Dora!  Hullo, Barbara!  (He knew their names, it seemed.)
And how are you?  And how's old England's winding-sheet?'

'Oo--haven't you got a cheek, just!'

'And what are you up to at this time of night?'

'Oo--jes' strolling around.'

'Like a lion, seeking whom he may devour?'

'Oo--you haven't half got a cheek!  Hasn't he got a cheek, Barbara?
You HAVE got a cheek!'

Ravelston had caught the taxi and brought it round to where Gordon
was standing.  He stepped out, saw Gordon between the two girls,
and stood aghast.

'Gordon!  Oh, my God!  What the devil have you been doing?'

'Let me introduce you.  Dora and Barbara,' said Gordon.

For a moment Ravelston looked almost angry.  As a matter of fact,
Ravelston was incapable of being properly angry.  Upset, pained,
embarrassed--yes; but not angry.  He stepped forward with a
miserable effort not to notice the two girls' existence.  Once he
noticed them the game was up.  He took Gordon by the arm and would
have bundled him into the taxi.

'Come on, Gordon, for God's sake!  Here's the taxi.  We'll go
straight home and put you to bed.'

Dora caught Gordon's other arm and hauled him out of reach as
though he had been a stolen handbag.

'What bloody business is it of yours?' she cried ferociously.

'You don't want to insult these two ladies, I hope?' said Gordon.

Ravelston faltered, stepped back, rubbed his nose.  It was a moment
to be firm; but Ravelston had never in his life been firm.  He
looked from Dora to Gordon, from Gordon to Barbara.  That was
fatal.  Once he had looked them in the face he was lost.  Oh, God!
What could he do?  They were human beings--he couldn't insult them.
The same instinct that sent his hand into his pocket at the very
sight of a beggar made him helpless at this moment.  The poor,
wretched girls!  He hadn't the heart to send them packing into the
night.  Suddenly he realized that he would have to go through with
this abominable adventure into which Gordon had led him.  For the
first time in his life he was let in for going home with a tart.

'But dash it all!' he said feebly.

'Allons-y,' said Gordon.

The taximan had taken his direction at a nod from Dora.  Gordon
slumped into the corner seat and seemed immediately to sink into
some immense abyss from which he rose again more gradually and with
only partial consciousness of what he had been doing.  He was
gliding smoothly through darkness starred with lights.  Or were the
lights moving and he stationary?  It was like being on the ocean
bottom, among the luminous, gliding fishes.  The fancy returned to
him that he was a damned soul in hell.  The landscape in hell would
be just like this.  Ravines of cold evil-coloured fire, with
darkness all above.  But in hell there would be torment.  Was this
torment?  He strove to classify his sensations.  The momentary lapse
into unconsciousness had left him weak, sick, shaken; his forehead
seemed to be splitting.  He put out a hand.  It encountered a knee,
a garter, and a small soft hand which sought mechanically for his.
He became aware that Ravelston, sitting opposite, was tapping his
toe urgently and nervously.

'Gordon!  Gordon!  Wake up!'

'What?'

'Gordon!  Oh, damn!  Causons en francais.  Qu'est-ce que tu as
fait?  Crois-tu que je veux coucher avec une sale--oh, damnation!'

'Oo-parley-voo francey!' squealed the girls.

Gordon was mildly amused.  Do Ravelston good, he thought.  A
parlour Socialist going home with a tart!  The first genuinely
proletarian action of his life.  As though aware of this thought,
Ravelston subsided into his corner in silent misery, sitting as far
away from Barbara as possible.  The taxi drew up at a hotel in a
side-street; a dreadful, shoddy, low place it was.  The 'hotel'
sign over the door looked skew-eyed.  The windows were almost dark,
but the sound of singing, boozy and dreary, trickled from within.
Gordon staggered out of the taxi and felt for Dora's arm.  Give us
a hand, Dora.  Mind the step.  What ho!

A smallish, darkish, smelly hallway, lino-carpeted, mean, uncared-
for, and somehow impermanent.  From a room somewhere on the left
the singing swelled, mournful as a church organ.  A cross-eyed,
evil-looking chambermaid appeared from nowhere.  She and Dora
seemed to know one another.  What a mug!  No competition there.
From the room on the left a single voice took up the song with
would-be facetious emphasis:


'The man that kisses a pretty girl
And goes and tells his mother,
Ought to have his lips cut off,
Ought to--'


It tailed away, full of the ineffable, undisguisable sadness of
debauchery.  A very young voice it sounded.  The voice of some poor
boy who in his heart only wanted to be at home with his mother and
sisters, playing hunt-the-slipper.  There was a party of young
fools in there, on the razzle with whisky and girls.  The tune
reminded Gordon.  He turned to Ravelston as he came in, Barbara
following.

'Where's my Chianti?' he said.

Ravelston gave him the bottle.  His face looked pale, harassed,
hunted, almost.  With guilty restless movements he kept himself
apart from Barbara.  He could not touch her or even look at her,
and yet to escape was beyond him.  His eyes sought Gordon's.  'For
the love of God can't we get out of it somehow?' they signalled.
Gordon frowned at him.  Stick it out!  No flinching!  He took
Dora's arm again.  Come on, Dora!  Now for those stairs.  Ah!
Wait a moment.

Her arm round his waist, supporting him, Dora drew him aside.  Down
the darkish, smelly stairs a young woman came mincingly, buttoning
on a glove; after her a bald, middle-aged man in evening clothes,
black overcoat, and white silk muffler, his opera hat in his hand.
He walked past them with small mean mouth tightened, pretending not
to see them.  A family man, by the guilty look in his eye.  Gordon
watched the gaslight gleam on the back of his bald head.  His
predecessor.  In the same bed, probably.  The mantle of Elisha.
Now then, Dora, up we go!  Ah, these stairs!  Difficilis ascensus
Averni.  That's right, here we are!  'Mind the step,' said Dora.
They were on the landing.  Black and white lino like a chessboard.
White-painted doors.  A smell of slops and a fainter smell of stale
linen.

We this way, you that.  At the other door Ravelston halted, his
fingers on the handle.  He could not--no, he COULD not do it.  He
could not enter that dreadful room.  For the last time his eyes,
like those of a dog about to be whipped, turned upon Gordon.  'Must
I, must I?' his eyes said.  Gordon eyed him sternly.  Stick it out,
Regulus!  March to your doom!  Atqui sciebat quae sibi Barbara.  It
is a far, far more proletarian thing that you do.  And then with
startling suddenness Ravelston's face cleared.  An expression of
relief, almost of joy, stole over it.  A wonderful thought had
occurred to him.  After all, you could always pay the girl without
actually doing anything!  Thank God!  He set his shoulders, plucked
up courage, went in.  The door shut.

So here we are.  A mean, dreadful room.  Lino on the floor, gas-
fire, huge double bed with sheets vaguely dingy.  Over the bed a
framed coloured picture from La Vie Parisienne.  A mistake, that.
Sometimes the originals don't compare so well.  And, by Jove! on
the bamboo table by the window, positively an aspidistra!  Hast
thou found me, O mine enemy?  But come here, Dora.  Let's have a
look at you.

He seemed to be lying on the bed.  He could not see very well.  Her
youthful, rapacious face, with blackened eyebrows, leaned over him
as he sprawled there.

'How about my present?' she demanded, half wheedling, half
menacing.

Never mind that now.  To work!  Come here.  Not a bad mouth.  Come
here.  Come closer.  Ah!

No.  No use.  Impossible.  The will but not the way.  The spirit is
willing but the flesh is weak.  Try again.  No.  The booze, it must
be.  See Macbeth.  One last try.  No, no use.  Not this evening,
I'm afraid.

All right, Dora, don't you worry.  You'll get your two quid all
right.  We aren't paying by results.

He made a clumsy gesture.  'Here, give us that bottle.  That bottle
off the dressing-table.'

Dora brought it.  Ah, that's better.  That at least doesn't fail.
With hands that had swollen to monstrous size he up-ended the
Chianti bottle.  The wine flowed down his throat, bitter and
choking, and some of it went up his nose.  It overwhelmed him.  He
was slipping, sliding, falling off the bed.  His head met the
floor.  His legs were still on the bed.  For a while he lay in this
position.  Is this the way to live?  Down below the youthful voices
were still mournfully singing:


'For tonight we'll merry be,
For tonight we'll merry be,
For tonight we'll merry be-e-e--
Tomorrow we'll be so-ober!'



9


And, by Jove, tomorrow we WERE sober!

Gordon emerged from some long, sickly dream to the consciousness
that the books in the lending library were the wrong way up.  They
were all lying on their sides.  Moreover, for some reason their
backs had turned white--white and shiny, like porcelain.

He opened his eyes a little wider and moved an arm.  Small rivulets
of pain, seemingly touched off by the movement, shot through his
body at unexpected places--down the calves of his legs, for
instance, and up both sides of his head.  He perceived that he was
lying on his side, with a hard smooth pillow under his cheek and a
coarse blanket scratching his chin and pushing its hairs into his
mouth.  Apart from the minor pains that stabbed him every time he
moved, there was a large, dull sort of pain which was not localized
but which seemed to hover all over him.

Suddenly he flung off the blanket and sat up.  He was in a police
cell.  At this moment a frightful spasm of nausea overcame him.
Dimly perceiving a W.C. in the corner, he crept towards it and was
violently sick, three or four times.

After that, for several minutes, he was in agonizing pain.  He
could scarcely stand on his feet, his head throbbed as though it
were going to burst, and the light seemed like some scalding white
liquid pouring into his brain through the sockets of his eyes.  He
sat on the bed holding his head between his hands.  Presently, when
some of the throbbing had died down, he had another look about him.
The cell measured about twelve feet long by six wide and was very
high.  The walls were all of white porcelain bricks, horribly white
and clean.  He wondered dully how they cleaned as high up as the
ceiling.  Perhaps with a hose, he reflected.  At one end there was
a little barred window, very high up, and at the other end, over
the door, an electric bulb let into the wall and protected by a
stout grating.  The thing he was sitting on was not actually a bed,
but a shelf with one blanket and a canvas pillow.  The door was of
steel, painted green.  In the door there was a little round hole
with a flap on the outside.

Having seen this much he lay down and pulled the blanket over him
again.  He had no further curiosity about his surroundings.  As to
what had happened last night, he remembered everything--at least,
he remembered everything up to the time when he had gone with Dora
into the room with the aspidistra.  God knew what had happened
after that.  There had been some kind of bust-up and he had landed
in the clink.  He had no notion of what he had done; it might be
murder for all he knew.  In any case he did not care.  He turned
his face to the wall and pulled the blanket over his head to shut
out the light.

After a long time the spyhole in the door was pushed aside.  Gordon
managed to turn his head round.  His neck-muscles seemed to creak.
Through the spyhole he could see a blue eye and a semi-circle of
pink chubby cheek.

''Ja do with a cup of tea?' a voice said.

Gordon sat up and instantly felt very sick again.  He took his head
between his hands and groaned.  The thought of a cup of hot tea
appealed to him, but he knew it would make him sick if it had sugar
in it.

'Please,' he said.

The police constable opened a partition in the top half of the door
and passed in a thick white mug of tea.  It had sugar in it.  The
constable was a solid rosy young man of about twenty-five, with a
kind face, white eyelashes, and a tremendous chest.  It reminded
Gordon of the chest of a carthorse.  He spoke with a good accent
but with vulgar turns of speech.  For a minute or so he stood
regarding Gordon.

'You weren't half bad last night,' he said finally.

'I'm bad now.'

'You was worse last night, though.  What you go and hit the
sergeant for?'

'Did I hit the sergeant?'

'Did you?  Coo!  He wasn't half wild.  He turns to me and he says--
holding his ear he was, like this--he says, "Now, if that man
wasn't too drunk to stand, I'd knock his block off."  It's all gone
down on your charge sheet.  Drunk and disorderly.  You'd only ha'
bin drunk and incapable if you hadn't of hit the sergeant.'

'Do you know what I shall get for this?'

'Five quid or fourteen days.  You'll go up before Mr Groom.  Lucky
for you it wasn't Mr Walker.  He'd give you a month without the
option, Mr Walker would.  Very severe on the drunks he is.
Teetotaller.'

Gordon had drunk some of the tea.  It was nauseatingly sweet but
its warmth made him feel stronger.  He gulped it down.  At this
moment a nasty, snarling sort of voice--the sergeant whom Gordon
had hit, no doubt--yelped from somewhere outside:

'Take that man out and get him washed.  Black Maria leaves at half
past nine.'

The constable hastened to open the cell door.  As soon as Gordon
stepped outside he felt worse then ever.  This was partly because
it was much colder in the passage than in the cell.  He walked a
step or two, and then suddenly his head was going round and round.
'I'm going to be sick!' he cried.  He was falling--he flung out a
hand and stopped himself against the wall.  The constable's strong
arm went round him.  Across the arm, as over a rail, Gordon sagged,
doubled up and limp.  A jet of vomit burst from him.  It was the
tea, of course.  There was a gutter running along the stone floor.
At the end of the passage the moustachio'd sergeant, in tunic
without a belt, stood with his hand on his hip, looking on
disgustedly.

'Dirty little tyke,' he muttered, and turned away.

'Come on, old chap,' said the constable.  'You'll be better in half
a mo'.'

He half led, half dragged Gordon to a big stone sink at the end of
the passage and helped him to strip to the waist.  His gentleness
was astonishing.  He handled Gordon almost like a nurse handling a
child.  Gordon had recovered enough strength to sluice himself with
the ice-cold water and rinse his mouth out.  The constable gave him
a torn towel to dry himself with and then led him back to the cell.

'Now you sit quiet till the Black Maria comes.  And take my tip--
when you go up to the court, you plead guilty and say you won't do
it again.  Mr Groom won't be hard on you.'

'Where are my collar and tie?' said Gordon.

'We took 'em away last night.  You'll get 'em back before you go up
to court.  We had a bloke hung himself with his tie, once.'

Gordon sat down on the bed.  For a little while he occupied himself
by calculating the number of porcelain bricks in the walls, then
sat with his elbows on his knees, his head between his hands.  He
was still aching all over; he felt weak, cold, jaded, and, above
all, bored.  He wished that boring business of going up to the
court could be avoided somehow.  The thought of being put into some
jolting vehicle and taken across London to hang about in chilly
cells and passages, and of having to answer questions and be
lectured by magistrates, bored him indescribably.  All he wanted
was to be left alone.  But presently there was the sound of several
voices farther down the passage, and then of feet approaching.  The
partition in the door was opened.

'Couple of visitors for you,' the constable said.

Gordon was bored by the very thought of visitors.  Unwillingly he
looked up, and saw Flaxman and Ravelston looking in upon him.  How
they had got there together was a mystery, but Gordon felt not the
faintest curiosity about it.  They bored him.  He wished they would
go away.

'Hullo, chappie!' said Flaxman.

'YOU here?' said Gordon with a sort of weary offensiveness.

Ravelston looked miserable.  He had been up since the very early
morning, looking for Gordon.  This was the first time he had seen
the interior of a police cell.  His face shrank with disgust as he
looked at the chilly white-tiled place with its shameless W.C. in
the corner.  But Flaxman was more accustomed to this kind of thing.
He cocked a practised eye at Gordon.

'I've seen 'em worse,' he said cheerfully.  'Give him a prairie
oyster and he'd buck up something wonderful.  D'you know what your
eyes look like, chappie?' he added to Gordon.  'They look as if
they'd been taken out and poached.'

'I was drunk last night,' said Gordon, his head between his hands.

'I gathered something of the kind, old chappie.'

'Look here, Gordon,' said Ravelston, 'we came to bail you out, but
it seems we're too late.  They're taking you up to court in a few
minutes' time.  This is a bloody show.  It's a pity you didn't give
them a false name when they brought you here last night.'

'Did I tell them my name?'

'You told them everything.  I wish to God I hadn't let you out of
my sight.  You slipped out of that house somehow and into the
street.'

'Wandering up and down Shaftesbury Avenue, drinking out of a
bottle,' said Flaxman appreciatively.  'But you oughtn't to have
hit the sergeant, old chappie!  That was a bit of bloody
foolishness.  And I don't mind telling you Mother Wisbeach is on
your track.  When your pal here came round this morning and told
her you'd been for a night on the tiles, she took on as if you'd
done a bloody murder.'

'And look here, Gordon,' said Ravelston.

There was the familiar note of discomfort in his face.  It was
something about money, as usual.  Gordon looked up.  Ravelston was
gazing into the distance.

'Look here.'

'What?'

'About your fine.  You'd better leave that to me.  I'll pay it.'

'No, you won't.'

'My dear old chap!  They'll send you to jail if I don't.'

'Oh, hell!  I don't care.'

He did not care.  At this moment he did not care if they sent him
to prison for a year.  Of course he couldn't pay his fine himself.
He knew without even needing to look that he had no money left.  He
would have given it all to Dora, or more probably she would have
pinched it.  He lay down on the bed again and turned his back on
the others.  In the sulky, sluggish state that he was in, his sole
desire was to get rid of them.  They made a few more attempts to
talk to him, but he would not answer, and presently they went away.
Flaxman's voice boomed cheerfully down the passage.  He was giving
Ravelston minute instructions as to how to make a prairie oyster.

The rest of that day was very beastly.  Beastly was the ride in the
Black Maria, which, inside, was like nothing so much as a miniature
public lavatory, with tiny cubicles down each side, into which you
were locked and in which you had barely room to sit down.
Beastlier yet was the long wait in one of the cells adjoining the
magistrate's court.  This cell was an exact replica of the cell at
the police station, even to having precisely the same number of
porcelain bricks.  But it differed from the police station cell in
being repulsively dirty.  It was cold, but the air was so fetid as
to be almost unbreathable.  Prisoners were coming and going all the
time.  They would be thrust into the cell, taken out after an hour
or two to go up to the court, and then perhaps brought back again
to wait while the magistrate decided upon their sentence or fresh
witnesses were sent for.  There were always five or six men in the
cell, and there was nothing to sit on except the plank bed.  And
the worst was that nearly all of them used the W.C.--there,
publicly, in the tiny cell.  They could not help it.  There was
nowhere else to go.  And the plug of the beastly thing did not even
pull properly.

Until the afternoon Gordon felt sick and weak.  He had had no
chance to shave, and his face was hatefully scrubby.  At first he
merely sat on the corner of the plank bed, at the end nearest the
door, as far away from the W.C. as he could get, and took no notice
of the other prisoners.  They bored and disgusted him; later, as
his headache wore off, he observed them with a faint interest.
There was a professional burglar, a lean worried-looking man with
grey hair, who was in a terrible stew about what would happen to
his wife and kids if he were sent to jail.  He had been arrested
for 'loitering with intent to enter'--a vague offence for which you
generally get convicted if there are previous convictions against
you.  He kept walking up and down, flicking the fingers of his
right hand with a curious nervous gesture, and exclaiming against
the unfairness of it.  There was also a deaf mute who stank like a
ferret, and a small middle-aged Jew with a fur-collared overcoat,
who had been buyer to a large firm of kosher butchers.  He had
bolted with twenty-seven pounds, gone to Aberdeen, of all places,
and spent the money on tarts.  He too had a grievance, for he said
his case ought to have been tried in the rabbi's court instead of
being turned over to the police.  There was also a publican who
had embezzled his Christmas club money.  He was a big, hearty,
prosperous-looking man of about thirty-five, with a loud red face
and a loud blue overcoat--the sort of man who, if he were not a
publican, would be a bookie.  His relatives had paid back the
embezzled money, all except twelve pounds, but the club members had
decided to prosecute.  There was something in this man's eyes that
troubled Gordon.  He carried everything off with a swagger, but all
the while there was that blank, staring look in his eyes; he would
fall into a kind of reverie at every gap in the conversation.  It
was somehow rather dreadful to see him.  There he was, still in his
smart clothes, with the splendour of a publican's life only a month
or two behind him; and now he was ruined, probably for ever.  Like
all London publicans he was in the claw of the brewer, he would be
sold up and his furniture and fittings seized, and when he came out
of jail he would never have a pub or a job again.

The morning wore on with dismal slowness.  You were allowed to
smoke--matches were forbidden, but the constable on duty outside
would give you a light through the trap in the door.  Nobody had
any cigarettes except the publican, who had his pockets full of
them and distributed them freely.  Prisoners came and went.  A
ragged dirty man who claimed to be a coster 'up' for obstruction
was put into the cell for half an hour.  He talked a great deal,
but the others were deeply suspicious of him; when he was taken out
again they all declared he was a 'split'.  The police, it was said,
often put a 'split' into the cells, disguised as a prisoner, to
pick up information.  Once there was great excitement when the
constable whispered through the trap that a murderer, or would-be
murderer, was being put into the cell next door.  He was a youth of
eighteen who had stabbed his 'tart' in the belly, and she was not
expected to live.  Once the trap opened and the tired, pale face of
a clergyman looked in.  He saw the burglar, said wearily, 'YOU here
again, Jones?' and went away again.  Dinner, so-called, was served
out at about twelve o'clock.  All you got was a cup of tea and two
slices of bread and marg.  You could have food sent in, though, if
you could pay for it.  The publican had a good dinner sent in in
covered dishes; but he had no appetite for it, and gave most of it
away.  Ravelston was still hanging about the court, waiting for
Gordon's case to come on, but he did not know the ropes well enough
to have food sent in to Gordon.  Presently the burglar and the
publican were taken away, sentenced, and brought back to wait till
the Black Maria should take them off to jail.  They each got nine
months.  The publican questioned the burglar about what prison was
like.  There was a conversation of unspeakable obscenity about the
lack of women there.

Gordon's case came on at half past two, and it was over so quickly
that it seemed preposterous to have waited all that time for it.
Afterwards he could remember nothing about the court except the
coat of arms over the magistrate's chair.  The magistrate was
dealing with the drunks at the rate of two a minute.  To the tune
of 'John-Smith-drunk six-shillings-move-on-NEXT!' they filed past
the railings of the dock, precisely like a crowd taking tickets at
a booking-office.  Gordon's case, however, took two minutes instead
of thirty seconds, because he had been disorderly and the sergeant
had to testify that Gordon had struck him on the ear and called him
a ---- bastard.  There was also a mild sensation in the court
because Gordon, when questioned at the police station, had
described himself as a poet.  He must have been very drunk to say a
thing like that.  The magistrate looked at him suspiciously.

'I see you call yourself a POET.  ARE you a poet?'

'I write poetry,' said Gordon sulkily.

'Hm!  Well, it doesn't seem to teach you to behave yourself, does
it?  You will pay five pounds or go to prison for fourteen days.
NEXT!'

And that was all.  Nevertheless, somewhere at the back of the court
a bored reporter had pricked up his ears.

On the other side of the court there was a room where a police
sergeant sat with a large ledger, entering up the drunks' fines and
taking payment.  Those who could not pay were taken back to the
cells.  Gordon had expected this to happen to himself.  He was
quite resigned to going to prison.  But when he emerged from the
court it was to find that Ravelston was waiting there and had
already paid his fine for him.  Gordon did not protest.  He allowed
Ravelston to pack him into a taxi and take him back to the flat in
Regent's Park.  As soon as they got there Gordon had a hot bath; he
needed one, after the beastly contaminating grime of the last
twelve hours.  Ravelston lent him a razor, lent him a clean shirt
and pyjamas and socks and underclothes, even went out of doors and
bought him a toothbrush.  He was strangely solicitous about Gordon.
He could not rid himself of a guilty feeling that what had happened
last night was mainly his own fault; he ought to have put his foot
down and taken Gordon home as soon as he showed signs of being
drunk.  Gordon scarcely noticed what was being done for him.  Even
the fact the Ravelston had paid his fine failed to trouble him.
For the rest of that afternoon he lay in one of the armchairs in
front of the fire, reading a detective story.  About the future he
refused to think.  He grew sleepy very early.  At eight o'clock he
went to bed in the spare bedroom and slept like a log for nine
hours.

It was not till next morning that he began to think seriously about
his situation.  He woke in the wide caressing bed, softer and
warmer than any bed he had ever slept in, and began to grope about
for his matches.  Then he remembered that in places like this you
didn't need matches to get a light, and felt for the electric
switch that hung on a cord at the bedhead.  Soft light flooded the
room.  There was a syphon of soda water on the bed-table.  Gordon
discovered that even after thirty-six hours there was still a vile
taste in his mouth.  He had a drink and looked about him.

It was a queer feeling, lying there in somebody else's pyjamas in
somebody else's bed.  He felt that he had no business there--that
this wasn't the sort of place where he belonged.  There was a sense
of guilt in lying here in luxury when he was ruined and hadn't a
penny in the world.  For he was ruined right enough, there was no
doubt about that.  He seemed to know with perfect certainty that
his job was lost.  God knew what was going to happen next.  The
memory of that stupid dull debauch rolled back upon him with
beastly vividness.  He could recall everything, from his first pink
gin before he started out to Dora's peach-coloured garters.  He
squirmed when he thought of Dora.  WHY does one do these things?
Money again, always money!  The rich don't behave like that.  The
rich are graceful even in their vices.  But if you have no money
you don't even know how to spend it when you get it.  You just
splurge it frantically away, like a sailor in a bawdy-house his
first night ashore.

He had been in the clink, twelve hours.  He thought of the cold
faecal stench of that cell at the police court.  A foretaste of
future days.  And everyone would know that he had been in the
clink.  With luck it might be kept from Aunt Angela and Uncle
Walter, but Julia and Rosemary probably knew already.  With
Rosemary it didn't matter so much, but Julia would be ashamed and
miserable.  He thought of Julia.  Her long thin back as she bent
over the tea-caddy; her good, goose-like, defeated face.  She had
never lived.  From childhood she had been sacrificed to him--to
Gordon, to 'the boy'.  It might be a hundred quid he had 'borrowed'
from her in all these years; and then even five quid he couldn't
spare her.  Five quid he had set aside for her, and then spent it
on a tart!

He turned out the light and lay on his back, wide awake.  At this
moment he saw himself with frightful clarity.  He took a sort of
inventory of himself and his possessions.  Gordon Comstock, last of
the Comstocks, thirty years old, with twenty-six teeth left; with
no money and no job; in borrowed pyjamas in a borrowed bed; with
nothing before him except cadging and destitution, and nothing
behind him except squalid fooleries.  His total wealth a puny body
and two cardboard suitcases full of worn-out clothes.

At seven Ravelston was awakened by a tap on his door.  He rolled
over and said sleepily, 'Hullo?'  Gordon came in, a dishevelled
figure almost lost in the borrowed silk pyjamas.  Ravelston roused
himself, yawning.  Theoretically he got up at the proletarian hour
of seven.  Actually he seldom stirred until Mrs Beaver, the
charwoman, arrived at eight.  Gordon pushed the hair out of his
eyes and sat down on the foot of Ravelston's bed.

'I say, Ravelston, this is bloody.  I've been thinking things over.
There's going to be hell to pay.'

'What?'

'I shall lose my job.  McKechnie can't keep me on after I've been
in the clink.  Besides, I ought to have been at work yesterday.
Probably the shop wasn't opened all day.'

Ravelston yawned.  'It'll be all right, I think.  That fat chap--
what's his name?  Flaxman--rang McKechnie up and told him you were
down with flu.  He made it pretty convincing.  He said your
temperature was a hundred and three.  Of course your landlady
knows.  But I don't suppose she'd tell McKechnie.'

'But suppose it's got into the papers!'

'Oh, lord!  I suppose that might happen.  The char brings the
papers up at eight.  But do they report drunk cases?  Surely not?'

Mrs Beaver brought the Telegraph and the Herald.  Ravelston sent
her out for the Mail and the Express.  They searched hurriedly
through the police-court news.  Thank God! it hadn't 'got into the
papers' after all.  There was no reason why it should, as a matter
of fact.  It was not as if Gordon had been a racing motorist or a
professional footballer.  Feeling better, Gordon managed to eat
some breakfast, and after breakfast Ravelston went out.  It was
agreed that he should go up to the shop, see Mr McKechnie, give him
further details of Gordon's illness, and find out how the land lay.
It seemed quite natural to Ravelston to waste several days in
getting Gordon out of his scrape.  All the morning Gordon hung
about the flat, restless and out of sorts, smoking cigarettes in an
endless chain.  Now that he was alone, hope had deserted him.  He
knew by profound instinct that Mr McKechnie would have heard about
his arrest.  It wasn't the kind of thing you could keep dark.  He
had lost his job, and that was all about it.

He lounged across to the window and looked out.  A desolate day;
the whitey-grey sky looked as if it could never be blue again; the
naked trees wept slowly into the gutters.  Down a neighbouring
street the cry of the coal-man echoed mournfully.  Only a fortnight
to Christmas now.  Jolly to be out of work at this time of year!
But the thought, instead of frightening him, merely bored him.  The
peculiar lethargic feeling, the stuffy heaviness behind the eyes,
that one has after a fit of drunkenness, seemed to have settled
upon him permanently.  The prospect of searching for another job
bored him even more than the prospect of poverty.  Besides, he
would never find another job.  There are no jobs to be had
nowadays.  He was going down, down into the sub-world of the
unemployed--down, down into God knew what workhouse depths of dirt
and hunger and futility.  And chiefly he was anxious to get it over
with as little fuss and effort as possible.

Ravelston came back at about one o'clock.  He pulled his gloves off
and threw them into a chair.  He looked tired and depressed.
Gordon saw at a glance that the game was up.

'He's heard, of course?' he said.

'Everything, I'm afraid.'

'How?  I suppose that cow of a Wisbeach woman went and sneaked to
him?'

'No.  It was in the paper after all.  The local paper.  He got it
out of that.'

'Oh, hell!  I'd forgotten that.'

Ravelston produced from his coat pocket a folded copy of a bi-
weekly paper.  It was one that they took in at the shop because Mr
McKechnie advertised in it--Gordon had forgotten that.  He opened
it.  Gosh!  What a splash!  It was all over the middle page.


BOOKSELLER'S ASSISTANT FINED

MAGISTRATE'S SEVERE STRICTURE

'DISGRACEFUL FRACAS'


There were nearly two columns of it.  Gordon had never been so
famous before and never would be again.  They must have been very
hard up for a bit of news.  But these local papers have a curious
notion of patriotism.  They are so avid for local news that a
bicycle-accident in the Harrow Road will occupy more space than a
European crisis, and such items of news as 'Hampstead Man on Murder
Charge' or 'Dismembered Baby in Cellar in Camberwell' are displayed
with positive pride.

Ravelston described his interview with Mr McKechnie.  Mr McKechnie,
it seemed, was torn between his rage against Gordon and his desire
not to offend such a good customer as Ravelston.  But of course,
after such a thing like that, you could hardly expect him to take
Gordon back.  These scandals were bad for trade, and besides, he
was justly angry at the lies Flaxman had told him over the phone.
But he was angriest of all at the thought of HIS assistant being
drunk and disorderly.  Ravelston said that the drunkenness seemed
to anger him in a way that was peculiar.  He gave the impression
that he would almost have preferred Gordon to pinch money out of
the till.  Of course, he was a teetotaller himself.  Gordon had
sometimes wondered whether he wasn't also a secret drinker, in the
traditional Scottish style.  His nose was certainly very red.  But
perhaps it was snuff that did it.  Anyway, that was that.  Gordon
was in the soup, full fathom five.

'I suppose the Wisbeach will stick to my clothes and things,' he
said.  'I'm not going round there to fetch them.  Besides, I owe
her a week's rent.'

'Oh, don't worry about that.  I'll see to your rent and everything.'

'My dear chap, I can't let you pay my rent!'

'Oh, dash it!'  Ravelston's face grew faintly pink.  He looked
miserably into the distance, and then said what he had to say all
in a sudden burst:  'Look here, Gordon, we must get this settled.
You've just got to stay here till this business has blown over.
I'll see you through about money and all that.  You needn't think
you're being a nuisance, because you're not.  And anyway, it's only
till you get another job.'

Gordon moved moodily away from him, his hands in his pockets.  He
had foreseen all this, of course.  He knew that he ought to refuse,
he WANTED to refuse, and yet he had not quite the courage.

'I'm not going to sponge on you like that,' he said sulkily.

'Don't use such expressions, for God's sake!  Besides, where could
you go if you didn't stay here?'

'I don't know--into the gutter, I suppose.  It's where I belong.
The sooner I get there the better.'

'Rot!  You're going to stay here till you've found another job.'

'But there isn't a job in the world.  It might be a year before I
found a job.  I don't WANT a job.'

'You mustn't talk like that.  You'll find a job right enough.
Something's bound to turn up.  And for God's sake don't talk about
SPONGING on me.  It's only an arrangement between friends.  If you
really want to, you can pay it all back when you've got the money.'

'Yes--WHEN!'

But in the end he let himself be persuaded.  He had known that he
would let himself be persuaded.  He stayed on at the flat, and
allowed Ravelston to go round to Willowbed Road and pay his rent
and recover his two cardboard suitcases; he even allowed Ravelston
to 'lend' him a further two pounds for current expenses.  His heart
sickened while he did it.  He was living on Ravelston--sponging on
Ravelston.  How could there ever be a real friendship between them
again?  Besides, in his heart he didn't want to be helped.  He only
wanted to be left alone.  He was headed for the gutter; better to
reach the gutter quickly and get it over.  Yet for the time being
he stayed, simply because he lacked the courage to do otherwise.

But as for this business of getting a job, it was hopeless from the
start.  Even Ravelston, though rich, could not manufacture jobs out
of nothing.  Gordon knew beforehand that there were no jobs going
begging in the book trade.  During the next three days he wore his
shoes out traipsing from bookseller to bookseller.  At shop after
shop he set his teeth, marched in, demanded to see the manager, and
three minutes later marched out again with his nose in the air.
The answer was always the same--no jobs vacant.  A few booksellers
were taking on an extra man for the Christmas rush, but Gordon was
not the type they were looking for.  He was neither smart nor
servile; he wore shabby clothes and spoke with the accent of a
gentleman.  Besides, a few questions always brought it out that he
had been sacked from his last job for drunkenness.  After only
three days he gave it up.  He knew it was no use.  It was only to
please Ravelston that he had even been pretending to look for work.

In the evening he trailed back to the flat, footsore and with his
nerves on edge from a series of snubs.  He was making all his
journeys on foot, to economize Ravelston's two pounds.  When he got
back Ravelston had just come up from the office and was sitting in
one of the armchairs in front of the fire, with some long galley-
proofs over his knee.  He looked up as Gordon came in.

'Any luck?' he said as usual.

Gordon did not answer.  If he had answered it would have been with
a stream of obscenities.  Without even looking at Ravelston he went
straight into his bedroom, kicked off his shoes, and flung himself
on the bed.  He hated himself at this moment.  Why had he come
back?  What right had he to come back and sponge on Ravelston when
he hadn't even the intention of looking for a job any longer?  He
ought to have stayed out in the streets, slept in Trafalgar Square,
begged--anything.  But he hadn't the guts to face the streets as
yet.  The prospect of warmth and shelter had tugged him back.  He
lay with his hands beneath his head, in a mixture of apathy and
self-hatred.  After about half an hour he heard the door-bell ring
and Ravelston get up to answer it.  It was that bitch Hermione
Slater, presumably.  Ravelston had introduced Gordon to Hermione a
couple of days ago, and she had treated him like dirt.  But a
moment later there was a knock at the bedroom door.

'What is it?' said Gordon.

'Somebody's come to see you,' said Ravelston.

'To see ME?'

'Yes.  Come on into the other room.'

Gordon swore and rolled sluggishly off the bed.  When he got to the
other room he found that the visitor was Rosemary.  He had been
half expecting her, of course, but it wearied him to see her.  He
knew why she had come; to sympathize with him, to pity him, to
reproach him--it was all the same.  In his despondent, bored mood
he did not want to make the effort of talking to her.  All he
wanted was to be left alone.  But Ravelston was glad to see her.
He had taken a liking to her in their single meeting and thought
she might cheer Gordon up.  He made a transparent pretext to go
downstairs to the office, leaving the two of them together.

They were alone, but Gordon made no move to embrace her.  He was
standing in front of the fire, round-shouldered, his hands in his
coat pockets, his feet thrust into a pair of Ravelston's slippers
which were much too big for him.  She came rather hesitantly
towards him, not yet taking off her hat or her coat with the lamb-
skin collar.  It hurt her to see him.  In less than a week his
appearance had deteriorated strangely.  Already he had that
unmistakable, seedy, lounging look of a man who is out of work.
His face seemed to have grown thinner, and there were rings round
his eyes.  Also it was obvious that he had not shaved that day.

She laid her hand on his arm, rather awkwardly, as a woman does
when it is she who has to make the first embrace.

'Gordon--'

'Well?'

He said it almost sulkily.  The next moment she was in his arms.
But it was she who had made the first movement, not he.  Her head
was on his breast, and behold! she was struggling with all her
might against the tears that almost overwhelmed her.  It bored
Gordon dreadfully.  He seemed so often to reduce her to tears!  And
he didn't want to be cried over; he only wanted to be left alone--
alone to sulk and despair.  As he held her there, one hand
mechanically caressing her shoulder, his main feeling was boredom.
She had made things more difficult for him by coming here.  Ahead
of him were dirt, cold, hunger, the streets, the workhouse, and the
jail.  It was against THAT that he had got to steel himself.  And
he could steel himself, if only she would leave him alone and not
come plaguing him with these irrelevant emotions.

He pushed her a little way from him.  She had recovered herself
quickly, as she always did.

'Gordon, my dear one!  Oh, I'm so sorry, so sorry!'

'Sorry about what?'

'You losing your job and everything.  You look so unhappy.'

'I'm not unhappy.  Don't pity me, for God's sake.'

He disengaged himself from her arms.  She pulled her hat off and
threw it into a chair.  She had come here with something definite
to say.  It was something she had refrained from saying all these
years--something that it had seemed to her a point of chivalry not
to say.  But now it had got to be said, and she would come straight
out with it.  It was not in her nature to beat about the bush.

'Gordon, will you do something to please me?'

'What?'

'Will you go back to the New Albion?'

So that was it!  Of course he had foreseen it.  She was going to
start nagging at him like all the others.  She was going to add
herself to the band of people who worried him and badgered him to
'get on'.  But what else could you expect?  It was what any woman
would say.  The marvel was that she had never said it before.  Go
back to the New Albion!  It had been the sole significant action of
his life, leaving the New Albion.  It was his religion, you might
say, to keep out of that filthy money-world.  Yet at this moment he
could not remember with any clarity the motives for which he had
left the New Albion.  All he knew was that he would never go back,
not if the skies fell, and that the argument he foresaw bored him
in advance.

He shrugged his shoulders and looked away.  'The New Albion
wouldn't take me back,' he said shortly.

'Yes, they would.  You remember what Mr Erskine said.  It's not so
long ago--only two years.  And they're always on the look-out for
good copywriters.  Everyone at the office says so.  I'm sure they'd
give you a job if you went and asked them.  And they'd pay you at
least four pounds a week.'

'Four pounds a week!  Splendid!  I could afford to keep an
aspidistra on that, couldn't I?'

'No, Gordon, don't joke about it now.'

'I'm not joking.  I'm serious.'

'You mean you won't go back to them--not even if they offered you a
job?'

'Not in a thousand years.  Not if they paid me fifty pounds a
week.'

'But why?  Why?'

'I've told you why,' he said wearily.

She looked at him helplessly.  After all, it was no use.  There was
this money-business standing in the way--these meaningless scruples
which she had never understood but which she had accepted merely
because they were his.  She felt all the impotence, the resentment
of a woman who sees an abstract idea triumphing over common sense.
How maddening it was, that he should let himself be pushed into the
gutter by a thing like that!  She said almost angrily:

'I don't understand you, Gordon, I really don't.  Here you are out
of work, you may be starving in a little while for all you know;
and yet when there's a good job which you can have almost for the
asking, you won't take it.'

'No, you're quite right.  I won't.'

'But you must have SOME kind of job, mustn't you?'

'A job, but not a GOOD job.  I've explained that God knows how
often.  I dare say I'll get a job of sorts sooner or later.  The
same kind of job as I had before.'

'But I don't believe you're even TRYING to get a job, are you?'

'Yes, I am.  I've been out all today seeing booksellers.'

'And you didn't even shave this morning!' she said, changing her
ground with feminine swiftness.

He felt his chin.  'I don't believe I did, as a matter of fact.'

'And then you expect people to give you a job!  Oh, Gordon!'

'Oh, well, what does it matter?  It's too much fag to shave every
day.'

'You're letting yourself go to pieces,' she said bitterly.  'You
don't seem to WANT to make any effort.  You want to sink--just
SINK!'

'I don't know--perhaps.  I'd sooner sink than rise.'

There were further arguments.  It was the first time she had ever
spoken to him like this.  Once again the tears came into her eyes,
and once again she fought them back.  She had come here swearing to
herself that she would not cry.  The dreadful thing was that her
tears, instead of distressing him, merely bored him.  It was as
though he COULD not care, and yet at his very centre there was an
inner heart that cared because he could not care.  If only she
would leave him alone!  Alone, alone!  Free from the nagging
consciousness of his failure; free to sink, as she had said, down,
down into quiet worlds where money and effort and moral obligation
did not exist.  Finally he got away from her and went back to the
spare bedroom, it was definitely a quarrel--the first really deadly
quarrel they had ever had.  Whether it was to be final he did not
know.  Nor did he care, at this moment.  He locked the door behind
him and lay on the bed smoking a cigarette.  He must get out of
this place, and quickly!  Tomorrow morning he would clear out.
No more sponging on Ravelston!  No more blackmail to the gods
of decency!  Down, down, into the mud--down to the streets, the
workhouse, and the jail.  It was only there that he could be at
peace.

Ravelston came upstairs to find Rosemary alone and on the point of
departure.  She said good-bye and then suddenly turned to him and
laid her hand on his arm.  She felt that she knew him well enough
now to take him into her confidence.

'Mr Ravelston, please--WILL you try and persuade Gordon to get a
job?'

'I'll do what I can.  Of course it's always difficult.  But I
expect we'll find him a job of sorts before long.'

'It's so dreadful to see him like this!  He goes absolutely to
pieces.  And all the time, you see, there's a job he could quite
easily get if he wanted it--a really GOOD job.  It's not that he
can't, it's simply that he won't.'

She explained about the New Albion.  Ravelston rubbed his nose.

'Yes.  As a matter of fact I've heard all about that.  We talked it
over when he left the New Albion.'

'But you don't think he was right to leave them?' she said,
promptly divining that Ravelston DID think Gordon right.

'Well--I grant you it wasn't very wise.  But there's a certain
amount of truth in what he says.  Capitalism's corrupt and we ought
to keep outside it--that's his idea.  It's not practicable, but in
a way it's sound.'

'Oh, I dare say it's all right as a theory!  But when he's out of
work and when he could get this job if he chose to ask for it--
SURELY you don't think he's right to refuse?'

'Not from a common-sense point of view.  But in principle--well,
yes.'

'Oh, in principle!  We can't afford principles, people like us.
THAT'S what Gordon doesn't seem to understand.'

Gordon did not leave the flat next morning.  One resolves to do
these things, one WANTS to do them; but when the time comes, in the
cold morning light, they somehow don't get done.  He would stay
just one day more he told himself; and then again it was 'just one
day more', until five whole days had passed since Rosemary's visit,
and he was still lurking there, living on Ravelston, with not even
a flicker of a job in sight.  He still made some pretence of
searching for work, but he only did it to save his face.  He would
go out and loaf for hours in public libraries, and then come home
to lie on the bed in the spare bedroom, dressed except for his
shoes, smoking endless cigarettes.  And for all that inertia and
the fear of the streets still held him there, those five days were
awful, damnable, unspeakable.  There is nothing more dreadful in
the world than to live in somebody else's house, eating his bread
and doing nothing in return for it.  And perhaps it is worst of all
when your benefactor won't for a moment admit that he is your
benefactor.  Nothing could have exceeded Ravelston's delicacy.  He
would have perished rather than admit that Gordon was sponging on
him.  He had paid Gordon's fine, he had paid his arrears of rent,
he had kept him for a week, and he had 'lent' him two pounds on top
of that; but it was nothing, it was a mere arrangement between
friends, Gordon would do the same for him another time.  From time
to time Gordon made feeble efforts to escape, which always ended in
the same way.

'Look here, Ravelston, I can't stay here any longer.  You've kept
me long enough.  I'm going to clear out tomorrow morning.'

'But my dear old chap!  Do be sensible.  You haven't--'  But no!
Not even now, when Gordon was openly on the rocks, could Ravelston
say, 'You haven't got any money.'  One can't say things like that.
He compromised:  'Where are you going to live, anyway?'

'God knows--I don't care.  There are common lodging-houses and
places.  I've got a few bob left.'

'Don't be such an ass.  You'd much better stay here till you've
found a job.'

'But it might be months, I tell you.  I can't live on you like
this.'

'Rot, my dear chap!  I like having you here.'

But of course, in his inmost heart, he didn't really like having
Gordon there.  How should he?  It was an impossible situation.
There was a tension between them all the time.  It is always so
when one person is living on another.  However delicately
disguised, charity is still horrible; there is a malaise, almost a
secret hatred, between the giver and the receiver.  Gordon knew
that his friendship with Ravelston would never be the same again.
Whatever happened afterwards, the memory of this evil time would be
between them.  The feeling of his dependent position, of being in
the way, unwanted, a nuisance, was with him night and day.  At
meals he would scarcely eat, he would not smoke Ravelston's
cigarettes, but bought himself cigarettes out of his few remaining
shillings.  He would not even light the gas-fire in his bedroom.
He would have made himself invisible if he could.  Every day, of
course, people were coming and going at the flat and at the office.
All of them saw Gordon and grasped his status.  Another of
Ravelston's pet scroungers, they all said.  He even detected a
gleam of professional jealousy in one or two of the hangers-on of
Antichrist.  Three times during that week Hermione Slater came.
After his first encounter with her he fled from the flat as soon as
she appeared; on one occasion, when she came at night, he had to
stay out of doors till after midnight.  Mrs Beaver, the charwoman,
had also 'seen through' Gordon.  She knew his type.  He was another
of those good-for-nothing young 'writing gentlemen' who sponged on
poor Mr Ravelston.  So in none too subtle ways she made things
uncomfortable for Gordon.  Her favourite trick was to rout him out
with broom and pan--'Now, Mr Comstock, I've got to do this room
out, IF you please'--from whichever room he had settled down in.

But in the end, unexpectedly and through no effort of his own,
Gordon did get a job.  One morning a letter came for Ravelston from
Mr McKechnie.  Mr McKechnie had relented--not to the extent of
taking Gordon back, of course, but to the extent of helping him
find another job.  He said that a Mr Cheeseman, a bookseller in
Lambeth, was looking for an assistant.  From what he said it was
evident that Gordon could get the job if he applied for it; it was
equally evident that there was some snag about the job.  Gordon had
vaguely heard of Mr Cheeseman--in the book trade everybody knows
everybody else.  In his heart the news bored him.  He didn't really
want this job.  He didn't want ever to work again; all he wanted
was to sink, sink, effortless, down into the mud.  But he couldn't
disappoint Ravelston after all Ravelston had done for him.  So the
same morning he went down to Lambeth to inquire about the job.

The shop was in the desolate stretch of road south of Waterloo
Bridge.  It was a poky, mean-looking shop, and the name over it,
in faded gilt, was not Cheeseman but Eldridge.  In the window,
however, there were some valuable calf folios, and some sixteenth-
century maps which Gordon thought must be worth money.  Evidently
Mr Cheeseman specialized in 'rare' books.  Gordon plucked up his
courage and went in.

As the door-bell ping'd, a tiny, evil-looking creature, with a
sharp nose and heavy black eyebrows, emerged from the office behind
the shop.  He looked up at Gordon with a kind of nosy malice.  When
he spoke it was in an extraordinary clipped manner, as though he
were biting each word in half before it escaped from him.  'Ot c'n
I do f'yer!'--that approximately was what it sounded like.  Gordon
explained why he had come.  Mr Cheeseman shot a meaning glance at
him and answered in the same clipped manner as before:

'Oh, eh?  Comstock, eh?  Come 'is way.  Got mi office back here.
Bin 'specting you.'

Gordon followed him.  Mr Cheeseman was a rather sinister little
man, almost small enough to be called a dwarf, with very black
hair, and slightly deformed.  As a rule a dwarf, when malformed,
has a full-sized torso and practically no legs.  With Mr Cheeseman
it was the other way about.  His legs were normal length, but the
top half of his body was so short that his buttocks seemed to
sprout almost immediately below his shoulder blades.  This gave
him, in walking, a resemblance to a pair of scissors.  He had the
powerful bony shoulders of the dwarf, the large ugly hands, and the
sharp nosing movements of the head.  His clothes had that peculiar
hardened, shiny texture of clothes that are very old and very
dirty.  They were just going into the office when the door-bell
ping'd again, and a customer came in, holding out a book from the
sixpenny box outside and half a crown.  Mr Cheeseman did not take
the change out of the till--apparently there was no till--but
produced a very greasy wash-leather purse from some secret place
under his waistcoat.  He handled the purse, which was almost lost
in his big hands, in a peculiarly secretive way, as though to hide
it from sight.

'I like keep mi money i' mi pocket,' he explained, with an upward
glance, as they went into the office.

It was apparent that Mr Cheeseman clipped his words from a notion
that words cost money and ought not to be wasted.  In the office
they had a talk, and Mr Cheeseman extorted from Gordon the
confession that he had been sacked for drunkenness.  As a matter of
fact he knew all about this already.  He had heard about Gordon
from Mr McKechnie, whom he had met at an auction a few days
earlier.  He had pricked up his ears when he heard the story, for
he was on the look-out for an assistant, and clearly an assistant
who had been sacked for drunkenness would come at reduced wages.
Gordon saw that his drunkenness was going to be used as a weapon
against him.  Yet Mr Cheeseman did not seem absolutely unfriendly.
He seemed to be the kind of person who will cheat you if he can,
and bully you if you give him the chance, but who will also regard
you with a contemptuous good-humour.  He took Gordon into his
confidence, talked of conditions in the trade, and boasted with
much chuckling of his own astuteness.  He had a peculiar chuckle,
his mouth curving upwards at the corners and his large nose seeming
about to disappear into it.

Recently, he told Gordon, he had had an idea for a profitable side-
line.  He was going to start a twopenny library; but it would have
to be quite separate from the shop, because anything so low-class
would frighten away the book-lovers who came to the shop in search
of 'rare' books.  He had taken premises a little distance away, and
in the lunch-hour he took Gordon to see them.  They were farther
down the dreary street, between a flyblown ham-and-beef shop and a
smartish undertaker.  The ads in the undertaker's window caught
Gordon's eye.  It seems you can get underground for as little as
two pounds ten nowadays.  You can even get buried on the hire-
purchase.  There was also an ad for cremations--'Reverent,
Sanitary, and Inexpensive.'

The premises consisted of a single narrow room--a mere pipe of a
room with a window as wide as itself, furnished with a cheap desk,
one chair, and a card index.  The new-painted shelves were ready
and empty.  This was not, Gordon saw at a glance, going to be the
kind of library that he had presided over at McKechnie's.
McKechnie's library had been comparatively highbrow.  It had
dredged no deeper than Dell, and it even had books by Lawrence and
Huxley.  But this was one of those cheap arid evil little libraries
('mushroom libraries', they are called) which are springing up all
over London and are deliberately aimed at the uneducated.  In
libraries like these there is not a single book that is ever
mentioned in the reviews or that any civilized person has ever
heard of.  The books are published by special low-class firms and
turned out by wretched hacks at the rate of four a year, as
mechanically as sausages and with much less skill.  In effect they
are merely fourpenny novelettes disguised as novels, and they only
cost the library-proprietor one and eightpence a volume.  Mr
Cheeseman explained that he had not ordered the books yet.  He
spoke of 'ordering the books' as one might speak of ordering a ton
of coals.  He was going to start with five hundred assorted titles,
he said.  The shelves were already marked off into sections--'Sex',
'Crime', 'Wild West', and so forth.

He offered Gordon the job.  It was very simple.  All you had to do
was to remain there ten hours a day, hand out the book, take the
money, and choke off the more obvious book-pinchers.  The pay, he
added with a measuring, sidelong glance, was thirty shillings a
week.

Gordon accepted promptly.  Mr Cheeseman was perhaps faintly
disappointed.  He had expected an argument, and would have enjoyed
crushing Gordon by reminding him that beggars can't be choosers.
But Gordon was satisfied.  The job would do.  There was no TROUBLE
about a job like this; no room for ambition, no effort, no hope.
Ten bob less--ten bob nearer the mud.  It was what he wanted.

He 'borrowed' another two pounds from Ravelston and took a
furnished bed-sitting room, eight bob a week, in a filthy alley
parallel to Lambeth Cut.  Mr Cheeseman ordered the five hundred
assorted titles, and Gordon started work on the twentieth of
December.  This, as it happened, was his thirtieth birthday.



10


Under ground, under ground!  Down in the safe soft womb of earth,
where there is no getting of jobs or losing of jobs, no relatives
or friends to plague you, no hope, fear, ambition, honour, duty--
no DUNS of any kind.  That was where he wished to be.

Yet it was not death, actual physical death, that he wished for.
It was a queer feeling that he had.  It had been with him ever
since that morning when he had woken up in the police cell.  The
evil, mutinous mood that comes after drunkenness seemed to have set
into a habit.  That drunken night had marked a period in his life.
It had dragged him downward with strange suddenness.  Before, he
had fought against the money-code, and yet he had clung to his
wretched remnant of decency.  But now it was precisely from decency
that he wanted to escape.  He wanted to go down, deep down, into
some world where decency no longer mattered; to cut the strings of
his self-respect, to submerge himself--to SINK, as Rosemary had
said.  It was all bound up in his mind with the thought of being
UNDER GROUND.  He liked to think about the lost people, the under-
ground people: tramps, beggars, criminals, prostitutes.  It is a
good world that they inhabit, down there in their frowzy kips and
spikes.  He liked to think that beneath the world of money there is
that great sluttish underworld where failure and success have no
meaning; a sort of kingdom of ghosts where all are equal.  That was
where he wished to be, down in the ghost-kingdom, BELOW ambition.
It comforted him somehow to think of the smoke-dim slums of South
London sprawling on and on, a huge graceless wilderness where you
could lose yourself for ever.

And in a way this job was what he wanted; at any rate, it was
something near what he wanted.  Down there in Lambeth, in winter,
in the murky streets where the sepia-shadowed faces of tea-
drunkards drifted through the mist, you had a SUBMERGED feeling.
Down here you had no contact with money or with culture.  No
highbrow customers to whom you had to act the highbrow; no one who
was capable of asking you, in that prying way that prosperous
people have, 'What are you, with your brains and education, doing
in a job like this?'  You were just part of the slum, and, like all
slum-dwellers, taken for granted.  The youths and girls and
draggled middle-aged women who came to the library scarcely even
spotted the fact that Gordon was an educated man.  He was just 'the
bloke at the library', and practically one of themselves.

The job itself, of course, was of inconceivable futility.  You just
sat there, ten hours a day, six hours on Thursdays, handing out
books, registering them, and receiving twopences.  Between whiles
there was nothing to do except read.  There was nothing worth
watching in the desolate street outside.  The principal event
of the day was when the hearse drove up to the undertaker's
establishment next door.  This had a faint interest for Gordon,
because the dye was wearing off one of the horses and it was
assuming by degrees a curious purplish-brown shade.  Much of the
time, when no customers came, he spent reading the yellow-jacketed
trash that the library contained.  Books of that type you could
read at the rate of one an hour.  And they were the kind of books
that suited him nowadays.  It is real 'escape literature', that
stuff in the twopenny libraries.  Nothing has ever been devised
that puts less strain on the intelligence; even a film, by
comparison, demands a certain effort.  And so when a customer
demanded a book of this category or that, whether it was 'Sex' or
'Crime' or 'Wild West' or 'ROmance' (always with the accent on the
O).  Gordon was ready with expert advice.

Mr Cheeseman was not a bad person to work for, so long as you
understood that if you worked till the Day of Judgement you would
never get a rise of wages.  Needless to say, he suspected Gordon of
pinching the till-money.  After a week or two he devised a new
system of booking, by which he could tell how many books had been
taken out and check this with the day's takings.  But it was still
(he reflected) in Gordon's power to issue books and make no record
of them; and so the possibility that Gordon might be cheating him
of sixpence or even a shilling a day continued to trouble him, like
the pea under the princess's mattress.  Yet he was not absolutely
unlikeable, in his sinister, dwarfish way.  In the evenings, after
he had shut the shop, when he came along to the library to collect
the day's takings, he would stay talking to Gordon for a while and
recounting with nosy chuckles any particularly astute swindles that
he had worked lately.  From these conversations Gordon pieced
together Mr Cheeseman's history.  He had been brought up in the
old-clothes trade, which was his spiritual vocation, so to speak,
and had inherited the bookshop from an uncle three years ago.  At
that time it was one of those dreadful bookshops in which there are
not even any shelves, in which the books lie about in monstrous
dusty piles with no attempt at classification.  It was frequented
to some extent by book-collectors, because there was occasionally a
valuable book among the piles of rubbish, but mainly it kept going
by selling secondhand paper-covered thrillers at twopence each.
Over this dustheap Mr Cheeseman had presided, at first, with
intense disgust.  He loathed books and had not yet grasped that
there was money to be made out of them.  He was still keeping his
old-clothes shop going by means of a deputy, and intended to return
to it as soon as he could get a good offer for the bookshop.  But
presently it was borne in upon him that books, properly handled,
are worth money.  As soon as he had made this discovery he
developed as astonishing flair for bookdealing.  Within two years
he had worked his shop up till it was one of the best 'rare'
bookshops of its size in London.  To him a book was as purely an
article of merchandise as a pair of second-hand trousers.  He had
never in his life READ a book himself, nor could he conceive why
anyone should want to do so.  His attitude towards the collectors
who pored so lovingly over his rare editions was that of a sexually
cold prostitute towards her clientele.  Yet he seemed to know by
the mere feel of a book whether it was valuable or not.  His head
was a perfect mine of auction-records and first-edition dates, and
he had a marvellous nose for a bargain.  His favourite way of
acquiring stock was to buy up the libraries of people who had just
died, especially clergymen.  Whenever a clergyman died Mr Cheeseman
was on the spot with the promptness of a vulture.  Clergymen, he
explained to Gordon, so often have good libraries and ignorant
widows.  He lived over the shop, was unmarried, of course, and had
no amusements and seemingly no friends.  Gordon used sometimes to
wonder what Mr Cheeseman did with himself in the evenings, when he
was not out snooping after bargains.  He had a mental picture of Mr
Cheeseman sitting in a double-locked room with the shutters over
the windows, counting piles of half-crowns and bundles of pound
notes which he stowed carefully away in cigarette-tins.

Mr Cheeseman bullied Gordon and was on the look-out for an excuse
to dock his wages; yet he did not bear him any particular ill-will.
Sometimes in the evening when he came to the library he would
produce a greasy packet of Smith's Potato Crisps from his pocket,
and, holding it out, say in his clipped style:

'Hassome chips?'

The packet was always grasped so firmly in his large hand that it
was impossible to extract more than two or three chips.  But he
meant it as a friendly gesture.

As for the place where Gordon lived, in Brewer's Yard, parallel to
Lambeth Cut on the south side, it was a filthy kip.  His bed-
sitting room was eight shillings a week and was just under the
roof.  With its sloping ceiling--it was a room shaped like a wedge
of cheese--and its skylight window, it was the nearest thing to the
proverbial poet's garret that he had ever lived in.  There was a
large, low, broken-backed bed with a ragged patchwork quilt and
sheets that were changed once fortnightly; a deal table ringed by
dynasties of teapots; a rickety kitchen chair; a tin basin for
washing in; a gas-ring in the fender.  The bare floorboards had
never been stained but were dark with dirt.  In the cracks in the
pink wallpaper dwelt multitudes of bugs; however, this was winter
and they were torpid unless you over-warmed the room.  You were
expected to make your own bed.  Mrs Meakin, the landlady,
theoretically 'did out' the rooms daily, but four days out of five
she found the stairs too much for her.  Nearly all the lodgers
cooked their own squalid meals in their bedrooms.  There was no
gas-stove, of course; just the gas-ring in the fender, and, down
two flights of stairs, a large evil-smelling sink which was common
to the whole house.

In the garret adjoining Gordon's there lived a tall handsome old
woman who was not quite right in the head and whose face was often
as black as a Negro's from dirt.  Gordon could never make out where
the dirt came from.  It looked like coal dust.  The children of the
neighbourhood used to shout 'Blackie!' after her as she stalked
along the pavement like a tragedy queen, talking to herself.  On
the floor below there was a woman with a baby which cried, cried
everlastingly; also a young couple who used to have frightful
quarrels and frightful reconciliations which you could hear all
over the house.  On the ground floor a house-painter, his wife, and
five children existed on the dole and an occasional odd job.  Mrs
Meakin, the landlady, inhabited some burrow or other in the
basement.  Gordon liked this house.  It was all so different from
Mrs Wisbeach's.  There was no mingy lower-middle-class decency
here, no feeling of being spied upon and disapproved of.  So long
as you paid your rent you could do almost exactly as you liked;
come home drunk and crawl up the stairs, bring women in at all
hours, lie in bed all day if you wanted to.  Mother Meakin was not
the type to interfere.  She was a dishevelled, jelly-soft old
creature with a figure like a cottage loaf.  People said that in
her youth she had been no better than she ought, and probably it
was true.  She had a loving manner towards anything in trousers.
Yet it seemed that traces of respectability lingered in her breast.
On the day when Gordon installed himself he heard her puffing and
struggling up the stairs, evidently bearing some burden.  She
knocked softly on the door with her knee, or the place where her
knee ought to have been, and he let her in.

''Ere y'are, then,' she wheezed kindly as she came in with her arms
full.  'I knew as 'ow you'd like this.  I likes all my lodgers to
feel comfortable-like.  Lemme put it on the table for you.  There!
That makes the room like a bit more 'ome-like, don't it now?'

It was an aspidistra.  It gave him a bit of a twinge to see it.
Even here, in this final refuge!  Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?
But it was a poor weedy specimen--indeed, it was obviously dying.

In this place he could have been happy if only people would let him
alone.  It was a place where you COULD be happy, in a sluttish way.
To spend your days in meaningless mechanical work, work that could
be slovened through in a sort of coma; to come home and light the
fire when you had any coal (there were sixpenny bags at the
grocer's) and get the stuffy little attic warm; to sit over a
squalid meal of bacon, bread-and-marg and tea, cooked over the gas-
ring; to lie on the frowzy bed, reading a thriller or doing the
Brain Brighteners in Tit Bits until the small hours; it was the
kind of life he wanted.  All his habits had deteriorated rapidly.
He never shaved more than three times a week nowadays, and only
washed the parts that showed.  There were good public baths near
by, but he hardly went to them as often as once in a month.  He
never made his bed properly, but just turned back the sheets, and
never washed his few crocks till all of them had been used twice
over.  There was a film of dust on everything.  In the fender there
was always a greasy frying-pan and a couple of plates coated with
the remnants of fried eggs.  One night the bugs came out of one of
the cracks and marched across the ceiling two by two.  He lay on
his bed, his hands under his head, watching them with interest.
Without regret, almost intentionally, he was letting himself go to
pieces.  At the bottom of all his feelings there was sulkiness a je
m'en fous in the face of the world.  Life had beaten him; but you
can still beat life by turning your face away.  Better to sink than
rise.  Down, down into the ghost-kingdom, the shadowy world where
shame, effort, decency do not exist!

To sink!  How easy it ought to be, since there are so few
competitors!  But the strange thing is that often it is harder to
sink than to rise.  There is always something that drags one
upwards.  After all, one is never quite alone; there are always
friends, lovers, relatives.  Everyone Gordon knew seemed to be
writing him letters, pitying him or bullying him.  Aunt Angela had
written, Uncle Walter had written, Rosemary had written over and
over again, Ravelston had written, Julia had written.  Even Flaxman
had sent a line to wish him luck.  Flaxman's wife had forgiven him,
and he was back at Peckham, in aspidistral bliss.  Gordon hated
getting letters nowadays.  They were a link with that other world
from which he was trying to escape.

Even Ravelston had turned against him.  That was after he had been
to see Gordon in his new lodgings.  Until this visit he had not
realized what kind of neighbourhood Gordon was living in.  As his
taxi drew up at the corner, in the Waterloo Road, a horde of ragged
shock-haired boys came swooping from nowhere, to fight round the
taxi door like fish at a bait.  Three of them clung to the handle
and hauled the door open simultaneously.  Their servile, dirty
little faces, wild with hope, made him feel sick.  He flung some
pennies among them and fled up the alley without looking at them
again.  The narrow pavements were smeared with a quantity of dogs'
excrement that was surprising, seeing that there were no dogs in
sight.  Down in the basement Mother Meakin was boiling a haddock,
and you could smell it half-way up the stairs.  In the attic
Ravelston sat on the rickety chair, with the ceiling sloping just
behind his head.  The fire was out and there was no light in the
room except four candles guttering in a saucer beside the
aspidistra.  Gordon lay on the ragged bed, fully dressed but with
no shoes on.  He had scarcely stirred when Ravelston came in.  He
just lay there, flat on his back, sometimes smiling a little, as
though there were some private joke between himself and the
ceiling.  The room had already the stuffy sweetish smell of rooms
that have been lived in a long time and never cleaned.  There were
dirty crocks lying about in the fender.

'Would you like a cup of tea?' Gordon said, without stirring.

'No thanks awfully--no,' said Ravelston, a little too hastily.

He had seen the brown-stained cups in the fender and the repulsive
common sink downstairs.  Gordon knew quite well why Ravelston
refused the tea.  The whole atmosphere of this place had given
Ravelston a kind of shock.  That awful mixed smell of slops and
haddock on the stairs!  He looked at Gordon, supine on the ragged
bed.  And, dash it, Gordon was a gentleman!  At another time he
would have repudiated that thought; but in this atmosphere pious
humbug was impossible.  All the class-instincts which he believed
himself not to possess rose in revolt.  It was dreadful to think of
anyone with brains and refinement living in a place like this.  He
wanted to tell Gordon to get out of it, pull himself together, earn
a decent income, and live like a gentleman.  But of course he didn't
say so.  You can't say things like that.  Gordon was aware of what
was going on inside Ravelston's head.  It amused him, rather.  He
felt no gratitude towards Ravelston for coming here and seeing him;
on the other hand, he was not ashamed of his surroundings as he
would once have been.  There was a faint, amused malice in the way
he spoke.

'You think I'm a B.F., of course,' he remarked to the ceiling.

'No, I don't.  Why should I?'

'Yes, you do.  You think I'm a B.F. to stay in this filthy place
instead of getting a proper job.  You think I ought to try for that
job at the New Albion.'

'No, dash it!  I never thought that.  I see your point absolutely.
I told you that before.  I think you're perfectly right in
principle.'

'And you think principles are all right so long as one doesn't go
putting them into practice.'

'No.  But the question always is, when IS one putting them into
practice?'

'It's quite simple.  I've made war on money.  This is where it's
led me.'

Ravelston rubbed his nose, then shifted uneasily on his chair.

'The mistake you make, don't you see, is in thinking one can live
in a corrupt society without being corrupt oneself.  After all,
what do you achieve by refusing to make money?  You're trying to
behave as though one could stand right outside our economic system.
But one can't.  One's got to change the system, or one changes
nothing.  One can't put things right in a hole-and-corner way, if
you take my meaning.'

Gordon waved a foot at the buggy ceiling.

'Of course this IS a hole-and-corner, I admit.'

'I didn't mean that,' said Ravelston, pained.

'But let's face facts.  You think I ought to be looking about for a
GOOD job, don't you?'

'It depends on the job.  I think you're quite right not to sell
yourself to that advertising agency.  But it does seem rather a
pity that you should stay in that wretched job you're in at
present.  After all, you HAVE got talents.  You ought to be using
them somehow.'

'There are my poems,' said Gordon, smiling at his private joke.

Ravelston looked abashed.  This remark silenced him.  Of course,
there WERE Gordon's poems.  There was London Pleasures, for
instance.  Ravelston knew, and Gordon knew, and each knew that the
other knew, that London Pleasures would never be finished.  Never
again, probably, would Gordon write a line of poetry; never, at
least, while he remained in this vile place, this blind-alley job
and this defeated mood.  He had finished with all that.  But this
could not be said, as yet.  The pretence was still kept up that
Gordon was a struggling poet--the conventional poet-in-garret.

It was not long before Ravelston rose to go.  This smelly place
oppressed him, and it was increasingly obvious that Gordon did not
want him here.  He moved hesitantly towards the door, pulling on
his gloves, then came back again, pulling off his left glove and
flicking it against his leg.

'Look here, Gordon, you won't mind my saying it--this is a filthy
place, you know.  This house, this street--everything.'

'I know.  It's a pigsty.  It suits me.'

'But do you HAVE to live in a place like this?'

'My dear chap, you know what my wages are.  Thirty bob a week.'

'Yes, but--!  Surely there ARE better places?  What rent are you
paying?'

'Eight bob.'

'Eight bob?  You could get a fairly decent unfurnished room for
that.  Something a bit better than this, anyway.  Look here, why
don't you take an unfurnished place and let me lend you ten quid
for furniture?'

'"Lend" me ten quid!  After all you've "lent" me already?  GIVE me
ten quid, you mean.'

Ravelston gazed unhappily at the wall.  Dash it, what a thing to
say!  He said flatly:

'All right, if you like to put it like that.  GIVE you ten quid.'

'But as it happens, you see, I don't want it.'

'But dash it all!  You might as well have a decent place to live
in.'

'But I don't want a decent place.  I want an indecent place.  This
one, for instance.'

'But why?  Why?'

'It's suited to my station,' said Gordon, turning his face to the
wall.

A few days later Ravelston wrote him a long, diffident sort of
letter.  It reiterated most of what he had said in their
conversation.  Its general effect was that Ravelston saw Gordon's
point entirely, that there was a lot of truth in what Gordon said,
that Gordon was absolutely right in principle, but--!  It was the
obvious, the inevitable 'but'.  Gordon did not answer.  It was
several months before he saw Ravelston again.  Ravelston made
various attempts to get in touch with him.  It was a curious fact--
rather a shameful fact from a Socialist's point of view--that the
thought of Gordon, who had brains and was of gentle birth, lurking
in that vile place and that almost menial job, worried him more
than the thought of ten thousand unemployed in Middlesbrough.
Several times, in hope of cheering Gordon up, he wrote asking him
to send contributions to Antichrist.  Gordon never answered.  The
friendship was at an end, it seemed to him.  The evil time when he
had lived on Ravelston had spoiled everything.  Charity kills
friendship.

And then there were Julia and Rosemary.  They differed from
Ravelston in this, that they had no shyness about speaking their
minds.  They did not say euphemistically that Gordon was 'right in
principle'; they knew that to refuse a 'good' job can never be
right.  Over and over again they besought him to go back to the New
Albion.  The worst was that he had both of them in pursuit of him
together.  Before this business they had never met, but now
Rosemary had got to know Julia somehow.  They were in feminine
league against him.  They used to get together and talk about the
'maddening' way in which Gordon was behaving.  It was the only
thing they had in common, their feminine rage against his
'maddening' behaviour.  Simultaneously and one after the other, by
letter and by word of mouth, they harried him.  It was unbearable.

Thank God, neither of them had seen his room at Mother Meakin's
yet.  Rosemary might have endured it, but the sight of that filthy
attic would have been almost the death of Julia.  They had been
round to see him at the library, Rosemary a number of times, Julia
once, when she could make a pretext to get away from the teashop.
Even that was bad enough.  It dismayed them to see what a mean,
dreary little place the library was.  The job at McKechnie's,
though wretchedly paid, had not been the kind of job that you need
actually be ashamed of.  It brought Gordon into touch with
cultivated people; seeing that he was a 'writer' himself, it might
conceivably 'lead to something'.  But here, in a street that was
almost a slum, serving out yellow-jacketed trash at thirty bob a
week--what hope was there in a job like that?  It was just a
derelict's job, a blind-alley job.  Evening after evening, walking
up and down the dreary misty street after the library was shut,
Gordon and Rosemary argued about it.  She kept on and on at him.
WOULD he go back to the New Albion?  WHY wouldn't he go back to the
New Albion?  He always told her that the New Albion wouldn't take
him back.  After all, he hadn't applied for the job and there was
no knowing whether he could get it; he preferred to keep it
uncertain.  There was something about him now that dismayed and
frightened her.  He seemed to have changed and deteriorated so
suddenly.  She divined, though he did not speak to her about it,
that desire of his to escape from all effort and all decency, to
sink down, down into the ultimate mud.  It was not only from money
but from life itself that he was turning away.  They did not argue
now as they had argued in the old days before Gordon had lost his
job.  In those days she had not paid much attention to his
preposterous theories.  His tirades against the money-morality had
been a kind of joke between them.  And it had hardly seemed to
matter that time was passing and that Gordon's chance of earning a
decent living was infinitely remote.  She had still thought of
herself as a young girl and of the future as limitless.  She had
watched him fling away two years of his life--two years of HER
life, for that matter; and she would have felt it ungenerous to
protest.

But now she was growing frightened.  Time's winged chariot was
hurrying near.  When Gordon lost his job she had suddenly realized,
with the sense of making a startling discovery, that after all she
was no longer very young.  Gordon's thirtieth birthday was past;
her own was not far distant.  And what lay ahead of them?  Gordon
was sinking effortless into grey, deadly failure.  He seemed to
WANT to sink.  What hope was there that they could ever get married
now?  Gordon knew that she was right.  The situation was impossible.
And so the thought, unspoken as yet, grew gradually in both their
minds that they would have to part--for good.

One night they were to meet under the railway arches.  It was a
horrible January night; no mist, for once, only a vile wind that
screeched round corners and flung dust and torn paper into your
face.  He waited for her, a small slouching figure, shabby almost
to raggedness, his hair blown about by the wind.  She was punctual,
as usual.  She ran towards him, pulled his face down, and kissed
his cold cheek.

'Gordon, dear, how cold you are!  Why did you come out without an
overcoat?'

'My overcoat's up the spout.  I thought you knew.'

'Oh, dear!  Yes.'

She looked up at him, a small frown between her black brows.  He
looked so haggard, so despondent, there in the ill-lit archway, his
face full of shadows.  She wound her arm through his and pulled him
out into the light.

'Let's keep walking.  It's too cold to stand about.  I've got
something serious I want to say to you.'

'What?'

'I expect you'll be very angry with me.'

'What is it?'

'This afternoon I went and saw Mr Erskine.  I asked leave to speak
to him for a few minutes.'

He knew what was coming.  He tried to free his arm from hers, but
she held on to it.

'Well?' he said sulkily.

'I spoke to him about you.  I asked him if he'd take you back.  Of
course he said trade was bad and they couldn't afford to take on
new staff and all that.  But I reminded him of what he'd said to
you, and he said, Yes, he'd always thought you were very promising.
And in the end he said he'd be quite ready to find a job for you if
you'd come back.  So you see I WAS right.  They WILL give you the
job.'

He did not answer.  She squeezed his arm.  'So NOW what do you
think about it?' she said.

'You know what I think,' he said coldly.

Secretly he was alarmed and angry.  This was what he had been
fearing.  He had known all along that she would do it sooner or
later.  It made the issue more definite and his own blame clearer.
He slouched on, his hands still in his coat pockets, letting her
cling to his arm but not looking towards her.

'You're angry with me?' she said.

'No, I'm not.  But I don't see why you had to do it--behind my
back.'

That wounded her.  She had had to plead very hard before she had
managed to extort that promise from Mr Erskine.  And it had needed
all her courage to beard the managing director in his den.  She had
been in deadly fear that she might be sacked for doing it.  But she
wasn't going to tell Gordon anything of that.

'I don't think you ought to say BEHIND YOUR BACK.  After all, I was
only trying to help you.'

'How does it help me to get the offer of a job I wouldn't touch
with a stick?'

'You mean you won't go back, even now?'

'Never.'

'Why?'

'MUST we go into it again?' he said wearily.

She squeezed his arm with all her strength and pulled him round,
making him face her.  There was a kind of desperation in the way
she clung to him.  She had made her last effort and it had failed.
It was as though she could feel him receding, fading away from her
like a ghost.

'You'll break my heart if you go on like this,' she said.

'I wish you wouldn't trouble about me.  It would be so much simpler
if you didn't.'

'But why do you have to throw your life away?'

'I tell you I can't help it.  I've got to stick to my guns.'

'You know what this will mean?'

With a chill at his heart, and yet with a feeling of resignation,
even of relief, he said:  'You mean we shall have to part--not see
each other again?'

They had walked on, and now they emerged into the Westminster
Bridge Road.  The wind met them with a scream, whirling at them a
cloud of dust that made both of them duck their heads.  They halted
again.  Her small face was full of lines, and the cold wind and the
cold lamplight did not improve it.

'You want to get rid of me,' he said.

'No.  No.  It's not exactly that.'

'But you feel we ought to part.'

'How can we go on like this?' she said desolately.

'It's difficult, I admit.'

'It's all so miserable, so hopeless!  What can it ever lead to?'

'So you don't love me after all?' he said.

'I do, I do!  You know I do.'

'In a way, perhaps.  But not enough to go on loving me when it's
certain I'll never have the money to keep you.  You'll have me as a
husband, but not as a lover.  It's still a question of money, you
see.'

'It is NOT money, Gordon!  It's NOT that.'

'Yes, it's just money.  There's been money between us from the
start.  Money, always money!'

The scene continued, but not for very much longer.  Both of them
were shivering with cold.  There is no emotion that matters greatly
when one is standing at a street corner in a biting wind.  When
finally they parted it was with no irrevocable farewell.  She
simply said, 'I must get back,' kissed him, and ran across the road
to the tram-stop.  Mainly with relief he watched her go.  He could
not stop now to ask himself whether he loved her.  Simply he wanted
to get away--away from the windy street, away from scenes and
emotional demands, back in the frowzy solitude of his attic.  If
there were tears in his eyes it was only from the cold of the wind.

With Julia it was almost worse.  She asked him to go and see her
one evening.  This was after she had heard, from Rosemary, of Mr
Erksine's offer of a job.  The dreadful thing with Julia was that
she understood nothing, absolutely nothing, of his motives.  All
she understood was that a 'good' job had been offered him and that
he had refused it.  She implored him almost on her knees not to
throw this chance away.  And when he told her that his mind was
made up, she wept, actually wept.  That was dreadful.  The poor
goose-like girl, with streaks of grey in her hair, weeping without
grace or dignity in her little Drage-furnished bed-sitting room!
This was the death of all her hopes.  She had watched the family
go down and down, moneyless and childless, into grey obscurity.
Gordon alone had had it in him to succeed; and he, from mad
perverseness, would not.  He knew what she was thinking; he had to
induce in himself a kind of brutality to stand firm.  It was only
because of Rosemary and Julia that he cared.  Ravelston did not
matter, because Ravelston understood.  Aunt Angela and Uncle
Walter, of course, were bleating weakly at him in long, fatuous
letters.  But them he disregarded.

In desperation Julia asked him, what did he mean to DO now that he
had flung away his last chance of succeeding in life.  He answered
simply, 'My poems.'  He had said the same to Rosemary and to
Ravelston.  With Ravelston the answer had sufficed.  Rosemary had
no longer any belief in his poems, but she would not say so.  As
for Julia, his poems had never at any time meant anything to her.
'I don't see much sense in writing if you can't make money out of
it,' was what she had always said.  And he himself did not believe
in his poems any longer.  But he still struggled to 'write', at
least at times.  Soon after he changed his lodgings he had copied
out on to clean sheets the completed portions of London Pleasures--
not quite four hundred lines, he discovered.  Even the labour of
copying it out was a deadly bore.  Yet he still worked on it
occasionally; cutting out a line here, altering another there, not
making or even expecting to make any progress.  Before long the
pages were as they had been before, a scrawled, grimy labyrinth of
words.  He used to carry the wad of grimy manuscript about with him
in his pocket.  The feeling of it there upheld him a little; after
all it was a kind of achievement, demonstrable to himself though to
nobody else.  There it was, sole product of two years--of a
thousand hours' work, it might be.  He had no feeling for it any
longer as a poem.  The whole concept of poetry was meaningless to
him now.  It was only that if London Pleasures were ever finished
it would be something snatched from fate, a thing created OUTSIDE
the money-world.  But he knew, far more clearly than before, that
it never would be finished.  How was it possible that any creative
impulse should remain to him, in the life he was living now?  As
time went on, even the desire to finish London Pleasures vanished.
He still carried the manuscript about in his pocket; but it was
only a gesture, a symbol of his private war.  He had finished for
ever with that futile dream of being a 'writer'.  After all, was
not that too a species of ambition?  He wanted to get away from all
that, BELOW all that.  Down, down!  Into the ghost-kingdom, out of
the reach of hope, out of the reach of fear!  Under ground, under
ground!  That was where he wished to be.

Yet in a way it was not so easy.  One night about nine he was lying
on his bed, with the ragged counterpane over his feet, his hands
under his head to keep them warm.  The fire was out.  The dust was
thick on everything.  The aspidistra had died a week ago and was
withering upright in its pot.  He slid a shoeless foot from under
the counterpane, held it up, and looked at it.  His sock was full
of holes--there were more holes than sock.  So here he lay, Gordon
Comstock, in a slum attic on a ragged bed, with his feet sticking
out of his socks, with one and fourpence in the world, with three
decades behind him and nothing, nothing accomplished!  Surely NOW
he was past redemption?  Surely, try as they would, they couldn't
prise him out of a hole like this?  He had wanted to reach the mud--
well, this was the mud, wasn't it?

Yet he knew that it was not so.  That other world, the world of
money and success, is always so strangely near.  You don't escape
it merely by taking refuge in dirt and misery.  He had been
frightened as well as angry when Rosemary told him about Mr
Erskine's offer.  It brought the danger so close to him.  A letter,
a telephone message, and from this squalor he could step straight
back into the money-world--back to four quid a week, back to effort
and decency and slavery.  Going to the devil isn't so easy as it
sounds.  Sometimes your salvation hunts you down like the Hound of
Heaven.

For a while he lay in an almost mindless state, gazing at the
ceiling.  The utter futility of just lying there, dirty and cold,
comforted him a little.  But presently he was roused by a light tap
at the door.  He did not stir.  It was Mother Meakin, presumably,
though it did not sound like her knock.

'Come in,' he said.

The door opened.  It was Rosemary.

She stepped in, and then stopped as the dusty sweetish smell of the
room caught her.  Even in the bad light of the lamp she could see
the state of filth the room was in--the litter of food and papers
on the table, the grate full of cold ashes, the foul crocks in the
fender, the dead aspidistra.  As she came slowly towards the bed
she pulled her hat off and threw it on to the chair.

'WHAT a place for you to live in!' she said.

'So you've come back?' he said.

'Yes.'

He turned a little away from her, his arm over his face.  'Come
back to lecture me some more, I suppose?'

'No.'

'Then why?'

'Because--'

She had knelt down beside the bed.  She pulled his arm away, put
her face forward to kiss him, then drew back, surprised, and began
to stroke the hair over his temple with the tips of her fingers.

'Oh, Gordon!'

'What?'

'You've got grey in your hair!'

'Have I?  Where?'

'Here--over the temple.  There's quite a little patch of it.  It
must have happened all of a sudden.'

'"My golden locks time hath to silver turned,"' he said
indifferently.

'So we're both going grey,' she said.

She bent her head to show him the three white hairs on her crown.
Then she wriggled herself on to the bed beside him, put an arm
under him, pulled him towards her, covered his face with kisses.
He let her do it.  He did not want this to happen--it was the very
thing that he least wanted.  But she had wriggled herself beneath
him; they were breast to breast.  Her body seemed to melt into his.
By the expression of her face he knew what had brought her here.
After all, she was virgin.  She did not know what she was doing.
It was magnanimity, pure magnanimity, that moved her.  His
wretchedness had drawn her back to him.  Simply because he was
penniless and a failure she had got to yield to him, even if it was
only once.

'I had to come back,' she said.

'Why?'

'I couldn't bear to think of you here alone.  It seemed so awful,
leaving you like that.'

'You did quite right to leave me.  You'd much better not have come
back.  You know we can't ever get married.'

'I don't care.  That isn't how one behaves to people one loves.  I
don't care whether you marry me or not.  I love you.'

'This isn't wise,' he said.

'I don't care.  I wish I'd done it years ago.'

'We'd much better not.'

'Yes.'

'No.'

'Yes!'

After all, she was too much for him.  He had wanted her so long,
and he could not stop to weigh the consequences.  So it was done
at last, without much pleasure, on Mother Meakin's dingy bed.
Presently Rosemary got up and rearranged her clothes.  The room,
though stuffy, was dreadfully cold.  They were both shivering a
little.  She pulled the coverlet further over Gordon.  He lay
without stirring, his back turned to her, his face hidden against
his arm.  She knelt down beside the bed, took his other hand, and
laid it for a moment against her cheek.  He scarcely noticed her.
Then she shut the door quietly behind her and tiptoed down the
bare, evil-smelling stairs.  She felt dismayed, disappointed, and
very cold.



11


Spring, spring!  Bytuene Mershe ant Averil, when spray biginneth to
spring!  When shaws be sheene and swards full fayre, and leaves
both large and longe!  When the hounds of spring are on winter's
traces, in the spring time, the only pretty ring time, when the
birds do sing, hey-ding-a-ding ding, cuckoo, jug-jug, pu-wee, ta-
witta-woo!  And so on and so on and so on.  See almost any poet
between the Bronze Age and 1805.

But how absurd that even now, in the era of central heating and
tinned peaches, a thousand so-called poets are still writing in the
same strain!  For what difference does spring or winter or any
other time of year make to the average civilized person nowadays?
In a town like London the most striking seasonal change, apart from
the mere change of temperature, is in the things you see lying
about on the pavement.  In late winter it is mainly cabbage leaves.
In July you tread on cherry stones, in November on burnt-out
fireworks.  Towards Christmas the orange peel grows thicker.  It
was a different matter in the Middle Ages.  There was some sense in
writing poems about spring when spring meant fresh meat and green
vegetables after months of frowsting in some windowless hut on a
diet of salt fish and mouldy bread.

If it was spring Gordon failed to notice it.  March in Lambeth did
not remind you of Persephone.  The days grew longer, there were
vile dusty winds and sometimes in the sky patches of harsh blue
appeared.  Probably there were a few sooty buds on the trees if you
cared to look for them.  The aspidistra, it turned out, had not
died after all; the withered leaves had dropped off it, but it was
putting forth a couple of dull green shoots near its base.

Gordon had been three months at the library now.  The stupid
slovenly routine did not irk him.  The library had swelled to a
thousand 'assorted titles' and was bringing Mr Cheeseman a pound a
week clear profit, so Mr Cheeseman was happy after his fashion.
He was, nevertheless, nurturing a secret grudge against Gordon.
Gordon had been sold to him, so to speak, as a drunkard.  He had
expected Gordon to get drunk and miss a day's work at least once,
thus giving a sufficient pretext for docking his wages; but Gordon
had failed to get drunk.  Queerly enough, he had no impulse to
drink nowadays.  He would have gone without beer even if he could
have afforded it.  Tea seemed a better poison.  All his desires and
discontents had dwindled.  He was better off on thirty bob a week
than he had been previously on two pounds.  The thirty bob covered,
without too much stretching, his rent, cigarettes, a washing bill
of about a shilling a week, a little fuel, and his meals, which
consisted almost entirely of bacon, bread-and-marg, and tea, and
cost about two bob a day, gas included.  Sometimes he even had
sixpence over for a seat at a cheap but lousy picture-house near
the Westminster Bridge Road.  He still carried the grimy manuscript
of London Pleasures to and fro in his pocket, but it was from mere
force of habit; he had dropped even the pretence of working.  All
his evenings were spent in the same way.  There in the remote
frowzy attic, by the fire if there was any coal left, in bed if
there wasn't, with teapot and cigarettes handy, reading, always
reading.  He read nothing nowadays except twopenny weekly papers.
Tit Bits, Answers, Peg's Paper, The Gem, The Magnet, Home Notes,
The Girl's Own Paper--they were all the same.  He used to get them
a dozen at a time from the shop.  Mr Cheeseman had great dusty
stacks of them, left over from his uncle's day and used for
wrapping paper.  Some of them were as much as twenty years old.

He had not seen Rosemary for weeks past.  She had written a number
of times and then, for some reason, abruptly stopped writing.
Ravelston had written once, asking him to contribute an article on
twopenny libraries to Antichrist.  Julia had sent a desolate little
letter, giving family news.  Aunt Angela had had bad colds all the
winter, and Uncle Walter was complaining of bladder trouble.
Gordon did not answer any of their letters.  He would have
forgotten their existence if he could.  They and their affection
were only an encumbrance.  He would not be free, free to sink down
into the ultimate mud, till he had cut his links with all of them,
even with Rosemary.

One afternoon he was choosing a book for a tow-headed factory girl,
when someone he only saw out of the corner of his eye came into the
library and hesitated just inside the door.

'What kind of book did you want?' he asked the factory girl.

'Oo--jest a kind of a ROmance, please.'

Gordon selected a ROmance.  As he turned, his heart bounded
violently.  The person who had just come in was Rosemary.  She did
not make any sign, but stood waiting, pale, and worried-looking,
with something ominous in her appearance.

He sat down to enter the book on the girl's ticket, but his hands
had begun trembling so that he could hardly do it.  He pressed the
rubber stamp in the wrong place.  The girl trailed out, peeping
into the book as she went.  Rosemary was watching Gordon's face.
It was a long time since she had seen him by daylight, and she was
struck by the change in him.  He was shabby to the point of
raggedness, his face had grown much thinner and had the dingy,
greyish pallor of people who live on bread and margarine.  He
looked much older--thirty-five at the least.  But Rosemary herself
did not look quite as usual.  She had lost her gay trim bearing,
and her clothes had the appearance of having been thrown on in a
hurry.  It was obvious that there was something wrong.

He shut the door after the factory girl.  'I wasn't expecting you,'
he began.

'I had to come.  I got away from the studio at lunch time.  I told
them I was ill.'

'You don't look well.  Here, you'd better sit down.'

There was only one chair in the library.  He brought it out from
behind the desk and was moving towards her, rather vaguely, to
offer some kind of caress.  Rosemary did not sit down, but laid her
small hand, from which she had removed the glove, on the top rung
of the chair-back.  By the pressure of her fingers he could see how
agitated she was.

'Gordon, I've a most awful thing to tell you.  It's happened after
all.'

'What's happened?'

'I'm going to have a baby.'

'A baby?  Oh, Christ!'

He stopped short.  For a moment he felt as though someone had
struck him a violent blow under the ribs.  He asked the usual
fatuous question:

'Are you sure?'

'Absolutely.  It's been weeks now.  If you knew the time I've had!
I kept hoping and hoping--I took some pills--oh, it was too
beastly!'

'A baby!  Oh, God, what fools we were!  As though we couldn't have
foreseen it!'

'I know.  I suppose it was my fault.  I--'

'Damn!  Here comes somebody.'

The door-bell ping'd.  A fat, freckled woman with an ugly under-lip
came in at a rolling gait and demanded 'Something with a murder in
it.'  Rosemary had sat down and was twisting her glove round and
round her fingers.  The fat woman was exacting.  Each book that
Gordon offered her she refused on the ground that she had 'had it
already' or that it 'looked dry'.  The deadly news that Rosemary
had brought had unnerved Gordon.  His heart pounding, his entrails
constricted, he had to pull out book after book and assure the fat
woman that this was the very book she was looking for.  At last,
after nearly ten minutes, he managed to fob her off with something
which she said grudgingly she 'didn't think she'd had before'.

He turned back to Rosemary.  'Well, what the devil are we going to
do about it?' he said as soon as the door had shut.

'I don't see what I can do.  If I have this baby I'll lose my job,
of course.  But it isn't only that I'm worrying about.  It's my
people finding out.  My mother--oh, dear!  It simply doesn't bear
thinking of.'

'Ah, your people!  I hadn't thought of them.  One's people!  What a
cursed incubus they are!'

'MY people are all right.  They've always been good to me.  But
it's different with a thing like this.'

He took a pace or two up and down.  Though the news had scared him
he had not really grasped it as yet.  The thought of a baby, his
baby, growing in her womb had awoken in him no emotion except
dismay.  He did not think of the baby as a living creature; it was
a disaster pure and simple.  And already he saw where it was going
to lead.

'We shall have to get married, I suppose,' he said flatly.

'Well, shall we?  That's what I came here to ask you.'

'But I suppose you want me to marry you, don't you?'

'Not unless YOU want to.  I'm not going to tie you down.  I know
it's against your ideas to marry.  You must decide for yourself.'

'But we've no alternative--if you're really going to have this
baby.'

'Not necessarily.  That's what you've got to decide.  Because after
all there IS another way.'

'What way?'

'Oh, YOU know.  A girl at the studio gave me an address.  A friend
of hers had it done for only five pounds.'

That pulled him up.  For the first time he grasped, with the only
kind of knowledge that matters, what they were really talking
about.  The words 'a baby' took on a new significance.  They did
not mean any longer a mere abstract disaster, they meant a bud of
flesh, a bit of himself, down there in her belly, alive and
growing.  His eyes met hers.  They had a strange moment of sympathy
such as they had never had before.  For a moment he did feel that
in some mysterious way they were one flesh.  Though they were feet
apart he felt as though they were joined together--as though some
invisible living cord stretched from her entrails to his.  He knew
then that it was a dreadful thing they were contemplating--a
blasphemy, if that word had any meaning.  Yet if it had been put
otherwise he might not have recoiled from it.  It was the squalid
detail of the five pounds that brought it home.

'No fear!' he said.  'Whatever happens we're not going to do THAT.
It's disgusting.'

'I know it is.  But I can't have the baby without being married.'

'No!  If that's the alternative I'll marry you.  I'd sooner cut my
right hand off than do a thing like that.'

Ping! went the door-bell.  Two ugly louts in cheap bright blue
suits, and a girl with a fit of the giggles, came in.  One of the
youths asked with a sort of sheepish boldness for 'something with
a kick in it--something smutty'.  Silently, Gordon indicated the
shelves where the 'sex' books were kept.  There were hundreds of
them in the library.  They had titles like Secrets of Paris and The
Man She Trusted; on their tattered yellow jackets were pictures of
half-naked girls lying on divans with men in dinner-jackets
standing over them.  The stories inside, however, were painfully
harmless.  The two youths and the girl ranged among them,
sniggering over the pictures on their covers, the girl letting out
little squeals and pretending to be shocked.  They disgusted Gordon
so much that he turned his back on them till they had chosen their
books.

When they had gone he came back to Rosemary's chair.  He stood
behind her, took hold of her small firm shoulders, then slid a hand
inside her coat and felt the warmth of her breast.  He liked the
strong springy feeling of her body; he liked to think that down
there, a guarded seed, his baby was growing.  She put a hand up and
caressed the hand that was on her breast, but did not speak.  She
was waiting for him to decide.

'If I marry you I shall have to turn respectable,' he said
musingly.

'Could you?' she said with a touch of her old manner.

'I mean I shall have to get a proper job--go back to the New
Albion.  I suppose they'd take me back.'

He felt her grow very still and knew that she had been waiting for
this.  Yet she was determined to play fair.  She was not going to
bully him or cajole him.

'I never said I wanted you to do that.  I want you to marry me--
yes, because of the baby.  But it doesn't follow you've got to keep
me.'

'There's no sense in marrying if I can't keep you.  Suppose I
married you when I was like I am at present--no money and no proper
job?  What would you do then?'

'I don't know.  I'd go on working as long as I could.  And
afterwards, when the baby got too obvious--well, I suppose I'd
have to go home to father and mother.'

'That would be jolly for you, wouldn't it?  But you were so anxious
for me to go back to the New Albion before.  You haven't changed
your mind?'

'I've thought things over.  I know you'd hate to be tied to a
regular job.  I don't blame you.  You've got your own life to
live.'

He thought it over a little while longer.  'It comes down to this.
Either I marry you and go back to the New Albion, or you go to one
of those filthy doctors and get yourself messed about for five
pounds.'

At this she twisted herself out of his grasp and stood up facing
him.  His blunt words had upset her.  They had made the issue
clearer and uglier than before.

'Oh, why did you say that?'

'Well, those ARE the alternatives.'

'I'd never thought of it like that.  I came here meaning to be
fair.  And now it sounds as if I was trying to bully you into it--
trying to play on your feelings by threatening to get rid of the
baby.  A sort of beastly blackmail.'

'I didn't mean that.  I was only stating facts.'

Her face was full of lines, the black brows drawn together.  But
she had sworn to herself that she would not make a scene.  He could
guess what this meant to her.  He had never met her people, but he
could imagine them.  He had some notion of what it might mean to go
back to a country town with an illegitimate baby; or, what was
almost as bad, with a husband who couldn't keep you.  But she was
going to play fair.  No blackmail!  She drew a sharp inward breath,
taking a decision.

'All right, then, I'm not going to hold THAT over your head.  It's
too mean.  Marry me or don't marry me, just as you like.  But I'll
have the baby, anyway.'

'You'd do that?  Really?'

'Yes, I think so.'

He took her in his arms.  Her coat had come open, her body was warm
against him.  He thought he would be a thousand kinds of fool if he
let her go.  Yet the alternative was impossible, and he did not see
it any less clearly because he held her in his arms.

'Of course, you'd like me to go back to the New Albion,' he said.

'No, I wouldn't.  Not if you don't want to.'

'Yes, you would.  After all, it's natural.  You want to see me
earning a decent income again.  In a GOOD job, with four pounds a
week and an aspidistra in the window.  Wouldn't you, now?  Own up.'

'All right, then--yes, I would.  But it's only something I'd LIKE
to see happening; I'm not going to MAKE you do it.  I'd just hate
you to do it if you didn't really want to.  I want you to feel
free.'

'Really and truly free?'

'Yes.'

'You know what that means?  Supposing I decided to leave you and
the baby in the lurch?'

'Well--if you really wanted to.  You're free--quite free.'

After a little while she went away.  Later in the evening or
tomorrow he would let her know what he decided.  Of course it was
not absolutely certain that the New Albion would give him a job
even if he asked them; but presumably they would, considering what
Mr Erskine had said.  Gordon tried to think and could not.  There
seemed to be more customers than usual this afternoon.  It maddened
him to have to bounce out of his chair every time he had sat down
and deal with some fresh influx of fools demanding crime-stories
and sex-stories and ROmances.  Suddenly, about six o'clock, he
turned out the lights, locked up the library, and went out.  He had
got to be alone.  The library was not due to shut for two hours
yet.  God knew what Mr Cheeseman would say when he found out.  He
might even give Gordon the sack.  Gordon did not care.

He turned westward, up Lambeth Cut.  It was a dull sort of evening,
not cold.  There was muck underfoot, white lights, and hawkers
screaming.  He had got to think this thing out, and he could think
better walking.  But it was so hard, so hard!  Back to the New
Albion, or leave Rosemary in the lurch; there was no other
alternative.  It was no use thinking, for instance, that he might
find some 'good' job which would offend his sense of decency a bit
less.  There aren't so many 'good' jobs waiting for moth-eaten
people of thirty.  The New Albion was the only chance he had or
ever would have.

At the corner, on the Westminster Bridge Road, he paused a moment.
There were some posters opposite, livid in the lamplight.  A
monstrous one, ten feet high at least, advertised Bovex.  The Bovex
people had dropped Corner Table and got on to a new tack.  They
were running a series of four-line poems--Bovex Ballads, they were
called.  There was a picture of a horribly eupeptic family, with
grinning ham-pink faces, sitting at breakfast; underneath, in
blatant lettering:


Why should YOU be thin and white?
And have that washed-out feeling?
Just take hot Bovex every night--
Invigorating--healing!


Gordon gazed at the thing.  He drank in its puling silliness.  God,
what trash!  'Invigorating--healing!'  The weak incompetence of it!
It hadn't even the vigorous badness of the slogans that really
stick.  Just soppy, lifeless drivel.  It would have been almost
pathetic in its feebleness if one hadn't reflected that all over
London and all over every town in England that poster was
plastered, rotting the minds of men.  He looked up and down the
graceless street.  Yes, war is coming soon.  You can't doubt it
when you see the Bovex ads.  The electric drills in our streets
presage the rattle of the machine-guns.  Only a little while before
the aeroplanes come.  Zoom--bang!  A few tons of T.N.T. to send our
civilization back to hell where it belongs.

He crossed the road and walked on, southward.  A curious thought
had struck him.  He did not any longer want that war to happen.  It
was the first time in months--years, perhaps--that he had thought
of it and not wanted it.

If he went back to the New Albion, in a month's time he might be
writing Bovex Ballads himself.  To go back to THAT!  Any 'good' job
was bad enough; but to be mixed up in THAT!  Christ!  Of course he
oughtn't to go back.  It was just a question of having the guts to
stand firm.  But what about Rosemary?  He thought of the kind of
life she would live at home, in her parents' house, with a baby and
no money; and of the news running through that monstrous family
that Rosemary had married some awful rotter who couldn't even keep
her.  She would have the whole lot of them nagging at her together.
Besides, there was the baby to think about.  The money-god is so
cunning.  If he only baited his traps with yachts and race-horses,
tarts and champagne, how easy it would be to dodge them.  It is
when he gets at you through your sense of decency that he finds you
helpless.

The Bovex Ballad jungled in Gordon's head.  He ought to stand firm.
He had made war on money--he ought to stick it out.  After all,
hitherto he HAD stuck it out, after a fashion.  He looked back over
his life.  No use deceiving himself.  It had been a dreadful life--
lonely, squalid, futile.  He had lived thirty years and achieved
nothing except misery.  But that was what he had chosen.  It was
what he WANTED, even now.  He wanted to sink down, down into the
muck where money does not rule.  But this baby-business had upset
everything.  It was a pretty banal predicament, after all.  Private
vices, public virtues--the dilemma is as old as the world.

He looked up and saw that he was passing a public library.  A
thought struck him.  That baby.  What did it mean, anyway, having a
baby?  What was it that was actually happening to Rosemary at this
moment?  He had only vague and general ideas of what pregnancy
meant.  No doubt they would have books in there that would tell him
about it.  He went in.  The lending library was on the left.  It
was there that you had to ask for works of reference.

The woman at the desk was a university graduate, young, colourless,
spectacled, and intensely disagreeable.  She had a fixed suspicion
that no one--at least, no male person--ever consulted works of
reference except in search of pornography.  As soon as you
approached she pierced you through and through with a flash of her
pince-nez and let you know that your dirty secret was no secret
from HER.  After all, all works of reference are pornographical,
except perhaps Whitaker's Almanack.  You can put even the Oxford
Dictionary to evil purposes by looking up words like ---- and ----.

Gordon knew her type at a glance, but he was too preoccupied to
care.  'Have you any book on gynaecology?' he said.

'Any WHAT?' demanded the young woman with a pince-nez flash of
unmistakable triumph.  As usual!  Another male in search of dirt!

'Well, any books on midwifery?  About babies being born, and so
forth.'

'We don't issue books of that description to the general public,'
said the young woman frostily.

'I'm sorry--there's a point I particularly want to look up.'

'Are you a medical student?'

'No.'

'Then I don't QUITE see what you want with books on midwifery.'

Curse the woman!  Gordon thought.  At another time he would have
been afraid of her; at present, however, she merely bored him.

'If you want to know, my wife's going to have a baby.  We neither
of us know much about it.  I want to see whether I can find out
anything useful.'

The young woman did not believe him.  He looked too shabby and
worn, she decided, to be a newly married man.  However, it was her
job to lend out books, and she seldom actually refused them, except
to children.  You always got your book in the end, after you had
been made to feel yourself a dirty swine.  With an aseptic air she
led Gordon to a small table in the middle of the library and
presented him with two fat books in brown covers.  Thereafter she
left him alone, but kept an eye on him from whatever part of the
library she happened to be in.  He could feel her pince-nez probing
the back of his neck at long range, trying to decide from his
demeanour whether he was really searching for information or merely
picking out the dirty bits.

He opened one of the books and searched inexpertly through it.
There were acres of close-printed text full of Latin words.  That
was no use.  He wanted something simple--pictures, for choice.  How
long had this thing been going on?  Six weeks--nine weeks, perhaps.
Ah!  This must be it.

He came on a print of a nine weeks' foetus.  It gave him a shock to
see it, for he had not expected it to look in the least like that.
It was a deformed, gnomelike thing, a sort of clumsy caricature of
a human being, with a huge domed head as big as the rest of its
body.  In the middle of the great blank expanse of head there was a
tiny button of an ear.  The thing was in profile; its boneless arm
was bent, and one hand, crude as a seal's flipper, covered its
face--fortunately, perhaps.  Below were little skinny legs, twisted
like a monkey's with the toes turned in.  It was a monstrous thing,
and yet strangely human.  It surprised him that they should begin
looking human so soon.  He had pictured something much more
rudimentary; a mere blob of nucleus, like a bubble of frog-spawn.
But it must be very tiny, of course.  He looked at the dimensions
marked below.  Length 30 millimetres.  About the size of a large
gooseberry.

But perhaps it had not been going on quite so long as that.  He
turned back a page or two and found a print of a six weeks' foetus.
A really dreadful thing this time--a thing he could hardly even
bear to look at.  Strange that our beginnings and endings are so
ugly--the unborn as ugly as the dead.  This thing looked as if it
were dead already.  Its huge head, as though too heavy to hold
upright, was bent over at right angles at the place where its neck
ought to have been.  There was nothing you could call a face, only
a wrinkle representing the eye--or was it the mouth?  It had no
human resemblance this time; it was more like a dead puppy-dog.
Its short thick arms were very doglike, the hands being mere stumpy
paws.  15.5 millimetres long--no bigger than a hazel nut.

He pored for a long time over the two pictures.  Their ugliness
made them more credible and therefore more moving.  His baby had
seemed real to him from the moment when Rosemary spoke of abortion;
but it had been a reality without visual shape--something that
happened in the dark and was only important after it had happened.
But here was the actual process taking place.  Here was the poor
ugly thing, no bigger than a gooseberry, that he had created by
his heedless act.  Its future, its continued existence perhaps,
depended on him.  Besides, it was a bit of himself--it WAS himself.
Dare one dodge such a responsibility as that?

But what about the alternative?  He got up, handed over his books
to the disagreeable young woman, and went out; then, on an impulse,
turned back and went into the other part of the library, where the
periodicals were kept.  The usual crowd of mangy-looking people
were dozing over the papers.  There was one table set apart for
women's papers.  He picked up one of them at random and bore it off
to another table.

It was an American paper of the more domestic kind, mainly adverts
with a few stories lurking apologetically among them.  And WHAT
adverts!  Quickly he flicked over the shiny pages.  Lingerie,
jewellery, cosmetics, fur coats, silk stockings flicked up and down
like the figures in a child's peepshow.  Page after page, advert
after advert.  Lipsticks, undies, tinned food, patent medicines,
slimming cures, face-creams.  A sort of cross-section of the money-
world.  A panorama of ignorance, greed, vulgarity, snobbishness,
whoredom, and disease.

And THAT was the world they wanted him to re-enter.  THAT was the
business in which he had a chance of Making Good.  He flicked over
the pages more slowly.  Flick, flick.  Adorable--until she smiles.
The food that is shot out of a gun.  Do you let foot-fag affect
your personality?  Get back that peach-bloom on a Beautyrest
Mattress.  Only a PENETRATING face-cream will reach that
undersurface dirt.  Pink toothbrush is HER trouble.  How to
alkalize your stomach almost instantly.  Roughage for husky kids.
Are you one of the four out of five?  The world-famed Culturequick
Scrapbook.  Only a drummer and yet he quoted Dante.

Christ, what muck!

But of course it was an American paper.  The Americans always go
one better on any kinds of beastliness, whether it is ice-cream
soda, racketeering, or theosophy.  He went over to the women's
table and picked up another paper.  An English one this time.
Perhaps the ads in an English paper wouldn't be quite so bad--
a little less brutally offensive?

He opened the paper.  Flick, flick.  Britons never shall be slaves!

Flick, flick.  Get that waist-line back to normal!  She SAID
'Thanks awfully for the lift,' but she THOUGHT, 'Poor boy, why
doesn't somebody tell him?'  How a woman of thirty-two stole her
young man from a girl of twenty.  Prompt relief for feeble kidneys.
Silkyseam--the smooth-sliding bathroom tissue.  Asthma was choking
her!  Are YOU ashamed of your undies?  Kiddies clamour for their
Breakfast Crisps.  Now I've a schoolgirl complexion all over.  Hike
all day on a slab of Vitamalt!

To be mixed up in THAT!  To be in it and of it--part and parcel of
it!  God, God, God!

Presently he went out.  The dreadful thing was that he knew already
what he was going to do.  His mind was made up--had been made up
for a long time past.  When this problem appeared it had brought
its solution with it; all his hesitation had been a kind of make-
believe.  He felt as though some force outside himself were pushing
him.  There was a telephone booth near by.  Rosemary's hostel was
on the phone--she ought to be at home by now.  He went into the
booth, feeling in his pocket.  Yes, exactly two pennies.  He
dropped them into the slot, swung the dial.

A refaned, adenoidal feminine voice answered him:  'Who's thyah,
please?'

He pressed Button A.  So the die was cast.

'Is Miss Waterlow in?'

'Who's THYAH, please?'

'Say it's Mr Comstock.  She'll know.  Is she at home?'

'Ay'll see.  Hold the lane, please.'

A pause.

'Hullo!  Is that you, Gordon?'

'Hullo!  Hullo!  Is that you, Rosemary?  I just wanted to tell you.
I've thought it over--I've made up my mind.'

'Oh!'  There was another pause.  With difficulty mastering her
voice, she added:  'Well, what did you decide?'

'It's all right.  I'll take the job--if they'll give it me, that
is.'

'Oh, Gordon, I'm so glad!  You're not angry with me?  You don't
feel I've sort of bullied you into it?'

'No, it's all right.  It's the only thing I can do.  I've thought
everything out.  I'll go up to the office and see them tomorrow.'

'I AM so glad!'

'Of course, I'm assuming they'll give me the job.  But I suppose
they will, after what old Erskine said.'

'I'm sure they will.  But, Gordon, there's just one thing.  You
will go there nicely dressed, won't you?  It might make a lot of
difference.'

'I know.  I'll have to get my best suit out of pawn.  Ravelston
will lend me the money.'

'Never mind about Ravelston.  I'll lend you the money.  I've got
four pounds put away.  I'll run out and wire it you before the
post-office shuts.  I expect you'll want some new shoes and a new
tie as well.  And, oh, Gordon!'

'What?'

'Wear a hat when you go up to the office, won't you?  It looks
better, wearing a hat.'

'A hat!  God!  I haven't worn a hat for two years.  Must I?'

'Well--it does look more business-like, doesn't it?'

'Oh, all right.  A bowler hat, even, if you think I ought.'

'I think a soft hat would do.  But get your hair cut, won't you,
there's a dear?'

'Yes, don't you worry.  I'll be a smart young business man.  Well
groomed, and all that.'

'Thanks ever so, Gordon dear.  I must run out and wire that money.
Good night and good luck.'

'Good night.'

He came out of the booth.  So that was that.  He had torn it now,
right enough.

He walked rapidly away.  What had he done?  Chucked up the sponge!
Broken all his oaths!  His long and lonely war had ended in
ignominious defeat.  Circumcise ye your foreskins, saith the Lord.
He was coming back to the fold, repentant.  He seemed to be walking
faster than usual.  There was a peculiar sensation, an actual
physical sensation, in his heart, in his limbs, all over him.  What
was it?  Shame, misery, despair?  Rage at being back in the clutch
of money?  Boredom when he thought of the deadly future?  He
dragged the sensation forth, faced it, examined it.  It was relief.

Yes, that was the truth of it.  Now that the thing was done he felt
nothing but relief; relief that now at last he had finished with
dirt, cold, hunger, and loneliness and could get back to decent,
fully human life.  His resolutions, now that he had broken them,
seemed nothing but a frightful weight that he had cast off.
Moreover, he was aware that he was only fulfilling his destiny.  In
some corner of his mind he had always known that this would happen.
He thought of the day when he had given them notice at the New
Albion; and Mr Erskine's kind, red, beefish face, gently counselling
him not to chuck up a 'good' job for nothing.  How bitterly he had
sworn, then, that he was done with 'good' jobs for ever!  Yet it was
foredoomed that he should come back, and he had known it even then.
And it was not merely because of Rosemary and the baby that he had
done it.  That was the obvious cause, the precipitating cause, but
even without it the end would have been the same; if there had been
no baby to think about, something else would have forced his hand.
For it was what, in his secret heart, he had desired.

After all he did not lack vitality, and that moneyless existence to
which he had condemned himself had thrust him ruthlessly out of the
stream of life.  He looked back over the last two frightful years.
He had blasphemed against money, rebelled against money, tried to
live like an anchorite outside the money-world; and it had brought
him not only misery, but also a frightful emptiness, an inescapable
sense of futility.  To abjure money is to abjure life.  Be not
righteous over much; why shouldst thou die before thy time?  Now he
was back in the money-world, or soon would be.  Tomorrow he would
go up to the New Albion, in his best suit and overcoat (he must
remember to get his overcoat out of pawn at the same time as his
suit), in homburg hat of the correct gutter-crawling pattern,
neatly shaved and with his hair cut short.  He would be as though
born anew.  The sluttish poet of today would be hardly recognizable
in the natty young business man of tomorrow.  They would take him
back, right enough; he had the talent they needed.  He would buckle
to work, sell his soul, and hold down his job.

And what about the future?  Perhaps it would turn out that these
last two years had not left much mark upon him.  They were merely a
gap, a small setback in his career.  Quite quickly, now that he had
taken the first step, he would develop the cynical, blinkered
business mentality.  He would forget his fine disgusts, cease to
rage against the tyranny of money--cease to be aware of it, even--
cease to squirm at the ads for Bovex and Breakfast Crisps.  He
would sell his soul so utterly that he would forget it had ever
been his.  He would get married, settle down, prosper moderately,
push a pram, have a villa and a radio and an aspidistra.  He would
be a law-abiding little cit like any other law-abiding little cit--
a soldier in the strap-hanging army.  Probably it was better so.

He slowed his pace a little.  He was thirty and there was grey in
his hair, yet he had a queer feeling that he had only just grown
up.  It occurred to him that he was merely repeating the destiny of
every human being.  Everyone rebels against the money-code, and
everyone sooner or later surrenders.  He had kept up his rebellion
a little longer than most, that was all.  And he had made such a
wretched failure of it!  He wondered whether every anchorite in his
dismal cell pines secretly to be back in the world of men.  Perhaps
there were a few who did not.  Somebody or other had said that the
modern world is only habitable by saints and scoundrels.  He,
Gordon, wasn't a saint.  Better, then, to be an unpretending
scoundrel along with the others.  It was what he had secretly pined
for; now that he had acknowledged his desire and surrendered to it,
he was at peace.

He was making roughly in the direction of home.  He looked up at
the houses he was passing.  It was a street he did not know.
Oldish houses, mean-looking and rather dark, let off in flatlets
and single rooms for the most part.  Railed areas, smoke-grimed
bricks, whited steps, dingy lace curtains.  'Apartments' cards in
half the windows, aspidistras in nearly all.  A typical lower-
middle-class street.  But not, on the whole, the kind of street
that he wanted to see blown to hell by bombs.

He wondered about the people in houses like those.  They would be,
for example, small clerks, shop-assistants, commercial travellers,
insurance touts, tram conductors.  Did THEY know that they were
only puppets dancing when money pulled the strings?  You bet they
didn't.  And if they did, what would they care?  They were too busy
being born, being married, begetting, working, dying.  It mightn't
be a bad thing, if you could manage it, to feel yourself one of
them, one of the ruck of men.  Our civilization is founded on greed
and fear, but in the lives of common men the greed and fear are
mysteriously transmuted into something nobler.  The lower-middle-
class people in there, behind their lace curtains, with their
children and their scraps of furniture and their aspidistras--they
lived by the money-code, sure enough, and yet they contrived to
keep their decency.  The money-code as they interpreted it was not
merely cynical and hoggish.  They had their standards, their
inviolable points of honour.  They 'kept themselves respectable'--
kept the aspidistra flying.  Besides, they were ALIVE.  They were
bound up in the bundle of life.  They begot children, which is what
the saints and the soul-savers never by any chance do.

The aspidistra is the tree of life, he thought suddenly.

He was aware of a lumpish weight in his inner pocket.  It was the
manuscript of London Pleasures.  He took it out and had a look at
it under a street lamp.  A great wad of paper, soiled and tattered,
with that peculiar, nasty, grimed-at-the-edges look of papers which
have been a long time in one's pocket.  About four hundred lines in
all.  The sole fruit of his exile, a two years' foetus which would
never be born.  Well, he had finished with all that.  Poetry!
POETRY, indeed!  In 1935.

What should he do with the manuscript?  Best thing, shove it down
the W.C.  But he was a long way from home and had not the necessary
penny.  He halted by the iron grating of a drain.  In the window of
the nearest house an aspidistra, a striped one, peeped between the
yellow lace curtains.

He unrolled a page of London Pleasures.  In the middle of the
labyrinthine scrawlings a line caught his eye.  Momentary regret
stabbed him.  After all, parts of it weren't half bad!  If only it
could ever be finished!  It seemed such a shame to shy it away
after all the work he had done on it.  Save it, perhaps?  Keep it
by him and finish it secretly in his spare time?  Even now it might
come to something.

No, no!  Keep your parole.  Either surrender or don't surrender.

He doubled up the manuscript and stuffed it between the bars of the
drain.  It fell with a plop into the water below.

Vicisti, O aspidistra!



12


Ravelston wanted to say good-bye outside the registry office, but
they would not hear of it, and insisted on dragging him off to have
lunch with them.  Not at Modigliani's, however.  They went to one
of those jolly little Soho restaurants where you can get such a
wonderful four-course lunch for half a crown.  They had garlic
sausage with bread and butter, fried plaice, entrecote aux pommes
frites, and a rather watery caramel pudding; also a bottle of Medoc
Superieur, three and sixpence the bottle.

Only Ravelston was at the wedding.  The other witness was a poor
meek creature with no teeth, a professional witness whom they
picked up outside the registry office and tipped half a crown.
Julia hadn't been able to get away from the teashop, and Gordon and
Rosemary had only got the day off from the office by pretexts
carefully manoeuvred a long time ahead.  Nobody knew they were
getting married, except Ravelston and Julia.  Rosemary was going to
go on working at the studio for another month or two.  She had
preferred to keep her marriage a secret until it was over, chiefly
for the sake of her innumerable brothers and sisters, none of whom
could afford wedding presents.  Gordon, left to himself, would have
done it in a more regular manner.  He had even wanted to be married
in church.  But Rosemary had put her foot down to that idea.

Gordon had been back at the office two months now.  Four ten a week
he was getting.  It would be a tight pinch when Rosemary stopped
working, but there was hope of a rise next year.  They would have
to get some money out of Rosemary's parents, of course, when the
baby was due to arrive.  Mr Clew had left the New Albion a year
ago, and his place had been taken by a Mr Warner, a Canadian who
had been five years with a New York publicity firm.  Mr Warner was
a live wire but quite a likeable person.  He and Gordon had a big
job on hand at the moment.  The Queen of Sheba Toilet Requisites
Co. were sweeping the country with a monster campaign for their
deodorant, April Dew.  They had decided that B.O. and halitosis
were worked out, or nearly, and had been racking their brains for a
long time past to think of some new way of scaring the public.
Then some bright spark suggested, What about smelling feet?  That
field had never been exploited and had immense possibilities.  The
Queen of Sheba had turned the idea over to the New Albion.  What
they asked for was a really telling slogan; something in the class
of 'Night-starvation'--something that would rankle in the public
consciousness like a poisoned arrow.  Mr Warner had thought it over
for three days and then emerged with the unforgettable phrase
'P.P.'  'P.P.' stood for Pedic Perspiration.  It was a real flash
of genius, that.  It was so simple and so arresting.  Once you knew
what they stood for, you couldn't possibly see those letters 'P.P.'
without a guilty tremor.  Gordon had searched for the word 'pedic'
in the Oxford Dictionary and found that it did not exist.  But Mr
Warner has said, Hell! what did it matter, anyway?  It would put
the wind up them just the same.  The Queen of Sheba had jumped at
the idea, of course.

They were putting every penny they could spare into the campaign.
On every hoarding in the British Isles huge accusing posters were
hammering 'P.P.' into the public mind.  All the posters were
identically the same.  They wasted no words, but just demanded with
sinister simplicity:


'P.P.'

WHAT ABOUT

YOU?


Just that--no pictures, no explanations.  There was no longer any
need to say what 'P.P.' stood for; everyone in England knew it by
this time.  Mr Warner, with Gordon to help him, was designing the
smaller ads for the newspapers and magazines.  It was Mr Warner who
supplied the bold sweeping ideas, sketched the general lay-out of
the ads, and decided what pictures would be needed; but it was
Gordon who wrote most of the letterpress--wrote the harrowing
little stories, each a realistic novel in a hundred words, about
despairing virgins of thirty, and lonely bachelors whose girls had
unaccountably thrown them over, and overworked wives who could not
afford to change their stockings once a week and who saw their
husbands subsiding into the clutches of 'the other woman'.  He did
it very well; he did it far better than he had ever done anything
else in his life.  Mr Warner gave golden reports of him.  There was
no doubt about Gordon's literary ability.  He could use words with
the economy that is only learned by years of effort.  So perhaps
his long agonizing struggles to be a 'writer' had not been wasted
after all.

They said good-bye to Ravelston outside the restaurant.  The taxi
bore them away.  Ravelston had insisted on paying for the taxi from
the registry office, so they felt they could afford another taxi.
Warmed with wine, they lolled together, in the dusty May sunshine
that filtered through the taxi window.  Rosemary's head on Gordon's
shoulder, their hands together in her lap.  He played with the very
slender wedding ring on Rosemary's ring finger.  Rolled gold, five
and sixpence.  It looked all right, however.

'I must remember to take if off before I go to the studio tomorrow,'
said Rosemary reflectively.

'To think we're really married!  Till death do us part.  We've done
it now, right enough.'

'Terrifying, isn't it?'

'I expect we'll settle down all right, though.  With a house of our
own and a pram and an aspidistra.'

He lifted her face up to kiss her.  She had a touch of make-up on
today, the first he had ever seen on her, and not too skilfully
applied.  Neither of their faces stood the spring sunshine very
well.  There were fine lines on Rosemary's, deep seams on Gordon's.
Rosemary looked twenty-eight, perhaps; Gordon looked at least
thirty-five.  But Rosemary had pulled the three white hairs out of
her crown yesterday.

'Do you love me?' he said.

'Adore you, silly.'

'I believe you do.  It's queer.  I'm thirty and moth-eaten.'

'I don't care.'

They began to kiss, then drew hurriedly apart as they saw two
scrawny upper-middle-class women, in a car that was moving parallel
to their own, observing them with catty interest.

The flat off the Edgware Road wasn't too bad.  It was a dull
quarter and rather a slummy street, but it was convenient for the
centre of London; also it was quiet, being a blind alley.  From
the back window (it was a top floor) you could see the roof of
Paddington Station.  Twenty-one and six a week, unfurnished.  One
bed, one reception, kitchenette, bath (with geyser), and W.C.  They
had got their furniture already, most of it on the never-never.
Ravelston had given them a complete set of crockery for a wedding
present--a very kindly thought, that.  Julia had given them a rather
dreadful 'occasional' table, veneered walnut with a scalloped edge.
Gordon had begged and implored her not to give them anything.  Poor
Julia!  Christmas had left her utterly broke, as usual, and Aunt
Angela's birthday had been in March.  But it would have seemed to
Julia a kind of crime against nature to let a wedding go by without
giving a present.  God knew what sacrifices she had made to scrape
together thirty bob for that 'occasional' table.  They were still
very short of linen and cutlery.  Things would have to be bought
piecemeal, when they had a few bob to spare.

They ran up the last flight of stairs in their excitement to get to
the flat.  It was all ready to inhabit.  They had spent their
evenings for weeks past getting the stuff in.  It seemed to them a
tremendous adventure to have this place of their own.  Neither of
them had ever owned furniture before; they had been living in
furnished rooms ever since their childhood.  As soon as they got
inside they made a careful tour of the flat, checking, examining,
and admiring everything as though they did not know by heart
already every item that was there.  They fell into absurd raptures
over each separate stick of furniture.  The double bed with the
clean sheet ready turned down over the pink eiderdown!  The linen
and towels stowed away in the chest of drawers!  The gateleg table,
the four hard chairs, the two armchairs, the divan, the bookcase,
the red Indian rug, the copper coal-scuttle which they had picked
up cheap in the Caledonian market!  And it was all their own, every
bit of it was their own--at least, so long as they didn't get
behind with the instalments!  They went into the kitchenette.
Everything was ready, down to the minutest detail.  Gas stove, meat
safe, enamel-topped table, plate rack, saucepans, kettle, sink
basket, mops, dishcloths--even a tin of Panshine, a packet of
soapflakes, and a pound of washing soda in a jam-jar.  It was all
ready for use, ready for life.  You could have cooked a meal in it
here and now.  They stood hand in hand by the enamel-topped table,
admiring the view of Paddington Station.

'Oh, Gordon, what fun it all is!  To have a place that's really our
own and no landladies interfering!'

'What I like best of all is to think of having breakfast together.
You opposite me on the other side of the table, pouring out coffee.
How queer it is!  We've known each other all these years and we've
never once had breakfast together.'

'Let's cook something now.  I'm dying to use those saucepans.'

She made some coffee and brought it into the front room on the red
lacquered tray which they had bought in Selfridge's Bargain
Basement.  Gordon wandered over to the 'occasional' table by the
window.  Far below the mean street was drowned in a haze of
sunlight, as though a glassy yellow sea had flooded it fathoms
deep.  He laid his coffee cup down on the 'occasional' table.

'This is where we'll put the aspidistra,' he said.

'Put the WHAT?'

'The aspidistra.'

She laughed.  He saw that she thought he was joking, and added:
'We must remember to go out and order it before all the florists
are shut.'

'Gordon!  You don't mean that?  You aren't REALLY thinking of
having an aspidistra?'

'Yes, I am.  We won't let ours get dusty, either.  They say an old
toothbrush is the best thing to clean them with.'

She had come over to his side, and she pinched his arm.

'You aren't serious, by any chance, are you?'

'Why shouldn't I be?'

'An aspidistra!  To think of having one of those awful depressing
things in here!  Besides, where could we put it?  I'm not going to
have it in this room, and in the bedroom it would be worse.  Fancy
having an aspidistra in one's bedroom!'

'We don't want one in the bedroom.  This is the place for an
aspidistra.  In the front window, where the people opposite can
see it.'

'Gordon, you ARE joking--you must be joking!'

'No, I'm not.  I tell you we've got to have an aspidistra.'

'But why?'

'It's the proper thing to have.  It's the first thing one buys
after one's married.  In fact, it's practically part of the wedding
ceremony.'

'Don't be so absurd!  I simply couldn't bear to have one of those
things in here.  You shall have a geranium if you really must.  But
not an aspidistra.'

'A geranium's no good.  It's an aspidistra we want.'

'Well, we're not going to have one, that's flat.'

'Yes, we are.  Didn't you promise to obey me just now?'

'No, I did not.  We weren't married in church.'

'Oh, well, it's implied in the marriage service.  "Love, honour,
and obey" and all that.'

'No, it isn't.  Anyway we aren't going to have that aspidistra.'

'Yes, we are.'

'We are NOT, Gordon!'

'Yes.'

'No!'

'Yes!'

'NO!'

She did not understand him.  She thought he was merely being
perverse.  They grew heated, and, according to their habit,
quarrelled violently.  It was their first quarrel as man and wife.
Half an hour later they went out to the florist's to order the
aspidistra.

But when they were half-way down the first flight of stairs
Rosemary stopped short and clutched the banister.  Her lips parted;
she looked very queer for a moment.  She pressed a hand against her
middle.

'Oh, Gordon!'

'What?'

'I felt it move!'

'Felt what move?'

'The baby.  I felt it move inside me.'

'You did?'

A strange, almost terrible feeling, a sort of warm convulsion,
stirred in his entrails.  For a moment he felt as though he were
sexually joined to her, but joined in some subtle way that he had
never imagined.  He had paused a step or two below her.  He fell on
his knees, pressed his ear to her belly, and listened.

'I can't hear anything,' he said at last.

'Of course not, silly!  Not for months yet.'

'But I shall be able to hear it later on, shan't I?'

'I think so.  YOU can hear it at seven months, _I_ can feel it at
four.  I think that's how it is.'

'But it really did move?  You're sure?  You really felt it move?'

'Oh, yes.  It moved.'

For a long time he remained kneeling there, his head pressed
against the softness of her belly.  She clasped her hands behind
his head and pulled it closer.  He could hear nothing, only the
blood drumming in his own ear.  But she could not have been
mistaken.  Somewhere in there, in the safe, warm, cushioned
darkness, it was alive and stirring.

Well, once again things were happening in the Comstock family.



THE END


Title:      Shooting an Elephant
Author:     George Orwell


In Moulmein, in lower Burma, I was hated by large numbers of people--the
only time in my life that I have been important enough for this to happen
to me. I was sub-divisional police officer of the town, and in an
aimless, petty kind of way anti-European feeling was very bitter. No one
had the guts to raise a riot, but if a European woman went through the
bazaars alone somebody would probably spit betel juice over her dress. As
a police officer I was an obvious target and was baited whenever it
seemed safe to do so. When a nimble Burman tripped me up on the football
field and the referee (another Burman) looked the other way, the crowd
yelled with hideous laughter. This happened more than once. In the end
the sneering yellow faces of young men that met me everywhere, the
insults hooted after me when I was at a safe distance, got badly on my
nerves. The young Buddhist priests were the worst of all. There were
several thousands of them in the town and none of them seemed to have
anything to do except stand on street corners and jeer at Europeans.

All this was perplexing and upsetting. For at that time I had already
made up my mind that imperialism was an evil thing and the sooner I
chucked up my job and got out of it the better. Theoretically--and
secretly, of course--I was all for the Burmese and all against their
oppressors, the British. As for the job I was doing, I hated it more
bitterly than I can perhaps make clear. In a job like that you see the
dirty work of Empire at close quarters. The wretched prisoners huddling
in the stinking cages of the lock-ups, the grey, cowed faces of the
long-term convicts, the scarred buttocks of the men who had been Bogged
with bamboos--all these oppressed me with an intolerable sense of guilt.
But I could get nothing into perspective. I was young and ill-educated
and I had had to think out my problems in the utter silence that is
imposed on every Englishman in the East. I did not even know that the
British Empire is dying, still less did I know that it is a great deal
better than the younger empires that are going to supplant it. All I knew
was that I was stuck between my hatred of the empire I served and my rage
against the evil-spirited little beasts who tried to make my job
impossible. With one part of my mind I thought of the British Raj as an
unbreakable tyranny, as something clamped down, in saecula saeculorum,
upon the will of prostrate peoples; with another part I thought that the
greatest joy in the world would be to drive a bayonet into a Buddhist
priest's guts. Feelings like these are the normal by-products of
imperialism; ask any Anglo-Indian official, if you can catch him off
duty.

One day something happened which in a roundabout way was enlightening. It
was a tiny incident in itself, but it gave me a better glimpse than I had
had before of the real nature of imperialism--the real motives for which
despotic governments act. Early one morning the sub-inspector at a police
station the other end of the town rang me up on the phone and said that
an elephant was ravaging the bazaar. Would I please come and do something
about it? I did not know what I could do, but I wanted to see what was
happening and I got on to a pony and started out. I took my rifle, an
old .44 Winchester and much too small to kill an elephant, but I thought
the noise might be useful in terrorem. Various Burmans stopped me on the
way and told me about the elephant's doings. It was not, of course, a wild
elephant, but a tame one which had gone "must." It had been chained up,
as tame elephants always are when their attack of "must" is due, but on
the previous night it had broken its chain and escaped. Its mahout, the
only person who could manage it when it was in that state, had set out in
pursuit, but had taken the wrong direction and was now twelve hours'
journey away, and in the morning the elephant had suddenly reappeared in
the town. The Burmese population had no weapons and were quite helpless
against it. It had already destroyed somebody's bamboo hut, killed a cow
and raided some fruit-stalls and devoured the stock; also it had met the
municipal rubbish van and, when the driver jumped out and took to his
heels, had turned the van over and inflicted violences upon it.

The Burmese sub-inspector and some Indian constables were waiting for me
in the quarter where the elephant had been seen. It was a very poor
quarter, a labyrinth of squalid bamboo huts, thatched with palmleaf,
winding all over a steep hillside. I remember that it was a cloudy,
stuffy morning at the beginning of the rains. We began questioning the
people as to where the elephant had gone and, as usual, failed to get any
definite information. That is invariably the case in the East; a story
always sounds clear enough at a distance, but the nearer you get to the
scene of events the vaguer it becomes. Some of the people said that the
elephant had gone in one direction, some said that he had gone in
another, some professed not even to have heard of any elephant. I had
almost made up my mind that the whole story was a pack of lies, when we
heard yells a little distance away. There was a loud, scandalized cry of
"Go away, child! Go away this instant!" and an old woman with a switch in
her hand came round the corner of a hut, violently shooing away a crowd
of naked children. Some more women followed, clicking their tongues and
exclaiming; evidently there was something that the children ought not to
have seen. I rounded the hut and saw a man's dead body sprawling in the
mud. He was an Indian, a black Dravidian coolie, almost naked, and he
could not have been dead many minutes. The people said that the elephant
had come suddenly upon him round the corner of the hut, caught him with
its trunk, put its foot on his back and ground him into the earth. This
was the rainy season and the ground was soft, and his face had scored a
trench a foot deep and a couple of yards long. He was lying on his belly
with arms crucified and head sharply twisted to one side. His face was
coated with mud, the eyes wide open, the teeth bared and grinning with an
expression of unendurable agony. (Never tell me, by the way, that the
dead look peaceful. Most of the corpses I have seen looked devilish.) The
friction of the great beast's foot had stripped the skin from his back as
neatly as one skins a rabbit. As soon as I saw the dead man I sent an
orderly to a friend's house nearby to borrow an elephant rifle. I had
already sent back the pony, not wanting it to go mad with fright and
throw me if it smelt the elephant.

The orderly came back in a few minutes with a rifle and five cartridges,
and meanwhile some Burmans had arrived and told us that the elephant was
in the paddy fields below, only a few hundred yards away. As I started
forward practically the whole population of the quarter flocked out of
the houses and followed me. They had seen the rifle and were all shouting
excitedly that I was going to shoot the elephant. They had not shown much
interest in the elephant when he was merely ravaging their homes, but it
was different now that he was going to be shot. It was a bit of fun to
them, as it would be to an English crowd; besides they wanted the meat.
It made me vaguely uneasy. I had no intention of shooting the elephant--I
had merely sent for the rifle to defend myself if necessary--and it is
always unnerving to have a crowd following you. I marched down the hill,
looking and feeling a fool, with the rifle over my shoulder and an
ever-growing army of people jostling at my heels. At the bottom, when you
got away from the huts, there was a metalled road and beyond that a miry
waste of paddy fields a thousand yards across, not yet ploughed but soggy
from the first rains and dotted with coarse grass. The elephant was
standing eight yards from the road, his left side towards us. He took not
the slightest notice of the crowd's approach. He was tearing up bunches
of grass, beating them against his knees to clean them and stuffing them
into his mouth.

I had halted on the road. As soon as I saw the elephant I knew with
perfect certainty that I ought not to shoot him. It is a serious matter
to shoot a working elephant--it is comparable to destroying a huge and
costly piece of machinery--and obviously one ought not to do it if it can
possibly be avoided. And at that distance, peacefully eating, the
elephant looked no more dangerous than a cow. I thought then and I think
now that his attack of "must" was already passing off; in which case he
would merely wander harmlessly about until the mahout came back and
caught him. Moreover, I did not in the least want to shoot him. I decided
that I would watch him for a little while to make sure that he did not
turn savage again, and then go home.

But at that moment I glanced round at the crowd that had followed me. It
was an immense crowd, two thousand at the least and growing every minute.
It blocked the road for a long distance on either side. I looked at the
sea of yellow faces above the garish clothes-faces all happy and excited
over this bit of fun, all certain that the elephant was going to be shot.
They were watching me as they would watch a conjurer about to perform a
trick. They did not like me, but with the magical rifle in my hands I was
momentarily worth watching. And suddenly I realized that I should have to
shoot the elephant after all. The people expected it of me and I had got
to do it; I could feel their two thousand wills pressing me forward,
irresistibly. And it was at this moment, as I stood there with the rifle
in my hands, that I first grasped the hollowness, the futility of the
white man's dominion in the East. Here was I, the white man with his gun,
standing in front of the unarmed native crowd--seemingly the leading
actor of the piece; but in reality I was only an absurd puppet pushed to
and fro by the will of those yellow faces behind. I perceived in this
moment that when the white man turns tyrant it is his own freedom that he
destroys. He becomes a sort of hollow, posing dummy, the conventionalized
figure of a sahib. For it is the condition of his rule that he shall
spend his life in trying to impress the "natives," and so in every crisis
he has got to do what the "natives" expect of him. He wears a mask, and
his face grows to fit it. I had got to shoot the elephant. I had
committed myself to doing it when I sent for the rifle. A sahib has got
to act like a sahib; he has got to appear resolute, to know his own mind
and do definite things. To come all that way, rifle in hand, with two
thousand people marching at my heels, and then to trail feebly away,
having done nothing--no, that was impossible. The crowd would laugh at
me. And my whole life, every white man's life in the East, was one long
struggle not to be laughed at.

But I did not want to shoot the elephant. I watched him beating his bunch
of grass against his knees, with that preoccupied grandmotherly air that
elephants have. It seemed to me that it would be murder to shoot him. At
that age I was not squeamish about killing animals, but I had never shot
an elephant and never wanted to. (Somehow it always seems worse to kill a
large animal.) Besides, there was the beast's owner to be considered.
Alive, the elephant was worth at least a hundred pounds; dead, he would
only be worth the value of his tusks, five pounds, possibly. But I had
got to act quickly. I turned to some experienced-looking Burmans who had
been there when we arrived, and asked them how the elephant had been
behaving. They all said the same thing: he took no notice of you if you
left him alone, but he might charge if you went too close to him.

It was perfectly clear to me what I ought to do. I ought to walk up to
within, say, twenty-five yards of the elephant and test his behavior. If
he charged, I could shoot; if he took no notice of me, it would be safe
to leave him until the mahout came back. But also I knew that I was going
to do no such thing. I was a poor shot with a rifle and the ground was
soft mud into which one would sink at every step. If the elephant charged
and I missed him, I should have about as much chance as a toad under a
steam-roller. But even then I was not thinking particularly of my own
skin, only of the watchful yellow faces behind. For at that moment, with
the crowd watching me, I was not afraid in the ordinary sense, as I would
have been if I had been alone. A white man mustn't be frightened in front
of "natives"; and so, in general, he isn't frightened. The sole thought
in my mind was that if anything went wrong those two thousand Burmans
would see me pursued, caught, trampled on and reduced to a grinning
corpse like that Indian up the hill. And if that happened it was quite
probable that some of them would laugh. That would never do.

There was only one alternative. I shoved the cartridges into the magazine
and lay down on the road to get a better aim. The crowd grew very still,
and a deep, low, happy sigh, as of people who see the theatre curtain go
up at last, breathed from innumerable throats. They were going to have
their bit of fun after all. The rifle was a beautiful German thing with
cross-hair sights. I did not then know that in shooting an elephant one
would shoot to cut an imaginary bar running from ear-hole to ear-hole. I
ought, therefore, as the elephant was sideways on, to have aimed straight
at his ear-hole, actually I aimed several inches in front of this,
thinking the brain would be further forward.

When I pulled the trigger I did not hear the bang or feel the kick--one
never does when a shot goes home--but I heard the devilish roar of glee
that went up from the crowd. In that instant, in too short a time, one
would have thought, even for the bullet to get there, a mysterious,
terrible change had come over the elephant. He neither stirred nor fell,
but every line of his body had altered. He looked suddenly stricken,
shrunken, immensely old, as though the frighfful impact of the bullet had
paralysed him without knocking him down. At last, after what seemed a
long time--it might have been five seconds, I dare say--he sagged
flabbily to his knees. His mouth slobbered. An enormous senility seemed
to have settled upon him. One could have imagined him thousands of years
old. I fired again into the same spot. At the second shot he did not
collapse but climbed with desperate slowness to his feet and stood weakly
upright, with legs sagging and head drooping. I fired a third time. That
was the shot that did for him. You could see the agony of it jolt his
whole body and knock the last remnant of strength from his legs. But in
falling he seemed for a moment to rise, for as his hind legs collapsed
beneath him he seemed to tower upward like a huge rock toppling, his
trunk reaching skyward like a tree. He trumpeted, for the first and only
time. And then down he came, his belly towards me, with a crash that
seemed to shake the ground even where I lay.

I got up. The Burmans were already racing past me across the mud. It was
obvious that the elephant would never rise again, but he was not dead. He
was breathing very rhythmically with long rattling gasps, his great mound
of a side painfully rising and falling. His mouth was wide open--I could
see far down into caverns of pale pink throat. I waited a long time for
him to die, but his breathing did not weaken. Finally I fired my two
remaining shots into the spot where I thought his heart must be. The
thick blood welled out of him like red velvet, but still he did not die.
His body did not even jerk when the shots hit him, the tortured breathing
continued without a pause. He was dying, very slowly and in great agony,
but in some world remote from me where not even a bullet could damage him
further. I felt that I had got to put an end to that dreadful noise. It
seemed dreadful to see the great beast Lying there, powerless to move and
yet powerless to die, and not even to be able to finish him. I sent back
for my small rifle and poured shot after shot into his heart and down his
throat. They seemed to make no impression. The tortured gasps continued
as steadily as the ticking of a clock.

In the end I could not stand it any longer and went away. I heard later
that it took him half an hour to die. Burmans were bringing dahs and
baskets even before I left, and I was told they had stripped his body
almost to the bones by the afternoon.

Afterwards, of course, there were endless discussions about the shooting
of the elephant. The owner was furious, but he was only an Indian and
could do nothing. Besides, legally I had done the right thing, for a mad
elephant has to be killed, like a mad dog, if its owner fails to control
it. Among the Europeans opinion was divided. The older men said I was
right, the younger men said it was a damn shame to shoot an elephant for
killing a coolie, because an elephant was worth more than any damn
Coringhee coolie. And afterwards I was very glad that the coolie had been
killed; it put me legally in the right and it gave me a sufficient
pretext for shooting the elephant. I often wondered whether any of the
others grasped that I had done it solely to avoid looking a fool.

THE END

Title:      The Road to Wigan Pier
Author:     George Orwell




PART ONE

  1

The first sound in the mornings was the clumping of the mill-girls' clogs
down the cobbled street. Earlier than that, I suppose, there were factory
whistles which I was never awake to hear.

There were generally four of us in the bedroom, and a beastly place it
was, with that defiled impermanent look of rooms that are not serving
their rightful purpose. Years earlier the house had been an ordinary
dwelling-house, and when the Brookers had taken it and fitted it out as
a tripe-shop and lodging-house, they had inherited some of the more
useless pieces of furniture and had never had the energy to remove them.
We were therefore sleeping in what was still recognizably a
drawing-room. Hanging from the ceiling there was a heavy glass
chandelier on which the dust was so thick that it was like fur. And
covering most of one wall there was a huge hideous piece of junk,
something between a sideboard and a hall-stand, with lots of carving and
little drawers and strips of looking-glass, and there was a once-gaudy
carpet ringed by the slop-pails of years, and two gilt chairs with burst
seats, and one of those old-fashioned horsehair armchairs which you
slide off when you try to sit on them. The room had been turned into a
bedroom by thrusting four squalid beds in among this other wreckage.

My bed was in the right-hand corner on the side nearest the door. There
was another bed across the foot of it and jammed hard against it (it had
to be in that position to allow the door to open) so that I had to sleep
with my legs doubled up; if I straightened them out I kicked the
occupant of the other bed in the small of the back. He was an elderly
man named Mr Reilly, a mechanic of sorts and employed 'on top' at one of
the coal pits. Luckily he had to go to work at five in the morning, so I
could uncoil my legs and have a couple of hours' proper sleep after he
was gone. In the bed opposite there was a Scotch miner who had been
injured in a pit accident (a huge chunk of stone pinned him to the
ground and it was a couple of hours before they could lever it off), and
had received five hundred pounds compensation. He was a big handsome man
of forty, with grizzled hair and a clipped moustache, more like a
sergeant-major than a miner, and he would lie in bed till late in the
day, smoking a short pipe. The other bed was occupied by a succession of
commercial travellers, newspaper-canvassers, and hire-purchase touts who
generally stayed for a couple of nights. It was a double bed and much
the best in the room. I had slept in it myself my first night there, but
had been manoeuvred out of it to make room for another lodger. I believe
all newcomers spent their first night in the double bed, which was used,
so to speak, as bait. All the windows were kept tight shut, with a red
sandbag jammed in the bottom, and in the morning the room stank like a
ferret's cage. You did not notice it when you got up, but if you went
out of the room and came back, the smell hit you in the face with a
smack.

I never discovered how many bedrooms the house contained, but strange to
say there was a bathroom, dating from before the Brookers' time.
Downstairs there was the usual kitchen living-room with its huge open
range burning night and day. It was lighted only by a skylight, for on
one side of it was the shop and on the other the larder, which opened
into some dark subterranean place where the tripe was stored. Partly
blocking the door of the larder there was a shapeless sofa upon which
Mrs Brooker, our landlady, lay permanently ill, festooned in grimy
blankets. She had a big, pale yellow, anxious face. No one knew for
certain what was the matter with her; I suspect that her only real
trouble was over-eating. In front of the fire there was almost always a
line of damp washing, and in the middle of the room was the big kitchen
table at which the family and all the lodgers ate. I never saw this
table completely uncovered, but I saw its various wrappings at different
times. At the bottom there was a layer of old newspaper stained by
Worcester Sauce; above that a sheet of sticky white oil-cloth; above
that a green serge cloth; above that a coarse linen cloth, never changed
and seldom taken off. Generally the crumbs from breakfast were still on
the table at supper. I used to get to know individual crumbs by sight
and watch their progress up and down the table from day to day.

The shop was a narrow, cold sort of room. On the outside of the window
a few white letters, relics of ancient chocolate advertisements, were
scattered like stars. Inside there was a slab upon which lay the great
white folds of tripe, and the grey flocculent stuff known as 'black
tripe', and the ghostly translucent feet of pigs, ready boiled. It was
the ordinary 'tripe and pea' shop, and not much else was stocked except
bread, cigarettes, and tinned stuff. 'Teas' were advertised in the
window, but if a customer demanded a cup of tea he was usually put off
with excuses. Mr Brooker, though out of work for two years, was a miner
by trade, but he and his wife had been keeping shops of various kinds as
a side-line all their lives. At one time they had had a pub, but they
had lost their licence for allowing gambling on the premises. I doubt
whether any of their businesses had ever paid; they were the kind of
people who run a business chiefly in order to have something to grumble
about. Mr Brooker was a dark, small-boned, sour, Irish-looking man, and
astonishingly dirty. I don't think I ever once saw his hands clean. As
Mrs Brooker was now an invalid he prepared most of the food, and like
all people with permanently dirty hands he had a peculiarly intimate,
lingering manner of handling things. If he gave you a slice of
bread-and-butter there was always a black thumb-print on it. Even in the
early morning when he descended into the mysterious den behind Mrs
Brooker's sofa and fished out the tripe, his hands were already black. I
heard dreadful stories from the other lodgers about the place where the
tripe was kept. Blackbeetles were said to swarm there. I do not know how
often fresh consignments of tripe were ordered, but it was at long
intervals, for Mrs Brooker used to date events by it. 'Let me see now,
I've had in three lots of froze (frozen tripe) since that happened,'
etc. We lodgers were never given tripe to eat. At the time I imagined
that this was because tripe was too expensive; I have since thought that
it was merely because we knew too much about it. The Brookers never ate
tripe themselves, I noticed.

The only permanent lodgers were the Scotch miner, Mr Reilly, two old-age
pensioners, and an unemployed man on the P.A.C. named Joe--he was the
kind of person who has no surname. The Scotch miner was a bore when you
got to know him. Like so many unemployed men he spent too much time
reading newspapers, and if you did not head him off he would discourse
for hours about such things as the Yellow Peril, trunk murders,
astrology, and the conflict between religion and science. The old-age
pensioners had, as usual, been driven from their homes by the Means
Test. They handed their weekly ten shillings over to the Brookers and in
return got the kind of accommodation you would expect for ten shillings;
that is, a bed in the attic and meals chiefly of bread-and-butter. One
of them was of 'superior' type and was dying of some malignant
disease--cancer, I believe. He only got out of bed on the days when he
went to draw his pension. The other, called by everyone Old Jack, was an
ex-miner aged seventy-eight who had worked well over fifty years in the
pits. He was alert and intelligent, but curiously enough he seemed only
to remember his boyhood experiences and to have forgotten all about the
modern mining machinery and improvements. He used to tell me tales of
fights with savage horses in the narrow galleries underground. When he
heard that I was arranging to go down several coal mines he was
contemptuous and declared that a man of my size (six feet two and a
half) would never manage the 'travelling'; it was no use telling him
that the 'travelling' was better than it used to be. But he was friendly
to everyone and used to give us all a fine shout of 'Good night, boys!'
as he crawled up the stairs to his bed somewhere under the rafters. What
I most admired about Old Jack was that he never cadged; he was generally
out-of tobacco towards the end of the week, but he always refused to
smoke anyone else's. The Brookers had insured the lives of both old-age
pensioners with one of the tanner-a-week companies. It was said that
they were overheard anxiously asking the insurance-tout 'how long people
lives when they've got cancer'.

Joe, like the Scotchman, was a great reader of newspapers and spent
almost his entire day in the public library. He was the typical
unmarried unemployed man, a derelict-looking, frankly ragged creature
with a round, almost childish face on which there was a naively naughty
expression. He looked more like a neglected little boy than a grown-up
man. I suppose it is the complete lack of responsibility that makes so
many of these men look younger than their ages. From Joe's appearance I
took him to be about twenty-eight, and was amazed to learn that he was
forty-three. He had a love of resounding phrases and was very proud of
the astuteness with which he had avoided getting married. He often said
to me, 'Matrimonial chains is a big item,' evidently feeling this to be
a very subtle and portentous remark. His total income was fifteen
shillings a week, and he paid out six or seven to the Brookers for his
bed. I sometimes used to see him making himself a cup of tea over the
kitchen fire, but for the rest he got his meals somewhere out of doors;
it was mostly slices of bread-and-marg and packets of fish and chips, I
suppose.

Besides these there was a floating clientele of commercial travellers of
the poorer sort, travelling actors--always common in the North because
most of the larger pubs hire variety artists at the week-ends--and
newspaper-canvassers. The newspaper-canvassers were a type I had never
met before. Their job seemed to me so hopeless, so appalling that I
wondered how anyone could put up with such a thing when prison was a
possible alternative. They were employed mostly by weekly or Sunday
papers, and they were sent from town to town, provided with maps and
given a list of streets which they had to 'work' each day. If they
failed to secure a minimum of twenty orders a day, they got the sack. So
long as they kept up their twenty orders a day they received a small
salary--two pounds a week, I think; on any order over the twenty they
drew a tiny commission. The thing is not so impossible as it sounds,
because in working-class districts every family takes in a twopenny
weekly paper and changes it every few weeks; but I doubt whether anyone
keeps a job of that kind long. The newspapers engage poor desperate
wretches, out-of-work clerks and commercial travellers and the like, who
for a while make frantic efforts and keep their sales up to the minimum;
then as the deadly work wears them down they are sacked and fresh men
are taken on. I got to know two who were employed by one of the more
notorious weeklies. Both of them were middle-aged men with families to
support, and one of them was a grandfather. They were on their feet ten
hours a day, 'working' their appointed streets, and then busy late into
the night filling in blank forms for some swindle their paper was
running--one of those schemes by which you are 'given' a set of crockery
if you take out a six weeks' subscription and send a two-shilling postal
order as well. The fat one, the grandfather, used to fall asleep with
his head on a pile of forms. Neither of them could afford the pound a
week which the Brookers charged for full board. They used to pay a small
sum for their beds and make shamefaced meals in a corner of the kitchen
off bacon and bread-and-margarine which they stored in their
suit-cases.

The Brookers had large numbers of sons and daughters, most of whom had
long since fled from home. Some were in Canada 'at Canada', as Mrs
Brooker used to put it. There was only one son living near by, a large
pig-like young man employed in a garage, who frequently came to the
house for his meals. His wife was there all day with the two children,
and most of the cooking and laundering was done by her and by Emmie, the
fiancee of another son who was in London. Emmie was a fair-haired,
sharp-nosed, unhappy-looking girl who worked at one of the mills for
some starvation wage, but nevertheless spent all her evenings in bondage
at the Brookers' house. I gathered that the marriage was constantly
being postponed and would probably never take place, but Mrs Brooker had
already appropriated Emmie as a daughter-in-law, and nagged her in that
peculiar watchful, loving way that invalids have. The rest of the
housework was done, or not done, by Mr Brooker. Mrs Brooker seldom rose
from her sofa in the kitchen (she spent the night there as well as the
day) and was too ill to do anything except eat stupendous meals. It was
Mr Brooker who attended to the shop, gave the lodgers their food, and
'did out' the bedrooms. He was always moving with incredible slowness
from one hated job to another. Often the beds were still unmade at six
in the evening, and at any hour of the day you were liable to meet Mr
Brooker on the stairs, carrying a full chamber-pot which he gripped with
his thumb well over the rim. In the mornings he sat by the fire with a
tub of filthy water, peeling potatoes at the speed of a slow-motion
picture. I never saw anyone who could peel potatoes with quite such an
air of brooding resentment. You could see the hatred of this 'bloody
woman's work', as he called it, fermenting inside him, a kind of bitter
juice. He was one of those people who can chew their grievances like a
cud.

Of course, as I was indoors a good deal, I heard all about the Brookers'
woes, and how everyone swindled them and was ungrateful to them, and how
the shop did not pay and the lodging-house hardly paid. By local
standards they were not so badly off, for, in some way I did not
understand, Mr Brooker was dodging the Means Test and drawing an
allowance from the P.A.C., but their chief pleasure was talking about
their grievances to anyone who would listen. Mrs Brooker used to lament
by the hour, lying on her sofa, a soft mound of fat and self-pity,
saying the same things over and over again.' We don't seem to get no
customers nowadays. I don't know 'ow it is. The tripe's just a-laying
there day after day--such beautiful tripe it is, too! It does seem 'ard,
don't it now?' etc., etc., etc. All Mrs Brookers' laments ended with'
It does seem 'ard, don't it now?' like the refrain of a ballade.
Certainly it was true that the shop did not pay. The whole place had the
unmistakable dusty, flyblown air of a business that is going down. But
it would have been quite useless to explain to them _why_ nobody came to
the shop, even if one had had the face to do it; neither was capable of
understanding that last year's dead bluebottles supine in the shop
window are not good for trade.

But the thing that really tormented them was the thought of those two
old-age pensioners living in their house, usurping floor-space,
devouring food, and paying only ten shillings a week. I doubt whether
they were really losing money over the old-age pensioners, though
certainly the profit on ten shillings a week must have been very small.
But in their eyes the two old men were a kind of dreadful parasite who
had fastened on them and were living on their charity. Old Jack they
could just tolerate, because he kept out-of-doors most of the day, but
they really hated the bedridden one, Hooker by name. Mr Brooker had a
queer way of pronouncing his name, without the H and with a long
U--'Uker'. What tales I heard about old Hooker and his fractiousness,
the nuisance of making his bed, the way he 'wouldn't eat' this and
'wouldn't eat' that, his endless ingratitude and, above all, the selfish
obstinacy with which he refused to die! The Brookers were quite openly
pining for him to die. When that happened they could at least draw the
insurance money. They seemed to feel him there, eating their substance
day after day, as though he had been a living worm in their bowels.
Sometimes Mr Brooker would look up from his potato-peeling, catch my
eye, and jerk his head with a look of inexpressible bitterness towards
the ceiling, towards old Hooker's room. 'It's a b-, ain't it?' he would
say. There was no need to say more; I had heard all about old Hooker's
ways already. But the Brookers had grievances of one kind and another
against all their lodgers, myself included, no doubt. Joe, being on the
P.A.C., was practically in the same category as the old-age pensioners.
The Scotchman paid a pound a week, but he was indoors most of the day
and they 'didn't like him always hanging round the place', as they put
it. The newspaper-canvassers were out all day, but the Brookers bore
them a grudge for bringing in their own food, and even Mr Reilly, their
best lodger, was in disgrace because Mrs Brooker said that he woke her
up when he came downstairs in the mornings. They couldn't, they
complained perpetually, get the kind of lodgers they wanted--good-class
'commercial gentlemen' who paid full board and were out all day. Their
ideal lodger would have been somebody who paid thirty shillings a week
and never came indoors except to sleep. I have noticed that people who
let lodgings nearly always hate their lodgers. They want their money but
they look on them as intruders and have a curiously watchful, jealous
attitude which at bottom is a determination not to let the lodger make
himself too much at home. It is an inevitable result of the bad system
by which the lodger has to live in somebody else's house without being
one of the family.

The meals at the Brookers' house were uniformly disgusting. For
breakfast you got two rashers of bacon and a pale fried egg, and
bread-and-butter which had often been cut overnight and always had
thumb-marks on it. However tactfully I tried, I could never induce Mr
Brooker to let me cut my own bread-and-butter; he _would_ hand it to me
slice by slice, each slice gripped firmly under that broad black thumbs.
For dinner there were generally those threepenny steak puddings which
are sold ready-made in tins--these were part of the stock of the shop, I
think--and boiled potatoes and rice pudding. For tea there was more
bread-and-butter and frayed-looking sweet cakes which were probably
bought as 'stales' from the baker. For supper there was the pale flabby
Lancashire cheese and biscuits. The Brookers never called these biscuits
biscuits. They always referred to them reverently as 'cream
crackers'--'Have another cream cracker, Mr Reilly. You'll like a cream
cracker with your cheese'--thus glozing over the fact that there was
only cheese for supper. Several bottles of Worcester Sauce and a
half-full jar of marmalade lived permanently on the table. It was usual
to souse everything, even a piece of cheese, with Worcester Sauce, but I
never saw anyone brave the marmalade jar, which was an unspeakable mass
of stickiness and dust. Mrs Brooker had her meals separately but also
took snacks from any meal that happened to be going, and manoeuvred with
great skill for what she called 'the bottom of the pot', meaning the
strongest cup of tea. She had a habit of constantly wiping her mouth on
one of her blankets. Towards the end of my stay she took to tearing off
strips of newspaper for this purpose, and in the morning the floor was
often littered with crumpled-up balls of slimy paper which lay there for
hours. The smell of the kitchen was dreadful, but, as with that of the
bedroom, you ceased to notice it after a while.

It struck me that this place must be fairly normal as lodging-houses in
the industrial areas go, for on the whole the lodgers did not complain.
The only one who ever did so to my knowledge was a little black-haired,
sharp-nosed Cockney, a traveller for a cigarette firm. He had never been
in the North before, and I think that till recently he had been in
better employ and was used to staying in commercial hotels. This was his
first glimpse of really low-class lodgings, the kind of place in which
the poor tribe of touts and canvassers have to shelter upon their
endless journeys. In the morning as we were dressing (he had slept in
the double bed, of course) I saw him look round the desolate room with a
sort of wondering aversion. He caught my eye and suddenly divined that I
was a fellow-Southerner. 'The filthy bloody bastards!' he said
feelingly. After that he packed his suit-case, went downstairs and, with
great strength of mind, told the Brookers that this was not the kind of
house he was accustomed to and that he was leaving immediately. The
Brookers could never understand why. They were astonished and hurt. The
ingratitude of it! Leaving them like that for no reason after a single
night! Afterwards they discussed it over and over again, in all its
bearings. It was added to their store of grievances.

On the day when there was a full chamber-pot under the breakfast table I
decided to leave. The place was beginning to depress me. It was not only
the dirt, the smells, and the vile food, but the feeling of stagnant
meaningless decay, of having got down into some subterranean place where
people go creeping round and round, just like blackbeetles, in an
endless muddle of slovened jobs and mean grievances. The most dreadful
thing about people like the Brookers is the way they say the same things
over and over again. It gives you the feeling that they are not real
people at all, but a kind of ghost for ever rehearsing the same futile
rigmarole. In the end Mrs Brooker's self-pitying talk--always the same
complaints, over and over, and always ending with the tremulous whine of
'It does seem 'ard, don't it now?'--revolted me even more than her habit
of wiping her mouth with bits of newspaper. But it is no use saying that
people like the Brookers are just disgusting and trying to put them out
of mind. For they exist in tens and hundreds of thousands; they are one
of the characteristic by-products of the modern world. You cannot
disregard them if you accept the civilization that produced them. For
this is part at least of what industrialism has done for us. Columbus
sailed the Atlantic, the first steam engines tottered into motion, the
British squares stood firm under the French guns at Waterloo, the
one-eyed scoundrels of the nineteenth century praised God and filled
their pockets; and this is where it all led--to labyrinthine slums and
dark back kitchens with sickly, ageing people creeping round and round
them like blackbeetles. It is a kind of duty to see and smell such
places now and again, especially smell them, lest you should forget that
they exist; though perhaps it is better not to stay there too long.

The train bore me away, through the monstrous scenery of slag-heaps,
chimneys, piled scrap-iron, foul canals, paths of cindery mud
criss-crossed by the prints of clogs. This was March, but the weather
had been horribly cold and everywhere there were mounds of blackened
snow. As we moved slowly through the outskirts of the town we passed row
after row of little grey slum houses running at right angles to
the-embankment. At the back of one of the houses a young woman was
kneeling on the stones, poking a stick up the leaden waste-pipe which
ran from the sink inside and which I suppose was blocked. I had time to
see everything about her--her sacking apron, her clumsy clogs, her arms
reddened by the cold. She looked up as the train passed, and I was
almost near enough to catch her eye. She had a round pale face, the
usual exhausted face of the slum girl who is twenty-five and looks
forty, thanks to miscarriages and drudgery; and it wore, for the second
in which I saw it, the most desolate, hopeless expression I have
ever seen. It struck me then that we are mistaken when we say that 'It
isn't the same for them as it would be for us,' and that people bred in
the slums can imagine nothing but the slums. For what I saw in her face
was not the ignorant suffering of an animal. She knew well enough what
was happening to her--understood as well as I did how dreadful a destiny
it was to be kneeling there in the bitter cold, on the slimy stones of a
slum backyard, poking a stick up a foul drain-pipe.

But quite soon the train drew away into open country, and that seemed
strange, almost unnatural, as though the open country had been a kind of
park; for in the industrial areas one always feels that the smoke and
filth must go on for ever and that no part of the earth's surface can
escape them. In a crowded, dirty little country like ours one takes
defilement almost for granted. Slag-heaps and chimneys seem a more
normal, probable landscape than grass and trees, and even in the depths
of the country when you drive your fork into the ground you half expect
to lever up a broken bottle or a rusty can. But out here the snow was
untrodden and lay so deep that only the tops of the stone boundary-walls
were showing, winding over the hills like black paths. I remembered that
D. H. Lawrence, writing of this same landscape or another near by, said
that the snow-covered hills rippled away into the distance 'like
muscle'. It was not the simile that would have occurred to me. To my eye
the snow and the black walls were more like a white dress with black
piping running across it.

Although the snow was hardly broken the sun was shining brightly, and
behind the shut windows of the carriage it seemed warm. According to the
almanac this was spring, and a few of the birds seemed to believe it.
For the first time in my life, in a bare patch beside the line, I saw
rooks treading. They did it on the ground and not, as I should have
expected, in a tree. The manner of courtship was curious. The female
stood with her beak open and the male walked round her and appeared to
be feeding her. I had hardly been in the train half an hour, but it
seemed a very long way from the Brookers' back-kitchen to the empty
slopes of snow, the bright sunshine, and the big gleaming birds.

The whole of the industrial districts are really one enormous town, of
about the same population as Greater London but, fortunately, of much
larger area; so that even in the middle of them there is still room for
patches of cleanness and decency. That is an encouraging thought. In
spite of hard trying, man has not yet succeeded in doing his dirt
everywhere. The earth is so vast and still so empty that even in the
filthy heart of civilization you find fields where the grass is green
instead of grey; perhaps if you looked for them you might even find
streams with live fish in them instead of salmon tins. For quite a long
time, perhaps another twenty minutes, the train was rolling through open
country before the villa-civilization began to close in upon us again,
and then the outer slums, and then the slag-heaps, belching chimneys,
blast-furnaces, canals, and gaso-meters of another industrial town.




  2



Our civilization, _pace_ Chesterton, is founded on coal, more completely
than one realizes until one stops to think about it. The machines that
keep us alive, and the machines that make machines, are all directly or
indirectly dependent upon coal. In the metabolism of the Western world
the coal-miner is second in importance only to the man who ploughs the
soil. He is a sort of caryatid upon whose shoulders nearly everything
that is not grimy is supported. For this reason the actual process by
which coal is extracted is well worth watching, if you get the chance
and are willing to take the trouble.

When you go down a coal-mine it is important to try and get to the coal
face when the 'fillers' are at work. This is not easy, because when the
mine is working visitors are a nuisance and are not encouraged, but if
you go at any other time, it is possible to come away with a totally
wrong impression. On a Sunday, for instance, a mine seems almost
peaceful. The time to go there is when the machines are roaring and the
air is black with coal dust, and when you can actually see what the
miners have to do. At those times the place is like hell, or at any rate
like my own mental picture of hell. Most of the things one imagines in
hell are if there--heat, noise, confusion, darkness, foul air, and,
above all, unbearably cramped space. Everything except the fire, for
there is no fire down there except the feeble beams of Davy lamps and
electric torches which scarcely penetrate the clouds of coal dust.

When you have finally got there--and getting there is a job in itself: I
will explain that in a moment--you crawl through the last line of pit
props and see opposite you a shiny black wall three or four feet high.
This is the coal face. Overhead is the smooth ceiling made by the rock
from which the coal has been cut; underneath is the rock again, so that
the gallery you are in is only as high as the ledge of coal itself,
probably not much more than a yard. The first impression of all,
overmastering everything else for a while, is the frightful, deafening
din from the conveyor belt which carries the coal away. You cannot see
very far, because the fog of coal dust throws back the beam of your
lamp, but you can see on either side of you the line of half-naked
kneeling men, one to every four or five yards, driving their shovels
under the fallen coal and flinging it swiftly over their left shoulders.
They are feeding it on to the conveyor belt, a moving rubber belt a
couple of feet wide which runs a yard or two behind them. Down this belt
a glittering river of coal races constantly. In a big mine it is
carrying away several tons of coal every minute. It bears it off to some
place in the main roads where it is shot into tubs holding half a ton,
and thence dragged to the cages and hoisted to the outer air.

It is impossible to watch the 'fillers' at work without feeling a pang
of envy for their toughness. It is a dreadful job that they do, an
almost superhuman job by the standard of an ordinary person. For they
are not only shifting monstrous quantities of coal, they are also doing
it in a position that doubles or trebles the work. They have got to
remain kneeling all the while--they could hardly rise from their knees
without hitting the ceiling--and you can easily see by trying it what a
tremendous effort this means. Shovelling is comparatively easy when you
are standing up, because you can use your knee and thigh to drive the
shovel along; kneeling down, the whole of the strain is thrown upon your
arm and belly muscles. And the other conditions do not exactly make
things easier. There is the heat--it varies, but in some mines it is
suffocating--and the coal dust that stuffs up your throat and nostrils
and collects along your eyelids, and the unending rattle of the conveyor
belt, which in that confined space is rather like the rattle of a
machine gun. But the fillers look and work as though they were made of
iron. They really do look like iron hammered iron statues--under the
smooth coat of coal dust which clings to them from head to foot. It is
only when you see miners down the mine and naked that you realize what
splendid men they are. Most of them are small (big men are at a
disadvantage in that job) but nearly all of them have the most noble
bodies; wide shoulders tapering to slender supple waists, and small
pronounced buttocks and sinewy thighs, with not an ounce of waste flesh
anywhere. In the hotter mines they wear only a pair of thin drawers,
clogs and knee-pads; in the hottest mines of all, only the clogs and
knee-pads. You can hardly tell by the look of them whether they are
young or old. They may be any age up to sixty or even sixty-five, but
when they are black and naked they all look alike. No one could do their
work who had not a young man's body, and a figure fit for a guardsman at
that, just a few pounds of extra flesh on the waist-line, and the
constant bending would be impossible. You can never forget that
spectacle once you have seen it--the line of bowed, kneeling figures,
sooty black all over, driving their huge shovels under the coal with
stupendous force and speed. They are on the job for seven and a half
hours, theoretically without a break, for there is no time 'off'.
Actually they snatch a quarter of an hour or so at some time during the
shift to eat the food they have brought with them, usually a hunk of
bread and dripping and a bottle of cold tea. The first time I was
watching the 'fillers' at work I put my hand upon some dreadful slimy
thing among the coal dust. It was a chewed quid of tobacco. Nearly all
the miners chew tobacco, which is said to be good against thirst.

Probably you have to go down several coal-mines before you can get much
grasp of the processes that are going on round you. This is chiefly
because the mere effort of getting from place to place makes it
difficult to notice anything else. In some ways it is even
disappointing, or at least is unlike what you have, expected. You get
into the cage, which is a steel box about as wide as a telephone box and
two or three times as long. It holds ten men, but they pack it like
pilchards in a tin, and a tall man cannot stand upright in it. The steel
door shuts upon you, and somebody working the winding gear above drops
you into the void. You have the usual momentary qualm in your belly and
a bursting sensation in the cars, but not much sensation of movement
till you get near the bottom, when the cage slows down so abruptly that
you could swear it is going upwards again. In the middle of the run the
cage probably touches sixty miles an hour; in some of the deeper mines
it touches even more. When you crawl out at the bottom you are perhaps
four hundred yards underground. That is to say you have a
tolerable-sized mountain on top of you; hundreds of yards of solid rock,
bones of extinct beasts, subsoil, flints, roots of growing things, green
grass and cows grazing on it--all this suspended over your head and held
back only by wooden props as thick as the calf of your leg. But because
of the speed at which the cage has brought you down, and the complete
blackness through which you have travelled, you hardly feel yourself
deeper down than you would at the bottom of the Piccadilly tube.

What is surprising, on the other hand, is the immense horizontal
distances that have to be travelled underground. Before I had been down
a mine I had vaguely imagined the miner stepping out of the cage and
getting to work on a ledge of coal a few yards away. I had not realized
that before he even gets to work he may have had to creep along passages
as long as from London Bridge to Oxford Circus. In the beginning, of
course, a mine shaft is sunk somewhere near a seam of coal; But as that
seam is worked out and fresh seams are followed up, the workings get
further and further from the pit bottom. If it is a mile from the pit
bottom to the coal face, that is probably an average distance; three
miles is a fairly normal one; there are even said to be a few mines
where it is as much as five miles. But these distances bear no relation
to distances above ground. For in all that mile or three miles as it may
be, there is hardly anywhere outside the main road, and not many places
even there, where a man can stand upright.

You do not notice the effect of this till you have gone a few hundred
yards. You start off, stooping slightly, down the dim-lit gallery, eight
or ten feet wide and about five high, with the walls built up with slabs
of shale, like the stone walls in Derbyshire. Every yard or two there
are wooden props holding up the beams and girders; some of the girders
have buckled into fantastic curves under which you have to duck. Usually
it is bad going underfoot--thick dust or jagged chunks of shale, and in
some mines where there is water it is as mucky as a farm-yard. Also
there is the track for the coal tubs, like a miniature railway track
with sleepers a foot or two apart, which is tiresome to walk on.
Everything is grey with shale dust; there is a dusty fiery smell which
seems to be the same in all mines. You see mysterious machines of which
you never learn the purpose, and bundles of tools slung together on
wires, and sometimes mice darting away from the beam of the lamps. They
are surprisingly common, especially in mines where there are or have
been horses. It would be interesting to know how they got there in the
first place; possibly by falling down the shaft--for they say a mouse
can fall any distance uninjured, owing to its surface area being so
large relative to its weight. You press yourself against the wall to
make way for lines of tubs jolting slowly towards the shaft, drawn by an
endless steel cable operated from the surface. You creep through sacking
curtains and thick wooden doors which, when they are opened, let out
fierce blasts of air. These doors are an important part of the
ventilation system. The exhausted air is sucked out of one shaft by
means of fans, and the fresh air enters the other of its own accord. But
if left to itself the air will take the shortest way round, leaving the
deeper workings unventilated; so all the short cuts have to be
partitioned off.

At the start to walk stooping is rather a joke, but it is a joke that
soon wears off. I am handicapped by being exceptionally tall, but when
the roof falls to four feet or less it is a tough job for anybody except
a dwarf or a child. You not only have to bend double, you have also got
to keep your head up all the while so as to see the beams and girders
and dodge them when they come. You have, therefore, a constant crick in
the neck, but this is nothing to the pain in your knees and thighs.
After half a mile it becomes (I am not exaggerating) an unbearable
agony. You begin to wonder whether you will ever get to the end--still
more, how on earth you are going to get back. Your pace grows slower and
slower. You come to a stretch of a couple of hundred yards where it is
all exceptionally low and you have to work yourself along in a squatting
position. Then suddenly the roof opens out to a mysterious height--scene
of and old fall of rock, probably--and for twenty whole yards you can
stand upright. The relief is overwhelming. But after this there is
another low stretch of a hundred yards and then a succession of beams
which you have to crawl under. You go down on all fours; even this is a
relief after the squatting business. But when you come to the end of the
beams and try to get up again, you find that your knees have temporarily
struck work and refuse to lift you. You call a halt, ignominiously, and
say that you would like to rest for a minute or two. Your guide (a
miner) is sympathetic. He knows that your muscles are not the same as
his. 'Only another four hundred yards,' he says encouragingly; you feel
that he might as well say another four hundred miles. But finally you do
somehow creep as far as the coal face. You have gone a mile and taken
the best part of an hour; a miner would do it in not much more than
twenty minutes. Having got there, you have to sprawl in the coal dust
and get your strength back for several minutes before you can even watch
the work in progress with any kind of intelligence.

Coming back is worse than going, not only because you are already tired
out but because the journey back to the shaft is slightly uphill. You
get through the low places at the speed of a tortoise, and you have no
shame now about calling a halt when your knees give way. Even the lamp
you are carrying becomes a nuisance and probably when you stumble you
drop it; whereupon, if it is a Davy lamp, it goes out. Ducking the beams
becomes more and more of an effort, and sometimes you forget to duck.
You try walking head down as the miners do, and then you bang your
backbone. Even the miners bang their backbones fairly often. This is the
reason why in very hot mines, where it is necessary to go about half
naked, most of the miners have what they call 'buttons down the
back'--that is, a permanent scab on each vertebra. When the track is
down hill the miners sometimes fit their clogs, which are hollow
underneath, on to the trolley rails and slide down. In mines where the
'travelling' is very bad all the miners carry sticks about two and a
half feet long, hollowed out below the handle. In normal places you keep
your hand on top of the stick and in the low places you slide your hand
down into the hollow. These sticks are a great help, and the wooden
crash-helmets--a comparatively recent invention--are a godsend. They
look like a French or Italian steel helmet, but they are made of some
kind of pith and very light, and so strong, that you can take a violent
blow on the head without feeling it. When finally you get back to the
surface you have been perhaps three hours underground and travelled two
miles, and you are more exhausted than you would be by a
twenty-five-mile walk above ground. For a week afterwards your thighs
are so stiff that coming downstairs is quite a difficult feat; you have
to work your way down in a peculiar sidelong manner, without bending the
knees. Your miner friends notice the stiffness of your walk and chaff
you about it. ('How'd ta like to work down pit, eh?' etc.) Yet even a
miner who has been long away from work--from illness, for
instance--when he comes back to the pit, suffers badly for the first few
days.

It may seem that I am exaggerating, though no one who has been down an
old-fashioned pit (most of the pits in England are old-fashioned) and
actually gone as far as the coal face, is likely to say so. But what I
want to emphasize is this. Here is this frightful business of crawling
to and fro, which to any normal person is a hard day's work in itself;
and it is not part of the miner's work at all, it is merely an extra,
like the City man's daily ride in the Tube. The miner does that journey
to and fro, and sandwiched in between there are seven and a half hours
of savage work. I have never travelled much more than a mile to the coal
face; but often it is three miles, in which case I and most people other
than coal-miners would never get there at all. This is the kind of point
that one is always liable to miss. When you think of the coal-mine you
think of depth, heat, darkness, blackened figures hacking at walls of
coal; you don't think, necessarily, of those miles of creeping to and
fro. There is the question of time, also. A miner's working shift of
seven and a half hours does not sound very long, but one has got to add
on to it at least an hour a day for 'travelling', more often two hours
and sometimes three. Of course, the 'travelling' is not technically work
and the miner is not paid for it; but it is as like work as makes no
difference. It is easy to say that miners don't mind all this.
Certainly, it is not the same for them as it would be for you or me.
They have done it since childhood, they have the right muscles hardened,
and they can move to and fro underground with a startling and rather
horrible agility. A miner puts his head down and runs, with a long
swinging stride, through places where I can only stagger. At the
workings you see them on all fours, skipping round the pit props almost
like dogs. But it is quite a mistake to think that they enjoy it. I have
talked about this to scores of miners and they all admit that the
'travelling' is hard work; in any case when you hear them discussing a
pit among themselves the 'travelling' is always one of the things they
discuss. It is said that a shift always returns from work faster than it
goes; nevertheless the miners all say that it is the coming away after a
hard day's work, that is especially irksome. It is part of their work
and they are equal to it, but certainly it is an effort. It is
comparable, perhaps, to climbing a smallish mountain before and after
your day's work.

When you have been down in two or three pits you begin to get some grasp
of the processes that are going on underground. (I ought to say, by the
way, that I know nothing whatever about the technical side of mining: I
am merely describing what I have seen.) Coal lies in thin seams between
enormous layers of rock, so that essentially the process of getting it
out is like scooping the central layer from a Neapolitan ice. In the old
days the miners used to cut straight into the coal with pick and
crowbar--a very slow job because coal, when lying in its virgin state,
is almost as hard as rock. Nowadays the preliminary work is done by an
electrically-driven coal-cutter, which in principle is an immensely
tough and powerful band-saw, running horizontally instead of vertically,
with teeth a couple of inches long and half an inch or an inch thick. It
can move backwards or forwards on its own power, and the men operating
it can rotate it this way or that. Incidentally it makes one of the most
awful noises I have ever heard, and sends forth clouds of coal dust
which make it impossible to see more than two to three feet and almost
impossible to breathe. The machine travels along the coal face cutting
into the base of the coal and undermining it to the depth of five feet
or five feet and a half; after this it is comparatively easy to extract
the coal to the depth to which it has been undermined. Where it is
'difficult getting', however, it has also to be loosened with
explosives. A man with an electric drill, like a rather small version of
the drills used in street-mending, bores holes at intervals in the coal,
inserts blasting powder, plugs it with clay, goes round the corner if
there is one handy (he is supposed to retire to twenty-five yards
distance) and touches off the charge with an electric current. This is
not intended to bring the coal out, only to loosen it. Occasionally, of
course, the charge is too powerful, and then it not only brings the coal
out but brings the roof down as well.

After the blasting has been done the 'fillers' can tumble the coal out,
break it up and shovel it on to the conveyor belt. It comes out first in
monstrous boulders which may weigh anything up to twenty tons. The
conveyor belt shoots it on to tubs, and the tubs are shoved into the
main road and hitched on to an endlessly revolving steel cable which
drags them to the cage. Then they are hoisted, and at the surface the
coal is sorted by being run over screens, and if necessary is washed as
well. As far as possible the 'dirt'--the shale, that is--is used for
making the roads below. All what cannot be used is sent to the surface
and dumped; hence the monstrous 'dirt-heaps', like hideous grey
mountains, which are the characteristic scenery of the coal areas. When
the coal has been extracted to the depth to which the machine has cut,
the coal face has advanced by five feet. Fresh props are put in to hold
up the newly exposed roof, and during the next shift the conveyor belt
is taken to pieces, moved five feet forward and re-assembled. As far as
possible the three operations of cutting, blasting and extraction are
done in three separate shifts, the cutting in the afternoon, the
blasting at night (there is a law, not always kept, that forbids its
being done when other men are working near by), and the 'filling' in the
morning shift, which lasts from six in the morning until half past one.

Even when you watch the process of coal-extraction you probably only
watch it for a short time, and it is not until you begin making a few
calculations that you realize what a stupendous task the 'fillers' are
performing. Normally each man has to clear a space four or five yards
wide. The cutter has undermined the coal to the depth of five feet, so
that if the seam of coal is three or four feet high, each man has to cut
out, break up and load on to the belt something between seven and twelve
cubic yards of coal. This is to say, taking a cubic yard as weighing
twenty-seven hundred-weight, that each man is shifting coal at a speed
approaching two tons an hour. I have just enough experience of pick and
shovel work to be able to grasp what this means. When I am digging
trenches in my garden, if I shift two tons of earth during the
afternoon, I feel that I have earned my tea. But earth is tractable
stuff compared with coal, and I don't have to work kneeling down, a
thousand feet underground, in suffocating heat and swallowing coal dust
with every breath I take; nor do I have to walk a mile bent double
before I begin. The miner's job would be as much beyond my power as it
would be to perform on a flying trapeze or to win the Grand National. I
am not a manual labourer and please God I never shall be one, but there
are some kinds of manual work that I could do if I had to. At a pitch I
could be a tolerable road-sweeper or an inefficient gardener or even a
tenth-rate farm hand. But by no conceivable amount of effort or training
could I become a coal-miner, the work would kill me in a few weeks.

Watching coal-miners at work, you realize momentarily what different
universes people inhabit. Down there where coal is dug is a sort of
world apart which one can quite easily go through life without ever
hearing about. Probably majority of people would even prefer not to hear
about it. Yet it is the absolutely necessary counterpart of our world
above. Practically everything we do, from eating an ice to crossing the
Atlantic, and from baking a loaf to writing a novel, involves the use of
coal, directly or indirectly. For all the arts of peace coal is needed;
if war breaks out it is needed all the more. In time of revolution the
miner must go on working or the revolution must stop, for revolution as
much as reaction needs coal. Whatever may be happening on the surface,
the hacking and shovelling have got to continue without a pause, or at
any rate without pausing for more than a few weeks at the most. In order
that Hitler may march the goose-step, that the Pope may denounce
Bolshevism, that the cricket crowds may assemble at Lords, that the
poets may scratch one another's backs, coal has got to be forthcoming.
But on the whole we are not aware of it; we all know that we 'must have
coal', but we seldom or never remember what coal-getting involves. Here
am I sitting writing in front of my comfortable coal fire. It is April
but I still need a fire. Once a fortnight the coal cart drives up to the
door and men in leather jerkins carry the coal indoors in stout sacks
smelling of tar and shoot it clanking into the coal-hole under the
stairs. It is only very rarely, when I make a definite mental-effort,
that I connect this coal with that far-off labour in the mines. It is
just 'coal'--something that I have got to have; black stuff that arrives
mysteriously from nowhere in particular, like manna except that you have
to pay for it. You could quite easily drive a car right across the north
of England and never once remember that hundreds of feet below the road
you are on the miners are hacking at the coal. Yet in a sense it is the
miners who are driving your car forward. Their lamp-lit world down there
is as necessary to the daylight world above as the root is to the
flower.

It is not long since conditions in the mines were worse than they are
now. There are still living a few very old women who in their youth have
worked underground, with the harness round their waists, and a chain
that passed between their legs, crawling on all fours and dragging tubs
of coal. They used to go on doing this even when they were pregnant. And
even now, if coal could not be produced without pregnant women dragging
it to and fro, I fancy we should let them do it rather than deprive
ourselves of coal. But-most of the time, of course, we should prefer to
forget that they were doing it. It is so with all types of manual work;
it keeps us alive, and we are oblivious of its existence. More than
anyone else, perhaps, the miner can stand as the type of the manual
worker, not only because his work is so exaggeratedly awful, but also
because it is so vitally necessary and yet so remote from our
experience, so invisible, as it were, that we are capable of forgetting
it as we forget the blood in our veins. In a way it is even humiliating
to watch coal-miners working. It raises in you a momentary doubt about
your own status as an 'intellectual' and a superior person generally.
For it is brought home to you, at least while you are watching, that it
is only because miners sweat their guts out that superior persons can
remain superior. You and I and the editor of the _Times Lit._ _Supp._,
and the nancy poets and the Archbishop of Canterbury and Comrade X,
author of _Marxism for Infants_--all of us _really_ owe the comparative
decency of our lives to poor drudges underground, blackened to the eyes,
with their throats full of coal dust, driving their shovels forward with
arms and belly muscles of steel.




3

When the miner comes up from the pit his face is so pale that it is
noticeable even through the mask of coal dust. This is due to the foul
air that he has been breathing, and will wear off presently. To a
Southerner, new to the mining districts, the spectacle of a shift of
several hundred miners streaming out of the pit is strange and slightly
sinister. Then-exhausted faces, with the grime clinging in all the
hollows, have a fierce, wild look. At other times, when their faces are
clean, there is not much to distinguish them from the rest of the
population. They have a very upright square-shouldered walk, a reaction
from the constant bending underground, but most of them are shortish men
and their thick ill-fitting clothes hide the splendour of their bodies.
The most definitely distinctive thing about them is the blue scars on
their noses. Every miner has blue scars on his nose and forehead, and
will carry them to his death. The coal dust of which the air underground
is full enters every cut, and then the skin grows over it and forms a
blue stain like tattooing, which in fact it is. Some of the older men
have their foreheads veined like Roquefort cheeses from this cause.

As soon as the miner comes above ground he gargles a little water to get
the worst of the coal dust out of his throat and nostrils, and then goes
home and either washes or does not wash according to his temperament.
From what I have seen I should say that a majority of miners prefer to
eat their meal first and wash afterwards, as I should do in their
circumstances. It is the normal thing to see a miner sitting down to his
tea with a Christy-minstrel face, completely black except for very red
lips which become clean by eating. After his meal he takes a largish
basin of water and washes very methodically, first his hands, then his
chest, neck, and armpits, then his forearms, then his face and scalp (it
is on the scalp that the grime clings thickest), and then his wife takes
the flannel and washes his back. He has only washed the top half of his
body and probably his navel is still a nest of coal dust, but even so it
takes some skill to get pass-ably clean in a single basin of water. For
my own part I found I needed two complete baths after going down a
coal-mine. Getting the dirt out of one's eyelids is a ten minutes' job
in itself.

At some of the larger and better appointed collieries there are pithead
baths. This is an enormous advantage, for not only can the miner wash
himself all over every day, in comfort and even luxury, but at the baths
he has two lockers where he can keep his pit clothes separate from his
day clothes, so that within twenty minutes of emerging as black as a
Negro he can be riding off to a football match dressed up to the nines.
But it is only comparatively seldom because a seam of coal does not last
for ever, so that it is not necessarily worth building a bath every time
a shaft is sunk. I can-not get hold of exact figures, but it seems
likely that rather less than one miner in three has access to a pithead
bath. Probably a large majority of miners are completely black from the
waist down for at least six days a week. It is almost impossible for
them to wash all over in their own homes. Every drop of water has got to
be heated up, and in a tiny living-room which contains, apart from the
kitchen range and a quantity of furniture, a wife, some children, and
probably a dog, there is simply not room to have a proper bath. Even
with a basin one is bound to splash the furniture. Middle-class people
are fond of saying that the miners would not wash themselves properly
even if they could, but this is nonsense, as is shown by the fact that
where pithead baths exist practically all the men use them. Only among
the very old men does the belief still linger that washing one's legs
'causes lumbago'. Moreover the pithead baths, where they exist, are paid
for wholly or partly by the miners themselves, out of the Miners'
Welfare Fund. Sometimes the colliery company subscribes, some-times the
Fund bears the whole cost. But doubtless even at this late date the old
ladies in Brighton boarding-houses are saying that 'if you give those
miners baths they only use them to keep coal in'.

As a matter of fact it is surprising that miners wash as regularly as
they do, seeing how little time they have between work and sleep. It is
a great mistake to think of a miner's working day as being only seven
and a half hours. Seven and a half hours is the time spent actually on
the job, but, as I have already explained, one has got to add on to this
time taken up in 'travelling', which is seldom less than an hour and may
often be three hours. In addition most miners have to spend a
considerable time in getting to and from the pit. Throughout the
industrial districts there is an acute shortage of houses, and it is
only in the small mining villages, where the village is grouped round
the pit, that the men can be certain of living near their work. In the
larger mining towns where I have stayed, nearly everyone went to work by
bus; half a crown a week seemed to be the normal amount to spend on
fares. One miner I stayed with was working on the morning shift, which
was from six in the morning till half past one. He had to be out of bed
at a quarter to four and got back somewhere after three in the
afternoon. In another house where I stayed a boy of fifteen was working
on the night shift. He left for work at nine at night and got back at
eight in the morning, had his breakfast, and then promptly went to bed
and slept till six in the evening; so that his leisure time amounted to,
about four hours a day--actually a good deal less, if you take off the
time for washing, eating, and dressing.

The adjustments a miner's family have to make when he is changed from
one shift to another must be tiresome in the extreme. If he is on the
night shift he gets home in time for breakfast, on the morning shift he
gets home in the middle of the afternoon, and on the afternoon shift he
gets home in the middle of the night; and in each case, of course, he
wants his principal meal of the day as soon as he returns. I notice that
the Rev. W. R. Inge, in his book _England_, accuses the miners of
gluttony. From my own observation I should say that they eat
astonishingly little. Most of the miners I stayed with ate slightly less
than I did. Many of them declare that they cannot do their day's work if
they have had a heavy meal beforehand, and the food they take with them
is only a snack, usually bread-and-dripping and cold tea. They carry it
in a flat tin called a snap-can which they strap to their belts. When a
miner gets back late at night his wife waits up for him, but when he is
on the morning shift it seems to be the custom for him to get his
breakfast for himself. Apparently the old superstition that it is bad
luck to see a woman before going to work on the morning shift is not
quite extinct. In the old days, it is said, a miner who happened to meet
a woman in the early morning would often turn back and do no work that
day.

Before I had been in the coal areas I shared the wide-spread illusion
that miners are comparatively well paid. One hears it loosely stated
that a miner is paid ten or eleven shillings a shift, and one does a
small multiplication sum and concludes that every miner is earning round
about £2 a week or £150 a year. But the statement that a miner receives
ten or eleven shillings a shift is very misleading. To begin with, it is
only the actual coal 'getter' who is paid at this rate; a 'dataller',
for instance, who attends to the roofing, is paid at a lower rate,
usually eight or nine shillings a shift. Again, when the coal 'getter'
is paid piecework, so much per ton extracted, as is the case in many
mines, he is dependent on the quality of the coal; a breakdown in the
machinery or a 'fault'--that is, a streak of rock running through the
coal seam--may rob him of his earnings for a day or two at a time. But
in any case one ought not to think of the miner as working six days a
week, fifty-two weeks a year. Almost certainly there will be a number of
days when he is' laid off'. The average earning per shift worked for
every mine-worker, of all ages and both sexes, in Great Britain in 1934,
was 9s. 1 3/4d. [From the _Colliery Year Book_ and Coal Trades
Directory_ for 1935.] If everyone were in work all the time, this would
mean that the mine-worker was earning a little over £142 a year, or
nearly £2 15s. a week. His real income, however, is far lower than this,
for the 9s. 1 3/4d. is merely an average calculation on shifts actually
worked and takes no account of blank days.

I have before me five pay-checks belonging to a Yorkshire miner, for
five weeks (not consecutive) at the beginning of 1936. Averaging them
up, the gross weekly wages they represent is £2 15s. 2d.; this is an
average of nearly 9s. 2 1/2d. a shift. But these pay-checks are for the
winter, when nearly all mines are running full time. As spring advances
the coal trade slacks off and more and more men are 'temporarily
stopped', while others still technically in work are laid off for a day
or two in every week. It is obvious therefore that £150 or even £142 is
an immense over-estimate for the mine-worker's yearly income. As a
matter of fact, for the year 1934 the average gross earnings of all
miners through-out Great Britain was only £115 11s. 6d. It varied
consider-ably from district to district, rising as high as £133 2s. 8d.
in Scotland, while in Durham it was a little under £105 or barely more
than £2 a week. I take these figures from The Coal Scuttle, by Mr Joseph
Jones, Mayor of Barnsley, Yorkshire. Mr Jones adds:

These figures cover the earnings of youths as well as adults and of the
higher- as well as the lower-paid grades...any particularly high
earning would be included in these figures, as would the earnings of
certain officials and other higher-paid men as well as the higher
amounts paid for overtime work.

_The figures, being averages, fail...to reveal the position of thousands
of adult workers whose earnings were substantially below the average
and' who received only 30s. to 40s. or less per week._

Mr Jones's italics. But please notice that even these wretched earnings
are _gross_ earnings. On top of this there are all kinds of stoppages
which are deducted from the miner's wages every week. Here is a list of
weekly stoppages which was given me as typical in one Lancashire
district:

                                        s. d.

Insurance (unemployment and health)     1  5
Hire of lamp                               6
For sharpening tools                       6
Check-weighman                             9
Infirmary                                  2
Hospital                                   1
Benevolent Fund                            6
Union fees                                 6
                                        ----
Total                                    4 5
                                        ----

Some of these stoppages, such as the Benevolent Fund and the union fees,
are, so to speak, the miner's own responsibility, others are imposed by
the colliery company. They are not the same in all districts. For
instance, the iniquitous swindle of making the miner pay for the hire of
his lamp (at sixpence a week he buys the lamp several times over in a
single year) does not obtain everywhere. But the stoppages always seem
to total up to about the same amount. On the Yorkshire miner's five
pay-checks, the average gross earning per week is £2 15s. 2d.; the
average net earning, after the stoppages have come off, is only £2 11s.
4d.--a reduction of 3s. 10d. a week. But the pay-check, naturally, only
mentions stoppages which are imposed or paid through the colliery
company; one has got to add the union fees, bringing the total reduction
up to something over four shillings. Probably it is safe to say that
stoppages of one kind and another cut four shillings or thereabouts from
_every_ adult miner's weekly wage. So that the £115 11s. 6d. which was
the mine-worker's average earning throughout Great Britain in 1934
should really be something nearer £105. As against this, most miners
receive allowances in kind, being able to purchase coal for their own
use at a reduced rate, usually eight or nine shillings a ton. But
according to Mr Jones, quoted above, 'the average value of all
allowances in kind for the country as a whole is only fourpence a day'.
And this fourpence a day is offset, in many cases, by the amount the
miner has to spend on fares in getting to and from the pit. So, taking
the industry as a whole, the sum the miner can actually bring home and
call his own does not average more, perhaps slightly less, than two
pounds a week.

Meanwhile, how much coal is the average miner producing?

The tonnage of coal raised yearly per person employed in mining rises
steadily though rather slowly. In 1914 every mine-worker produced, on
average, 253 tons of coal; in 1934 he produced 280 tons.[_The Coal
Scuttle_. The _Colliery Year Book end Coal Trades Directory_ gives a
slightly higher figure.] This of course is an average figure for
mine-workers of all kinds; those actually working at the coal face
extract an enormously greater amount--in many cases, probably, well over
a thousand tons each. But taking 280 tons as a representative figure, it
is worth noticing what a vast achievement this is. One gets the best
idea of it by comparing a miner's life with somebody else's. If I live
to be sixty I shall probably have produced thirty novels, or enough to
fill two medium-sized library shelves. In the same period the average
miner produces 8400 tons of coal; enough coal to pave Trafalgar Square
nearly two feet deep or to supply seven large families with fuel for
over a hundred years.

Of the five pay-checks I mentioned above, no less than three are
rubber-stamped with the words 'death stoppage'. When a miner is killed
at work it is usual for the other miners to make up a subscription,
generally of a shilling each, for his widow, and this is collected by
the colliery company and automatically deducted from their wages. The
significant detail here is the rubber stamp. The rate of accidents among
miners is so high, compared with that in other trades, that casualties
are taken for granted almost as they would be in a minor war. Every year
one miner in about nine hundred is killed and one in about six is
injured; most of these injuries, of course, are petty ones, but a fair
number amount to total disablement. This means that if a miner's working
life is forty years the chances are nearly seven to one against his
escaping injury and not much more than twenty to one against his being
killed outright. No other trade approaches this in dangerousness; the
next most dangerous is the shipping trade, one sailor in a little under
1300 being killed every year. The figures I have given apply, of course,
to mine-workers as a whole; for those actually working underground the
proportion of injuries would be very much higher. Every miner of long
standing that I have talked to had either been in a fairly serious
accident himself or had seen some of his mates killed, and in every
mining family they tell you tales of fathers, brothers, or uncles killed
at work. ('And he fell seven hundred feet, and they wouldn't never have
collected t'pieces only he were wearing a new suit of oil-skins,' etc.,
etc., etc.) Some of these tales are appalling in the extreme. One miner,
for instance, described to me how a mate of his, a 'dataller', was
buried by a fall of rock. They rushed to him and managed to uncover his
head and shoulders so that he could breathe, and he was alive and spoke
to them. Then they saw that the roof was coming down again and had to
run to save themselves; the 'dataller' was buried a second time. Once
again they rushed to him and got his head and shoulders free, and again
he was alive and spoke to them. Then the roof came down a third time,
and this time they could not uncover him for several hours, after which,
of course, he was dead. But the miner who told me the story (he had been
buried himself on one occasion, but he was lucky enough to have his head
jammed between his legs so that there was a small space in which he
could breathe) did not think it was a particularly appalling one. Its
significance, for him, was that the 'dataller' had known perfectly well
that the place where he was working was unsafe, and had gone there in
daily expectation of an accident. 'And it worked on his mind to that
extent that he got to kissing his wife before he went to work. And she
told me afterwards that it were over twenty years since he'd kissed
her.'

The most obviously understandable cause of accidents is explosions of
gas, which is always more or less present in the atmosphere of the pit.
There is a special lamp which is used to test the air for gas, and when
it is present in at all large quantities it can be detected by the flame
of an ordinary Davy lamp burning blue. If the wick can be turned up to
its full extent and the flame is still blue, the proportion of gas is
dangerously high; it is, nevertheless, difficult to detect, because it
does not distribute itself evenly throughout the atmosphere but hangs
about in cracks and crevices. Before starting work a miner often tests
for gas by poking his lamp into all the corners. The gas may be touched
off by a spark during blasting operations, or by a pick striking a spark
from a stone, or by a defective lamp, or by 'gob fires'--spontaneously
generated fires which' smoulder in the coal dust and are very hard to
put out. The great mining disasters which happen from time to time, in
which several hundred men are killed, are usually caused by explosions;
hence one tends to think of explosions as the chief danger of mining.
Actually, the great majority of accidents are due to the normal
every-day dangers of the pit; in particular, to falls of roof. There
are, for instance, 'pot-holes'--circular holes from which a lump of
stone big enough to kill a man shoots out with the promptitude of a
bullet. With, so far as I can remember, only one exception, all the
miners I have talked to declared that the new machinery, and 'speeding
up' generally, have made the work more dangerous. This may be partly due
to conservatism, but they can give plenty of reasons. To begin with, the
speed at which the coal is now extracted means that for hours at a time
a dangerously large stretch of roof remains unpropped. Then there is the
vibration, which tends to shake everything loose, and the noise, which
makes it harder to detect signs of danger. One must remember that a
miner's safety underground depend largely on his own care and skill. An
experienced miner claims to know by a sort of instinct when the roof is
unsafe; the way he puts it is that he 'can feel the weight on him'. He
can, for instance, hear the faint creaking of the props. The reason why
wooden props are still generally preferred to iron girders is that a
wooden prop which is about to collapse gives warning by creaking,
whereas a girder flies out un-expectedly. The devastating noise of the
machines makes it impossible to hear anything else, and thus the danger
is increased.

When a miner is hurt it is of course impossible to attend to him
immediately. He lies crushed under several hundred-weight of stone in
some dreadful cranny underground, and even after he has been extricated
it is necessary to drag his body a mile or more, perhaps, through
galleries where nobody can stand upright. Usually when you talk to a man
who has been injured you find that it was a couple of hours or so before
they got him to the surface. Sometimes, of course, there are accidents
to the cage. The cage is shooting several yards up or down at the speed
of an express train, and it is operated by somebody on the surface who
cannot see what is happening. He has very delicate indicators to tell
him how far the cage has got, but it is possible for him to make a
mistake, and there have been cases of the cage crashing into the
pit-bottom at its very maximum speed. This seems to me a dreadful way to
die. For as that tiny steel box whizzes through the blackness there must
come a moment when the ten men who are locked inside it _know_ that
something has gone wrong; and the remaining seconds before they are
smashed to pieces hardly bear thinking about. A miner told me he was
once in a cage in which something went wrong. It did not slow up when it
should have done, and they thought the cable must have snapped. As it
happened they got to the bottom safely, but when he stepped out he found
that he had broken a tooth; he had been clenching his teeth so hard in
expectation of that frightful crash.

Apart from accidents miners seem to be healthy, as obviously they have
got to be, considering the muscular efforts demanded of them. They are
liable to rheumatism and a man with defective lungs does not last long
in that dust-impregnated air, but the most characteristic industrial
disease is nystagmus. This is a disease of the eyes which makes the
eyeballs oscillate in a strange manner when they come near a light. It
is due presumably to working in half-darkness, and sometimes results in
total blindness. Miners who are disabled in this way or any other way
are compensated by the colliery company, sometimes with a lump sum,
sometimes with a weekly pension. This pension never amounts to more than
twenty-nine shillings a week; if it falls below fifteen shillings the
disabled man can also get something from the dole or the P.A.C. If I
were a disabled miner I should very much prefer the lump sum, for then
at any rate I should know that I had got my money. Disability pensions
are not guaranteed by any centralized fund, so that if the colliery
company goes bankrupt that is the end of the disabled miner's pension,
though he does figure among the other creditors.

In Wigan I stayed for a while with a miner who was suffering from
nystagmus. He could see across the room but not much further. He had
been drawing compensation of twenty-nine shillings a week for the past
nine months, but the colliery company were now talking of putting him on
'partial compensation' of fourteen shillings a week. It all depended on
whether the doctor passed him as fit for light work 'on top'. Even if
the doctor did pass him there would, needless to say, be no light work
available, but he could draw the dole and the company would have saved
itself fifteen shillings a week. Watching this man go to the colliery to
draw his compensation, I was struck by the profound differences that are
still made by _status_. Here was a man who had been half blinded in one
of the most useful of all jobs and was drawing a pension to which he had
a perfect right, if anybody has a right to anything. Yet he could not,
so to speak, _demand_ this pension--he could not, for instance, draw it
when and how he wanted it. He had to go to the colliery once a week at a
time named by the company, and when he got there he was kept waiting
about for hours in the cold wind. For all I know he was also expected to
touch his cap and show gratitude to whoever paid him; at any rate he had
to waste an afternoon and spend sixpence in bus fares. It is very
different for a member of the bourgeoisie, even such a down-at-heel
member as I am. Even when I am on the verge of starvation I have certain
rights attaching to my bourgeois status. I do not earn much more than a
miner earns, but I do at least get it paid into my bank in a
gentle-manly manner and can draw it out when I choose. And even when my
account is exhausted the bank people are passably polite.

This business of petty inconvenience and indignity, of being kept
waiting about, of having to do everything at other people's convenience,
is inherent in working-class life. A thousand influences constantly
press a working man down into a passive role. He does not act, he is
acted upon. He feels himself the slave of mysterious authority and has a
firm conviction that 'they' will never allow him to do this, that, and
the other. Once when I was hop-picking I asked the sweated pickers (they
earn something under sixpence an hour) why they did not form a union. I
was told immediately that 'they' would never allow it. Who were 'they'?
I asked. Nobody seemed to know, but evidently 'they' were omnipotent.

A person of bourgeois origin goes through life with some expectation of
getting what he wants, within reasonable limits. Hence the fact that in
times of stress 'educated' people tend to come to the front; they are no
more gifted than the others and their 'education' is generally quite
useless in itself, but they are accustomed to a certain amount of
deference and consequently have the cheek necessary to a commander. That
they will come to the front seems to be taken for granted, always and
everywhere. In Lissagaray's _History of the Commune_ there is an
interesting passage describing the shootings that took place after the
Commune had been suppressed. The authorities were shooting the
ringleaders, and as they did not know who the ringleaders were, they
were picking them out on the principle that those of better class would
be the ringleaders. An officer walked down a line of prisoners, picking
out likely-looking types. One man was shot because he was wearing a
watch, another because he 'had an intelligent face'. I should not like
to be shot for having an intelligent face, but I do agree that in almost
any revolt the leaders would tend to be people who could pronounce their
aitches.




4

AS you walk through the industrial towns you lose yourself in labyrinths
of little brick houses blackened by smoke, festering in planless chaos
round miry alleys and little cindered yards where there are stinking
dust-bins and lines of grimy washing and half-ruinous w.c.s. The
interiors of these houses are always very much the same, though the
number of rooms varies between two or five. All have an almost exactly
similar living-room, ten or fifteen feet square, with an open kitchen
range; in the larger ones there is a scullery as well, in the smaller
ones the sink and copper are in the living-room. At the back there is
the yard, or part of a yard shared by a number of houses, just big
enough for the dustbin and the w.c.s. Not a single one has hot water
laid on. You might walk, I suppose, through literally hundreds of miles
of streets inhabited by miners, every one of whom, when he is in work,
gets black from head to foot every day, without ever passing a house in
which one could have a bath. It would have been very simple to install a
hot-water system working from the kitchen range, but the builder saved
perhaps ten pounds on each house by not doing so, and at the time when
these houses were built no one imagined that miners wanted baths.

For it is to be noted that the majority of these houses are old, fifty
or sixty years old at least, and great numbers of them are by any
ordinary standard not fit for human habitation. They go on being
tenanted simply because there are no others to be had. And that is the
central fact about housing in the industrial areas: not that the houses
are poky and ugly, and insanitary and comfortless, or that they are
distributed in incredibly filthy slums round belching foundries and
stinking canals and slag-heaps that deluge them with sulphurous
smoke--though all this is perfectly true--but simply that there are not
enough houses to go round.

'Housing shortage' is a phrase that has been bandied about pretty freely
since the war, but it means very little to anyone with an income of more
than £10 a week, or even £5 a week for that matter. Where rents are high
the difficulty is not to find houses but to find tenants. Walk down any
street in Mayfair and you will see 'To Let' boards in half the windows.
But in the industrial areas the mere difficulty of getting hold of a
house is one of the worst aggravations of poverty. It means that people
will put up with anything--any hole and corner slum, any misery of bugs
and rotting floors and cracking walls, any extortion of skinflint
landlords and blackmailing agents--simply to get a roof over their
heads. I have been into appalling houses, houses in which I would not
live a week if you paid me, and found that the tenants had been there
twenty and thirty years and only hoped they might have the luck to die
there. In general these conditions are taken as a matter of course,
though not always. Some people hardly seem to realize that such things
as decent houses exist and look on bugs and leaking roofs as acts of
God; others rail bitterly against their landlords; but all cling
desperately to their houses lest worse should befall. So long as the
housing shortage continues the local authorities cannot do much to make
existing houses more liveable. They can 'condemn' a house, but they
cannot order it to be pulled down till the tenant has another house to
go to; and so the condemned houses remain standing and are all the worse
for being condemned, because naturally the landlord will not spend more
than he can help on a house which is going to be demolished sooner or
later. In a town like Wigan, for instance, there are over two thousand
houses standing which have been condemned for years, and whole sections
of the town would be condemned en bloc if there were any hope of other
houses being built to replace them. Towns like Leeds and Sheffield have
scores of thousands of 'back to back' houses which are all of a
condemned type but will remain standing for decades.

I have inspected great numbers of houses in various mining towns and
villages and made notes on their essential points. I think I can best
give an idea of what conditions are like by transcribing a few extracts
from my notebook, taken more or less at random. They are only brief
notes and they will need certain explanations which I will give
afterwards. Here are a few from Wigan:


1. House in Wallgate quarter. Blind back type. One up, one down.
Living-room measures 12 ft by 10 ft, room upstairs the same. Alcove
under stairs measuring 5 ft by 5 ft and serving as larder, scullery, and
coal-hole. Windows will open. Distance to lavatory 50 yards. Rent 4s.
9d., rates 2s. 6d., total 7s. 3d.

2. Another near by. Measurements as above, but no alcove under stairs,
merely a recess two feet deep containing the sink--no room for larder,
etc. Rent 3s. 2d., rates 2s., total 5s. 2d.

3. House in Scholes quarter. Condemned house. One up, one down. Rooms 15
ft by 15 ft. Sink and copper in living-room, coal-hole under stairs.
Floor subsiding. No windows will open. House decently dry. Landlord
good. Rent 3s. 8d. rates 2s. 6d., total 6s. 2d.

4. Another near by. Two up, two down, and coal-hole. Walls falling
absolutely to pieces. Water comes into upstairs rooms in quantities.
Floor lopsided. Downstairs windows will not open. Landlord bad. Rent
6s., rates 3s. 6d., total 9s. 6d.

5. House in Greenough's Row. One up, two down. Living-room 13 ft by 8
ft. Walls coming apart and water comes in. Back windows will not open,
front ones will. Ten in family with eight children very near together in
age. Corporations are trying to evict them for overcrowding but cannot
find another house to send them to. Landlord bad. Rent 4s., rates 2s.
3d., total 6s. 3d.


So much for Wigan. I have pages more of the same type. Here is one from
Sheffield--a typical specimen of Sheffield's several score thousand
'back to back' houses:


House in Thomas Street. Back to back, two up, one down (i.e. a
three-storey house with one room on each storey). Cellar below.
Living-room 14 ft by 10 ft, and rooms above corresponding. Sink in
living-room. Top floor has no door but gives on open stairs, Walls in
living-room slightly damp, walls in top rooms coming to pieces and
oozing damp on all sides. House is so dark that light has to be kept
burning all day. Electricity estimated at 6d. a day (probably an
exaggeration). Six in family, parents and foul children. Husband (on
P.A.C.) is tuberculous. One child in hospital, the others appear
healthy. Tenants have been seven years in this house. Would move, but no
other house available. Rent 6s. 6d., rates included.


Here are one or two from Barnsley:


1. House in Wortley Street. Two up, one down. Living-room 12 ft by 10
ft. Sink and copper in living-room, coal-hole under stairs. Sink worn
almost flat and constantly overflowing. Walls not too sound. Penny in
slot gas-light. House very dark and gas-light estimated 4d. a day.
Upstairs rooms are really one large room partitioned into two. Walls
very bad--wall of back room cracked right through. Window-frames coming
to pieces and have to be stuffed with wood. Rain comes through in
several places. Sewer runs under house and stinks in summer but
Corporation 'says they can't do nowt'. Six people in house, two adults
and four children, the eldest aged fifteen. Youngest but one attending
hospital--tuberculosis suspected. House infested by bugs. Rent 5s. 3d.,
including rates.

2. House in Peel Street. Back to back, two up, two down and large
cellar. Living-room loft square with copper and sink. The other
downstairs room the same size, probably intended as par-lour but used as
bedroom. Upstairs rooms the same size as those below. Living-room very
dark. Gas-light estimated at 4 1/2d. a day. Distance to lavatory 70
yards. Four beds in house for eight people--two old parents, two adult
girls (the eldest aged twenty-seven), one young man, and three children.
Parents have one bed, eldest son another, and remaining five people
share the other two. Bugs very bad--'You can't keep 'em down when it's
'ot.' Indescribable squalor in downstairs room and smell upstairs almost
unbearable. Rent 5s. 7 1/2d., including rates.

3. House in Mapplewell (small mining village near Barnsley). Two up, one
down. Living-room 14 ft by 13 ft. Sink in living-room. Plaster cracking
and coming off walls. No shelves in oven. Gas leaking slightly. The
upstairs rooms each 10 ft by 8 ft. Four beds (for six persons, all
adult), but 'one bed does nowt', presumably for lack of bedclothes. Room
nearest stairs has no door and stairs have no banister, so that when you
step out of bed your foot hangs in vacancy and you may fall ten feet on
to stones. Dry rot so bad that one can see through the floor into the
room below. Bugs, but 'I keeps 'em down with sheep dip'. Earth road past
these cottages is like a muck-heap and said to be almost impassable in
winter. Stone lavatories at ends of gardens in semi-ruinous condition.
Tenants have been twenty-two years in this house. Are £11 in arrears
with rent, and have been paying an extra 1s. a week to pay this off.
Landlord now refuses this and has served orders to quit. Rent 5s.,
including rates.


And so on and so on and so on. I could multiply examples by the
score--they could be multiplied by the hundred thousand if anyone chose
to make a house-to-house inspection throughout the industrial districts.
Meanwhile some of the expressions I have used need explaining. 'One up,
one down' means one room on each storey--i.e. a two-roomed house. 'Back
to back' houses are two houses built in one, each side of the house
being somebody's front door, so that if you walk down a row of what is
apparently twelve houses you are in reality seeing not twelve houses but
twenty-four. The front houses give on the street and the back ones on
the yard, and there is only one way out of each house. The effect of
this is obvious. The lavatories are in the yard at the back, so that if
you live on the side facing the street, to get to the lavatory or the
dust-bin you have to go out of the front door and walk round the end of
the block--a distance that may be as much as two hundred yards; if you
live at the back, on the other hand, your outlook is on to a row of
lavatories. There are also houses of what is called the 'blind back'
type, which are single houses, but in which the builder has omitted to
put in a back door--from pure spite, apparently. The windows which
refuse to open are a peculiarity of old mining towns. Some of these
towns are so undermined by ancient workings that the ground is
constantly subsiding and the houses above slip sideways. In Wigan you
pass whole rows of houses which have slid to startling angles, their
windows being ten or twenty degrees out of the horizontal. Sometimes the
front wall bellies outward till it looks as though the house were seven
months gone in pregnancy. It can be refaced, but the new facing soon
begins to bulge again. When a house sinks at all suddenly its windows
are jammed for ever and the door has to be refitted. This excites no
surprise locally. The story of the miner who comes home from work and
finds that he can only get indoors by smashing down the front door with
an axe is considered humorous. In some cases I have noted 'Landlord
good' or 'Landlord bad', because there is great variation in what the
slum-dwellers say about their landlords. I found--one might expect it,
perhaps--that the small landlords are usually the worst. It goes against
the grain to say this, but one can see why it should be so. Ideally, the
worst type of slum landlord is a fat wicked man, preferably a bishop,
who is drawing an immense income from extortionate rents. Actually, it
is a poor old woman who has invested her life's savings in three slum
houses, inhabits one of them, and tries to live on the rent of the other
two--never, in consequence, having any money for repairs.

But mere notes like these are only valuable as reminders to myself. To
me as I read them they bring back what I have seen, but they cannot in
themselves give much idea of what conditions are like in those fearful
northern slums. Words are such feeble things. What is the use of a brief
phrase like 'roof leaks' or 'four beds for eight people'? It is the kind
of thing your eye slides over, registering nothing. And yet what a
wealth of misery it can cover! Take the question of overcrowding, for
instance. Quite often you have eight or even ten people living in a
three-roomed house. One of these rooms is a living-room, and as it
probably measures about a dozen feet square and contains, besides the
kitchen range and the sink, a table, some chairs, and a dresser, there
is no room in it for a bed. So there are eight or ten people sleeping in
two small rooms, probably in at most four beds. If some of these people
are adults and have to go to work, so much the worse. In one house, I
remember, three grown-up girls shared the same bed and all went to work
at different hours, each disturbing the others when she got up or came
in; in another house a young miner working on the night shift slept by
day in a narrow bed in which another member of the family slept by
night. There is an added difficulty when there are grown-up children, in
that you cannot let adolescent youths and girls sleep in the same bed.
In one family I visited there were a father and mother and a son and
daughter aged round about seventeen, and only two beds for the lot of
them. The father slept with the son and the mother with the daughter; it
was the only arrangement that ruled out the danger of incest. Then there
is the misery of leaking roofs and oozing walls, which in winter makes
some rooms almost uninhabitable. Then there are bugs. Once bugs get into
a house they are in it till the crack of doom; there is no sure way of
exterminating them. Then there are the windows that will not open. I
need not point out what this must mean, in summer, in a tiny stuffy
living-room where the fire, on which all the cooking is done, has to be
kept burning more or less constantly. And there are the special miseries
attendant upon back to back houses. A fifty yards' walk to the lavatory
or the dust-bin is not exactly an inducement to be clean. In the front
houses--at any rate in a side-street where the Corporation don't
interfere--the women get into the habit of throwing their refuse out of
the front door, so that the gutter is always littered with tea-leaves
and bread crusts. And it is worth considering what it is like for a
child to grow up in one of the back alleys where its gaze is bounded by
a row of lavatories and a wall.

In such places as these a woman is only a poor drudge muddling among an
infinity of jobs. She may keep up her spirits, but she cannot keep up
her standards of cleanliness and tidiness. There is always something to
be done, and no conveniences and almost literally not room to turn
round. No sooner have you washed one child's face than another's is
dirty; before you have washed the crocks from one meal the next is due
to be cooked. I found great variation in the houses I visited. Some were
as decent as one could possibly expect in the circumstances, some were
so appalling that I have no hope of describing them adequately. To begin
with, the smell, the dominant and essential thing, is indescribable. But
the squalor and the confusion! A tub full of filthy water here, a basin
full of unwashed crocks there, more crocks piled in any odd corner, torn
newspaper littered everywhere, and in the middle always the same
dreadful table covered with sticky oilcloth and crowded with cooking
pots and irons and half-darned stockings and pieces of stale bread and
bits of cheese wrapped round with greasy newspaper! And the congestion
in a tiny room where getting from one side to the other is a complicated
voyage between pieces of furniture, with a line of damp washing getting
you in the face every time you move and the children as thick underfoot
as toadstools! There are scenes that stand out vividly in my memory. The
almost bare living-room of a cottage in a little mining village, where
the whole family was out of work and everyone seemed to be underfed; and
the big family of grown-up sons and daughters sprawling aimlessly about,
all strangely alike with red hair, splendid bones, and pinched faces
ruined by malnutrition and idleness; and one tall son sitting by the
fire-place, too listless even to notice the entry of a stranger, and
slowly peeling a sticky sock from a bare foot. A dreadful room in Wigan
where all the furniture seemed to be made of packing cases and barrel
staves and was coming to pieces at that; and an old woman with a
blackened neck and her hair coining down denouncing her landlord in a
Lancashire-Irish accent; and her mother, aged well over ninety, sitting
in the background on the barrel that served her as a commode and
regarding us blankly with a yellow, cretinous face. I could fill up
pages with memories of similar interiors.

Of course the squalor of these people's houses is some-times their own
fault. Even if you live in a back to back house and have four children
and a total income of thirty-two and sixpence a week from the P.A.C.,
there is no need to have unemptied chamber-pots standing about in your
living-room. But it is equally certain that their circumstances do not
encourage self-respect. The determining factor is probably the number of
children. The best-kept interiors I saw were always childless houses or
houses where there were only one or two children; with, say, six
children in a three-roomed house it is quite impossible to keep anything
decent. One thing that is very noticeable is that the worst squalors are
never downstairs. You might visit quite a number of houses, even among
the poorest of the unemployed, and bring away a wrong impression. These
people, you might reflect, cannot be so badly off if they still have a
fair amount of furniture and crockery. But it is in the rooms upstairs
that the gauntness of poverty really discloses itself. Whether this is
because pride makes people cling to their living-room furniture to the
last, or because bedding is more pawnable, I do not know, but certainly
many of the bedrooms I saw were fearful places. Among people who have
been unemployed for several years continuously I should say it is the
exception to have anything like a full set of bedclothes. Often there is
nothing that can be properly called bedclothes at all--just a heap of
old overcoats and miscellaneous rags on a rusty iron bedstead. In this
way overcrowding is aggravated. One family of four persons that I knew,
a father and mother and two children, possessed two beds but could only
use one of them because they had not enough bedding for the other.

Anyone who wants to see the effects of the housing shortage at their
very worse should visit the dreadful caravan-dwellings that exist in
numbers in many of the northern towns. Ever since the war, in the
complete impossibility of getting houses, parts of the population have
overflowed into supposedly temporary quarters in fixed caravans. Wigan,
for instance, with a population of about 85,000, has round about 200
caravan-dwellings with a family in each--perhaps somewhere near 1000
people in all. How many of these caravan-colonies exist throughout the
industrial areas it would be difficult to discover with any accuracy.
The local authorities are reticent about them and the census report of
1931 seems to have decided to ignore them. But so far as I can discover
by inquiry they are to be found in most of the larger towns in
Lancashire and Yorkshire, and perhaps further north as well. The
probability is that throughout the north of England there are some
thousands, perhaps tens of thousands of _families_ (not individuals) who
have no home except a fixed caravan.

But the word 'caravan' is very misleading. It calls up a picture of a
cosy gypsy-encampment (in fine weather, of course) with wood fires
crackling and children picking blackberries and many-coloured washing
fluttering on the lines. The caravan-colonies in Wigan and Sheffield are
not like that. I had a look at several of them, I inspected those in
Wigan with considerable care, and I have never seen comparable squalor
except in the Far East. Indeed when I saw them I was immediately
reminded of the filthy kennels in which I have seen Indian coolies
living in Burma. But, as a matter of fact, nothing in the East could
ever be quite as bad, for in the East you haven't our clammy,
penetrating cold to contend with, and the sun is a disinfectant.

Along the banks of Wigan's miry canal are patches of waste ground on
which the caravans have been dumped like rubbish shot out of a bucket.
Some of them are actually gypsy caravans, but very old ones and in bad
repair. The majority are old single-decker buses (the rather smaller
buses of ten years ago) which have been taken off their wheels and
propped up with struts of wood. Some are simply wagons with
semi-circular slats on top, over which canvas is stretched, so that the
people inside have nothing but canvas between them and the outer air.
Inside, these places are usually about five feet wide by six high (I
could not stand quite upright in any of them) and anything from six to
fifteen feet long. Some, I suppose, are inhabited by only one person,
but I did not see any that held less than two persons, and some of them
contained large families. One, for instance, measuring fourteen feet
long, had seven people in it--seven people in about 450 cubic feet of
space; which is to say that each person had for his entire dwelling a
space a _good deal_ smaller than one compartment of a public lavatory.
The dirt and congestion of these places is such that you cannot well
imagine it unless you have tested it with your own eyes and more
particularly your nose. Each contains a tiny cottage Kitchener and such
furniture as can be crammed in--sometimes two beds, more usually one,
into which the whole family have to huddle as best they can. It is
almost impossible to sleep on the floor, because the damp soaks up from
below. I was shown mat-tresses which were still wringing wet at eleven
in the morning. In winter it is so cold that the Kitcheners have to be
kept burning day and night, and the windows, need-less to say, are never
opened. Water is got from a hydrant common to the whole colony, some of
the caravan-dwellers having to walk 150 or 200 yards for every bucket of
water. There are no sanitary arrangements at all. Most of the people
construct a little hut to serve as a lavatory on the tiny patch of
ground surrounding their caravan, and once a week dig a deep hole in
which to bury the refuse. All the people I saw in these places,
especially the children, were unspeakably dirty, and I do not doubt that
they were lousy as well. They could not possibly be otherwise. The
thought that haunted me as I went from caravan to caravan was, What can
happen in those cramped interiors when anybody dies? But that, of
course, is the kind of question you hardly care to ask.

Some of the people have been in their caravans for many years.
Theoretically the Corporation are doing away with the caravan-colonies
and getting the inhabitants out into houses; but as the houses don't get
built, the caravans remain standing. Most of the people I talked to had
given up the idea of ever getting a decent habitation again. They were
all out of work, and a job and a house seemed to them about equally
remote and impossible. Some hardly seemed to care; others realized quite
clearly in what misery they were living. One woman's face stays by me, a
worn skull-like face on which was a look of intolerable misery and
degradation. I gathered that in that dreadful pigsty, struggling to keep
her large brood of children clean, she felt as I should feel if I were
coated all over with dung. One must remember that these people are not
gypsies; they are decent English people who have all, except the
children born there, had homes of their own in their day; besides, their
caravans are greatly inferior to those of gypsies and they have not the
great advantage of being on the move. No doubt there are still
middle-class people who think that the Lower Orders don't mind that kind
of thing and who, if they happened to pass a caravan-colony in the
train, would immediately assume that the people lived there from choice.
I never argue nowadays with that kind of person. But it is worth
noticing that the caravan-dwellers don't even save money by living
there, for they are paying about the same rents as they would for
houses. I could not hear of any rent lower than five shillings a week
(five shillings for 200 cubic feet of space!) and there are even cases
where the rent is as high as ten shillings. Somebody must be making a
good thing out of those caravans! But dearly their continued existence
is due to the housing shortage and not directly to poverty.

Talking once with a miner I asked him when the housing shortage first
became acute in his district; he answered, 'When we were told about it',
meaning that till recently people's standards were so low that they took
almost any degree of overcrowding for granted. He added that when he was
a child his family had slept eleven in a room and thought nothing of it,
and that later, when he was grown-up, he and his wife had lived in one
of the old-style back to back houses in which you not only had to walk a
couple of hundred yards to the lavatory but often had to wait in a queue
when you got there, the lavatory being shared by thirty-six people. And
when his wife was sick with the illness that killed her, she still had
to make that two hundred yards' journey to the lavatory. This, he said,
was the kind of thing people would put up with 'till they were told
about it'.

I do not know whether that is true. What is certain is that nobody now
thinks it bearable to sleep eleven in a room, and that even people with
comfortable incomes are vaguely troubled by the thought of 'the slums'.
Hence the clatter about 'rehousing' and 'slum clearance' which we have
had at intervals ever since the war. Bishops, politicians,
philanthropists, and what not enjoy talking piously about 'slum
clearance', because they can thus divert attention from more serious
evils and pretend that if you abolish the slums you abolish poverty. But
all this talk has led to surprisingly small results. So far as one can
discover, the congestion is no better, perhaps slightly worse, than it
was a dozen years ago. There is certainly great variation in the speed
at which the different towns are attacking their housing problem. In
some towns building seems to be almost at a standstill, in others it is
proceeding rapidly and the private landlord is being driven out of
business. Liverpool, for instance, has been very largely rebuilt, mainly
by the efforts of the Corporation. Sheffield, too, is being torn down
and rebuilt pretty fast, though perhaps, considering the unparalleled
beastliness of its slums, not quite fast enough.[The number of
Corporation houses in process of construction in Sheffield at the
beginning of 1936 was 1398. To replace the slum areas entirely Sheffield
is said to need 100,000 houses.]

Why rehousing has on the whole moved so slowly, and why some towns can
borrow money for building purposes so much more easily than others, I do
not know. Those questions would have to be answered by someone who knows
more about the machinery of local government than I do. A Corporation
house costs normally somewhere between three and four hundred pounds; it
costs rather less when it is built by 'direct labour' than when built by
contract. The rent of these houses would average something over twenty
pounds a year not counting rates, so one would think that, even allowing
for overhead expenses and interest on loans, it would pay any
Corporation to build as many houses as could be tenanted. In many cases,
of course, the houses would have to be inhabited by people on the
P.A.C., so that the local bodies would merely be taking money out of one
pocket and putting it into another--i.e. paying out money in the form of
relief and taking it back in the form of rent. But they have got to pay
the relief in any case, and at present a proportion of what they pay is
being swallowed up by private landlords. The reasons given for the slow
rate of building are lack of money and the difficulty of getting hold of
sites--for Corporation houses are not erected piecemeal but in
'estates', sometimes of hundreds of houses at a time. One thing that
always strikes me as mysterious is that so many of the northern towns
see fit to build themselves immense and luxurious public buildings at
the same time as they are in crying need of dwelling houses. The town of
Barnsley, for instance, recently spent close on £150,000 on a new town
hall, although admittedly needing at least 2000 new working-class
houses, not to mention public baths. (The public baths in Barnsley
contain nineteen men's slipper baths--this in a town of 70,000
inhabitants, largely miners, not one of whom has a bath in his house!)
For £150,000 it could have built 350 Corporation houses and still had
£10,000 to spend on a town hall. However, as I say, I do not pretend to
understand the mysteries of local government. I merely record the fact
that houses are desperately needed and are being built, on the whole,
with paralytic slowness.

Still, houses are being built, and the Corporation building estates,
with their row upon row of little red houses, all much aliker than two
peas (where did that expression come from? Peas have great
individuality) are a regular feature of the outskirts of the industrial
towns. As to what they are like and how they compare with the slum
houses, I can best give an idea by transcribing two more extracts from
my diary. The tenants' opinions of their houses vary greatly, so I will
give one favourable extract and one unfavourable. Both of these are from
Wigan and both are the cheaper 'non-parlour type' houses:


1. House in Beech Hill Estate.

_Downstairs_. Large living-room with Kitchener fireplace, cup-boards,
and fixed dresser, composition floor. Small hallway, largish kitchen. Up
to date electric cooker hired from Corporation at much the same rate as
a gas cooker.

_Upstairs_. Two largish bedrooms, one tiny one--suitable only for a
boxroom or temporary bedroom. Bathroom, w.c., with hot and cold water.

Smallish garden. These vary throughout the estate, but mostly rather
smaller than an allotment.

Four in family, parents and two children. Husband in good employ. Houses
appear well built and are quite agreeable to look at. Various
restrictions, e.g. it is forbidden to keep poultry or pigeons, take in
lodgers, sub-let, or start any kind of business with-out leave from the
Corporation. (This is easily granted in the case of taking in lodgers,
but not in any of the others.) Tenant very well satisfied with house
and proud of it. Houses in this estate all well kept. Corporation are
good about repairs, but keep tenants up to the mark with regard to
keeping the place tidy, etc.

Rent 11s. 3d. including rates. Bus fare into town 2d.


2. House in Welly Estate.

_Downstairs_. Living-room 14 ft by 10 ft, kitchen a good deal smaller,
tiny larder under stairs, small but fairly good bathroom. Gas cooker,
electric lighting. Outdoor w.c.

_Upstairs_. One bedroom 12 ft by 10 ft with tiny fireplace, another the
same size without fireplace, another 7 ft by 6 ft. Best bedroom has
small wardrobe let into wall. 'Garden about 20 yards by 10.

Six in family, parents and four children, eldest son nineteen, eldest
daughter twenty-two. None in work except eldest son. Tenants very
discontented. Their complaints are: 'House is cold, draughty, and damp.
Fireplace in living-room gives out no heat and makes room very
dusty--attributed to its being set too low. Fireplace in best bedroom
too small to be of any use. Walls upstairs cracking. Owing to
uselessness of tiny bedroom, five are sleeping in one bedroom, one (the
eldest son) in the other.'

Gardens in this estate all neglected.

Rent 10s. 3d., inclusive. Distance to town a little over a mile--there
is no bus here.


I could multiply examples, but these two are enough, as the types of
Corporation houses being built do not vary greatly from place to place.
Two things are immediately obvious. The first is that at their very
worst the Corporation houses are better than the slums they replace. The
mere possession of a bathroom and a bit of garden would out-weigh almost
any disadvantage. The other is that they are much more expensive to live
in. It is common enough for a man to be turned out of a condemned house
where he is paying six or seven shillings a week and given a Corporation
house where he has to pay ten. This only affects those who are in work
or have recently been in work, because when a man is on the P.A.C. his
rent is assessed at a quarter of his dole, and if it is more than this
he gets an extra allowance; in any case, there are certain classes of
Corporation houses to which people on the dole are not admitted. But
there are other ways in which life in a Corporation estate is expensive,
whether you are in work or out of it. To begin with, owing to the higher
rents, the shops in the estate are much more expensive and there are not
so many of them. Then again, in a comparatively large, detached house,
away from the frowsy huddle of the slum, it is much colder and more fuel
has to be burnt. And again there is the expense, especially for a man in
work, of getting to and from town. This last is one of the more obvious
problems of rehousing. Slum clearance means diffusion of the population.
When you rebuild on a large scale, what you do in effect is to scoop out
the centre of the town and redistribute it on the outskirts. This is all
very well in a way; you have got the people out of fetid alleys into
places where they have room to breathe; but from the point of view of
the people themselves, what you have done is to pick them up and dump
them down five miles from their work. The simplest solution is flats. If
people are going to live in large towns at all they must learn to live
on top of one another. But the northern working people do not take
kindly to flats; even where fiats exist they are contemptuously named
'tenements'. Almost everyone will tell you that he 'wants a house of his
own', and apparently a house in the middle of an unbroken block of
houses a hundred yards long seems to them more 'their own' than a flat
situated in mid-air.

To revert to the second of the two Corporation houses I have just
mentioned. The tenant complained that the house was cold, damp, and so
forth. Perhaps the house was jerry-built, but equally probably he was
exaggerating. He had come there from a filthy hovel in the middle of
Wigan which I happened to have inspected previously; while there he had
made every effort to get hold of a Corporation house, and he was no
sooner in the Corporation house than he wanted to be back in the slum.
This looks like mere captiousness but it covers a perfectly genuine
grievance. In very many cases, perhaps in half the cases, I found that
the people in Corporation houses don't really like them. They are glad
to get out of the stink of the slum, they know that it is better for
their children to have space to play about in, but they don't feel
really at home. The exceptions are usually people in good employ who can
afford to spend a little extra on fuel and furniture and journeys, and
who in any case are of 'superior' type. The others, the typical
slum-dwellers, miss the frowsy warmth of the slum. They complain that
'out in the country', i.e. on the edge of the town, they are 'starving'
(freezing). Certainly most Corporation estates are pretty bleak in
winter. Some I have been through, perched on treeless clayey hillsides
and swept by icy winds, would be horrible places to live in. It is not
that slum-dwellers want dirt and congestion for their own sakes, as the
fat-bellied bourgeoisie love to believe. (See for instance the
conversation about slum-clearance in Galsworthy's Swan Song, where the
rentier's cherished belief that the slum-dweller makes the slum, and not
vice versa, is put into the mouth of a philanthropic Jew.) Give people a
decent house and they will soon learn to keep it decent. Moreover, with
a smart-looking house to live up to they improve in self-respect and
cleanliness, and their children start life with better chances.
Nevertheless, in a Corporation estate there is an uncomfortable, almost
prison-like atmosphere, and the people who live there are perfectly well
aware of it.

And it is here that one comes on the central difficulty of the housing
problem. When you walk through the smoke-dim slums of Manchester you
think that nothing is needed except to tear down these abominations and
build decent houses in their place. But the trouble is that in
destroying the slum you destroy other things as well. Houses are I'
desperately needed and are not being built fast enough; but in so far as
rehousing is being done, it is being done--perhaps it is unavoidable--in
a monstrously inhuman manner. I don't mean merely that the houses are
new and ugly. All houses have got to be new at some time, and as a
matter of fact the type of Corporation house now being built is not at
all offensive to look at. On the outskirts of Liverpool there are what
amount to whole towns consisting entirely of Corporation houses, and
they are quite pleasing to the eye; the blocks of workers' flats in the
centre of the town modelled, I believe, on the workers' flats in Vienna,
are definitely fine buildings. But there is something ruthless and
soulless about the whole business. Take, for instance, the restrictions
with which you are burdened in a Corporation house. You are not allowed
to keep your house and garden as you want them--in some estates there is
even a regulation that every garden must have the same kind of hedge.
You are not allowed to keep poultry or pigeons. The Yorkshire miners are
fond of keeping homer pigeons; they keep them in the back yard and take
them out and race them on Sundays. But pigeons are messy birds and the
Corporation suppresses them as a matter of course. The restrictions
about shops are more serious. The number of shops in a Corporation
estate is rigidly limited, and it is said that preference is given to
the Co-op and the chain stores; this may not be strictly true, but
certainly those are the shops that one usually sees there. This is bad
enough for the general public, but from the point of view of the
independent shopkeeper it is a disaster. Many a small shopkeeper is
utterly ruined by some rehousing scheme which takes no notice of his
existence. A whole section of the town is condemned en bloc; presently
the houses are pulled down and the people are transferred to some
housing estate miles away. In this way all the small shopkeepers of the
quarter have their whole clientele taken away from them at a single
swoop and receive not a penny of compensation. They cannot transfer
their business to the estate, because even if they can afford the move
and the much higher rents, they would probably be refused a licence. As
for pubs, they are banished from the housing estates almost completely,
and the few that remain are dismal sham-Tudor places fitted out by the
big brewery companies and very expensive. For a middle-class population
this would be a nuisance--it might mean walking a mile to get a glass of
beer; for a working-class population, which uses the pub as a kind of
club, it is a serious blow at communal life. It is a great achievement
to get slum-dwellers into decent houses, but it is unfortunate that,
owing to the peculiar temper of our time, it is also considered
necessary to rob them of the last vestiges of their liberty. The people
themselves feel this, and it is this feeling that they are rationalizing
when they complain that their new houses--so much better, as houses,
than those they have come out of--are cold and uncomfortable and
'unhomelike'.

I sometimes think that the price of liberty is not so much eternal
vigilance as eternal dirt. There are some Corporation estates in which
new tenants are systematically de-loused before being allowed into their
houses. All their possessions except what they stand up in are taken
away from them, fumigated, and sent on to the new house. This procedure
has its points, for it is a pity that people should take bugs into brand
new houses (a bug will follow you about in your luggage if he gets half
a chance), but it is the kind of thing that makes you wish that the word
'hygiene' could be dropped out of the dictionary. Bugs are bad, but a
state of affairs in which men will allow themselves to be dipped like
sheep is worse. 'Perhaps, however, when it is a case of slum clearance,
one must take for granted a certain amount of restrictions and
inhumanity. When all is said and done, the most important thing is that
people shall live in decent houses and not in pigsties. I have seen too
much of slums to go into Chestertonian raptures about them. A place
where the children can breathe clean air, and women have a few
conveniences to save them from drudgery, and a man has a bit of garden
to dig in, must be better than the stinking back-streets of Leeds and
Sheffield. On balance, the Corporation Estates are better than the
slums; but only by a small margin.

When I was looking into the housing question I visited and inspected
numbers of houses, perhaps a hundred or two hundred houses altogether,
in various mining towns and villages. I cannot end this chapter without
remarking on the extraordinary courtesy and good nature with which I was
received everywhere. I did not go alone--I always had some local friend
among the unemployed to show me round--but even so, it is an
impertinence to go poking into strangers' houses and asking to see the
cracks in the bedroom wall. Yet everyone was astonishingly patient and
seemed to understand almost without explanation why I was questioning
them and what I wanted to see. If any unauthorized person walked into
_my_ house and began asking me whether the roof leaked and whether I was
much troubled by bugs and what I thought of my landlord, I should
probably tell him to go to hell. This only happened to me once, and in
that case the woman was slightly deaf and took me for a Means Test nark;
but even she relented after a while and gave me the information I
wanted.

I am told that it is bad form for a writer to quote his own reviews, but
I want here to contradict a reviewer in the _Manchester Guardian_ who
says apropos of one of my books:


Set down in Wigan or Whitechapel Mr Orwell would still exercise an
unerring power of closing his vision to all that is good in order to
proceed with his wholehearted vilification of humanity.


Wrong. Mr Orwell was 'set down' in Wigan for quite a while and it did
not inspire him with any wish to vilify humanity. He liked Wigan very
much--the people, not the scenery. Indeed, he has only one fault to find
with it, and that is in respect of the celebrated Wigan Pier, which he
had set his heart on seeing. Alas! Wigan Pier had been demolished, and
even the spot where it used to stand is no longer certain.




5

When you see the unemployment figures quoted at two millions, it is
fatally easy to take this as meaning that two million people are out of
work and the rest of the population is comparatively comfortable. I
admit that till recently I was in the habit of doing so myself. I used
to calculate that if you put the registered unemployed at round about
two millions and threw in the destitute and those who for one reason and
another were not registered, you might take the number of underfed
people in England (for everyone on the dole or thereabouts is underfed)
as being, at the very most, five millions.

This is an enormous under-estimate, because, in the first place, the
only people shown on unemployment figures are those actually drawing the
dole--that is, in general, heads of families. An unemployed man's
dependants do not figure on the list unless they too are drawing a
separate allowance. A Labour Exchange officer told me that to get at the
real number of people _living on_ (not drawing) the dole, you have got
to multiply the official figures by something over three. This alone
brings the number of unemployed to round about six millions. But in
addition there are great numbers of people who are in work but who, from
a financial point of view, might equally well be unemployed, because
they are not drawing anything that can be described as a living
wage.[For instance, a recent census of the Lancashire cotton mills
revealed the fact that over 40,000 full-time employees receive less than
thirty shillings a week each. In Preston, to take only one town, the
number receiving over thirty shillings a week was 640 and the number
receiving under thirty shillings was 3113.] Allow for these and their
dependants, throw in as before the old-age pensioners, the destitute,
and other nondescripts, and you get an _underfed_ population of well
over ten millions. Sir John Orr puts it at twenty millions.

Take the figures for Wigan, which is typical enough of the industrial
and mining districts. The number of insured workers is round about
36,000 (26,000 men and 10,000 women). Of these, the number unemployed at
the beginning of 1936 was about 10,000. But this was in winter when the
mines are working full time; in summer it would probably be 12,000.
Multiply by three, as above, and you get 30,000 or 36,000. The total
population of Wigan is a little under 87,000; so that at any moment more
than one person in three out of the whole population--not merely the
registered workers--is either drawing or living on the dole. Those ten
or twelve thousand unemployed contain a steady core of from four to five
thousand miners who have been continuously unemployed for the past seven
years. And Wigan is not especially badly off as industrial towns go.
'Even in Sheffield, which has been doing well for the last year or so
because of wars and rumours of war, the proportion of unemployment is
about the same--one in three of registered workers unemployed.

When a man is first unemployed, until his insurance stamps are
exhausted, he draws 'full benefit', of which the rates are as follows:


                    per week

Single man            17s.
Wife                   9s.
Each child below 14    3s.


Thus in a typical family of parents and three children of whom one was
over fourteen, the total income would be 32s. per week, plus anything
that might be earned by the eldest child. When a man's stamps are
exhausted, before being turned over to the P.A.C. (Public Assistance
Committee), he receives twenty-six weeks' 'transitional benefit' from
the U.A.B. (Unemployment Assistance Board), the rates being as follows:



                   per week

Single man           15s.
Man and wife         24s.
Children 14-18        6s.
Children 11-14        4s. 6d.
Children 8-11         4s.
Children 5-8          3s. 6d.
Children 3-5          3s.


Thus on the U.A.B. the income of the typical family of five persons
would be 37s. 6d. a week if no child was in work. When a man is on the
U.A.B. a quarter of his dole is regarded as rent, with a minimum of 7s.
6d. a week. If the rent he is paying is more than a quarter of his dole
he receives an extra allowance, but if it is less than 7s. 6d., a
corresponding amount is deducted. Payments on the P.A.C. theoretically
comes out of the local rates, but are backed by a central fund. The
rates of benefit are:


                      per week

Single man             12s. 6d.
Man and wife           23s.
Eldest child            4s.
Any other child         3s.


Being at the discretion of the local bodies these rates vary slightly,
and a single man may or may not get an extra 2s. 6d. weekly, bringing
his benefit up to 15s. As on the U.A.B., a quarter of a married man's
dole is regarded as rent. Thus in the typical family considered above
the total income would be 33s. a week, a quarter of this being regarded
as rent. In addition, in most districts a coal allowance of 1s. 6d. a
week (1s. 6d. is equivalent to about a hundredweight of coal) is granted
for six weeks before and six weeks after Christmas.

It will be seen that the income of a family on the dole normally
averages round about thirty shillings a week. One can write at least a
quarter of this off as rent, which is to say that the average person,
child or adult, has got to be fed, clothed, warmed, and otherwise
cared-for for six or seven shillings a week. Enormous groups of people,
probably at least a third of the whole population of the industrial
areas, are living at this level. The Means Test is very strictly
enforced, and you are liable to be refused relief at the slightest hint
that you are getting money from another source. Dock-labourers, for
instance, who are generally hired by the half-day, have to sign on at a
Labour Exchange twice daily; if they fail to do so it is assumed that
they have been working and their dole is reduced correspondingly. I have
seen cases of evasion of the Means Test, but I should say that in the
industrial towns, where there is still a certain amount of communal life
and everyone has neighbours who know him, it is much harder than it
would be in London. The usual method is for a young man who is actually
living with his parents to get an accommodation address, so that
supposedly he has a separate establishment and draws a separate
allowance. But there is much spying and tale-bearing. One man I knew,
for instance, was seen feeding his neighbour's chickens while the
neighbour was away. It was reported to the authorities that he 'had a
job feeding chickens' and he had great difficulty in refuting this. The
favourite joke in Wigan was about a man who was refused relief on the
ground that he 'had a job carting firewood'. He had been seen, it was
said, carting firewood at night. He had to explain that he was not
carting firewood but doing a moonlight flit. The 'firewood' was his
furniture.

The most cruel and evil effect of the Means Test is the way in which it
breaks up families. Old people, sometimes bedridden, are driven out of
their homes by it. An old age pensioner, for instance, if a widower,
would normally live with one or other of his children; his weekly ten
shillings goes towards the household expenses, and probably he is not
badly cared for. Under the Means Test, however, he counts as a 'lodger'
and if he stays at home his children's dole will be docked. So, perhaps
at seventy or seventy-five years of age, he has to turn out into
lodgings, handing his pension over to the lodging-house keeper and
existing on the verge of starvation. I have seen several cases of this
myself. It is happening all over England at this moment, thanks to the
Means Test.

Nevertheless, in spite of the frightful extent of unemployment, it is a
fact that poverty--extreme poverty--is less in evidence in the
industrial North than it is in London. Everything is poorer and
shabbier, there are fewer motor-cars and fewer well-dressed people; but
also there are fewer people who are obviously destitute. Even in a town
the size of Liverpool or Manchester you are struck by the fewness of the
beggars. London is a sort of whirlpool which draws derelict people
towards it, and it is so vast that life there is solitary and anonymous.
Until you break the law nobody will take any notice of you, and you can
go to pieces as you could not possibly do in a place where you had
neighbours who knew you. But in the industrial towns the old communal
way of life has not yet broken up, tradition is still strong and almost
everyone has a family--potentially, therefore, a home. In a town of
50,000 or 100,000 inhabitants there is no casual and as it were
unaccounted-for population; nobody sleeping in the streets, for
instance. Moreover, there is just this to be said for the unemployment
regulations, that they do not discourage people from marrying. A man and
wife on twenty-three shillings a week are not far from the starvation
line, but they can make a home of sorts; they are vastly better off than
a single man on fifteen shillings. The life of a single unemployed man
is dreadful. He lives sometimes in a common lodging-house, more often in
a 'furnished' room for which he usually pays six shillings a week,
finding himself as best he can on the other nine (say six shillings a
week for food and three for clothes, tobacco, and amusements). Of course
he cannot feed or look after himself properly, and a man who pays six
shillings a week for his room is not encouraged to be indoors more than
is necessary. So he spends his days loafing in the public library or any
other place where he can keep warm. That keeping warm--is almost the
sole preoccupation of a single unemployed man in winter. In Wigan a
favourite refuge was the pictures, which are fantastically cheap there.
You can always get a seat for fourpence, and at the matinee at some
houses you can even get a seat for twopence. Even people on the verge of
starvation will readily pay twopence to get out of the ghastly cold of a
winter afternoon. In Sheffield I was taken to a public hall to listen to
a lecture by a clergyman, and it was by a long way the silliest and
worst-delivered lecture I have ever heard or ever expect to hear. I
found it physically impossible to sit it out, indeed my feet carried me
out, seemingly of their own accord, before it was half-way through. Yet
the hall was thronged with unemployed men; they would have sat through
far worse drivel for the sake of a warm place to shelter in.

At times I have seen unmarried men on the dole living in the extreme of
misery. In one town I remember a whole colony of them who were
squatting, more or less illicitly, in a derelict house which was
practically falling down. They had collected a few scraps of furniture,
presumably off refuse-tips, and I remember that their sole table was an
old marble-topped wash-hand-stand. But this kind of thing is
exceptional. A working-class bachelor is a rarity, and so long as a man
is married unemployment makes comparatively little alteration in his way
of life. His home is impoverished but it is still a home, and it is
noticeable everywhere that the anomalous position created by
unemployment--the man being out of work while the woman's work continues
as before--has not altered the relative status of the sexes. In a
working-class home it is the man who is the master and not, as in a
middle-class home, the woman or the baby. Practically never, for
instance, in a working-class home, will you see the man doing a stroke
of the housework. Unemployment has not changed this convention, which on
the face of it seems a little unfair. The man is idle from morning to
night but the woman is as busy as ever--more so, indeed, because she has
to manage with less money. Yet so far as my experience goes the women do
not protest. I believe that they, as well as the men, feel that a man
would lose his manhood if, merely because he was out of work, he
developed into a 'Mary Ann'.

But there is no doubt about the deadening, debilitating effect of
unemployment upon everybody, married or single, and upon men more than
upon women. The best intellects will not stand up against it. Once or
twice it has happened to me to meet unemployed men of genuine literary
ability; there are others whom I haven't met but whose work I
occasionally see in the magazines. Now and again, at long intervals,
these men will produce an article or a short story which is quite
obviously better than most of the stuff that gets whooped up by the
blurb-reviewers. Why, then, do they make so little use of their talents?
They have all the leisure in the world; why don't they sit down and
write books? Because to write books you need not only comfort and
solitude--and solitude is never easy to attain in a working-class
home--you also need peace of mind. You can't settle to anything, you
can't command the spirit of _hope_ in which anything has got to be
created, with that dull evil cloud of unemployment hanging over you.
Still, an unemployed man who feels at home with books can at any rate
occupy himself by reading. But what about the man who cannot read
without discomfort? Take a miner, for instance, who has worked in the
pit since childhood and has been trained to be a miner and nothing else.
How the devil is he to fill up the empty days? It is absurd to say that
he ought to be looking for work. There is no work to look for, and
everybody knows it. You can't go on looking for work every day for seven
years. There are allotments, which occupy the time and help to feed a
family, but in a big town there are only allotments for a small
proportion of the people. Then there are the occupational centres which
were started a few years ago to help the unemployed. On the whole this
movement has been a failure, but some of the centres are still
flourishing. I have visited one or two of them. There are shelters where
the men can keep warm and there are periodical classes in carpentering,
boot-making, leather-work, handloom-weaving, basket-work, sea-grass
work, etc., etc.; the idea being that the men can make furniture and so
forth, not for sale but for their own homes, getting tools free and
materials cheaply. Most of the Socialists I have talked to denounce this
movement as they denounce the project--it is always being talked about
but it never comes to anything--to give the unemployed small-holdings.
They say that the occupational centres are simply a device to keep the
unemployed quiet and give them the illusion that something is being done
for them. Undoubtedly that is the underlying motive. Keep a man busy
mending boots and he is less likely to read the _Daily Worker_. Also
there is a nasty Y.M.C.A. atmosphere about these places which you can
feel as soon as you go in. The unemployed men who frequent them are
mostly of the cap-touching type--the type who tells you oilily that he
is 'Temperance' and votes Conservative. Yet even here you feel yourself
torn both ways. For probably it is better that a man should waste his
time even with such rubbish as sea-grass work than that for years upon
end he should do absolutely _nothing_.

By far the best work for the unemployed is being done by the
N.U.W.M.--National Unemployed Workers' Movement. This is a revolutionary
organization intended to hold the unemployed together, stop them
blacklegging during strikes, and give them legal advice against the
Means Test. It is a movement that has been built out of nothing by the
pennies and efforts of the unemployed themselves. I have seen a good
deal of the N.U.W.M., and I greatly admire the men, ragged and underfed
like the others, who keep the organization going. Still more I admire
the tact and patience with which they do it; for it is not easy to coax
even a penny-a-week subscription out of the pockets of people on the
P.A.C. As I said earlier, the English working class do not show much
capacity for leadership, but they have a wonderful talent for
organization. The whole trade union movement testifies to this; so do
the excellent working-men's clubs--really a sort of glorified
cooperative pub, and splendidly organized--which are so common in
Yorkshire. In many towns the N.U.W.M. have shelters and arrange speeches
by Communist speakers. But even at these shelters the men who go there
do nothing but sit round the stove and occasionally play a game of
dominoes. If this move-met could be combined with something along the
lines of the occupational centres, it would be nearer what is needed. It
is a deadly thing to see a skilled man running to seed, year after year,
in utter, hopeless idleness. It ought not to be impossible to give him
the chance of using his hands and making furniture and so forth for his
own home, with-out turning him into a Y.M.C.A. cocoa-drunkard. We may as
well face the fact that several million men in England will--unless
another war breaks out--never have a real job this side the grave. One
thing that probably could be done and certainly ought to be done as a
matter of course is to give every unemployed man a patch of ground and
free tools if he chose to apply for them. It is disgraceful that men who
are expected to keep alive on the P.A.C. should not even have the chance
to grow vegetables for their families.

To study unemployment and its effects you have got to go to the
industrial areas. In the South unemployment exists, but it is scattered
and queerly unobtrusive. There are plenty of rural districts where a man
out of work is almost unheard-of, and you don't anywhere see the
spectacle of whole blocks of cities living on the dole and the P.A.C. It
is only when you lodge in streets where nobody has a job, where getting
a job seems about as probable as owning an aeroplane and much _less_
probable than winning fifty pounds in the Football Pool, that you begin
to grasp the changes that are being worked in our civilization. For a
change is taking place, there is no doubt about that. The attitude of
the submerged working class is profoundly different from what it was
seven or eight years ago.

I first became aware of the unemployment problem in 1928. At that time I
had just come back from Burma, where unemployment was only a word, and I
had gone to Burma when I was still a boy and the post-war boom was not
quite over. When I first saw unemployed men at close quarters, the thing
that horrified and amazed me was to find that many of them were
_ashamed_ of being unemployed. I was very ignorant, but not so ignorant
as to imagine that when the loss of foreign markets pushes two million
men out of work, those two million are any more to blame than the people
who draw blanks in the Calcutta Sweep. But at that time nobody cared to
admit that unemployment was inevitable, because this meant admitting
that it would probably continue. The middle classes were still talking
about 'lazy idle loafers on the dole' and saying that 'these men could
all find work if they wanted to', and naturally these opinions
percolated to the working class themselves. I remember the shock of
astonishment it gave me, when I first mingled with tramps and beggars,
to find that a fair proportion, perhaps a quarter, of these beings whom
I had been taught to regard as cynical parasites, were decent young
miners and cotton-workers gazing at their destiny with the same sort of
dumb amazement as an animal in a trap. They simply could not understand
what was happening to them. They had been brought up to work, and
behold! it seemed as if they were never going to have the chance of
working again. In their circumstances it was inevitable, at first, that
they should be haunted by a feeling of personal degradation. That was
the attitude towards unemployment in those days: it was a disaster which
happened to _you_ as an individual and for which _you_ were to blame.

When a quarter of a million miners are unemployed, it is part of the
order of things that Alf Smith, a miner living in the back streets of
Newcastle, should be out of work. Alf Smith is merely one of the quarter
million, a statistical unit. But no human being finds it easy to regard
himself as a statistical unit. So long as Bert Jones across the street
is still at work, Alf Smith is bound to feel himself dishonoured and a
failure. Hence that frightful feeling of impotence and despair which is
almost the worst evil of unemployment--far worse than any hardship,
worse than the demoralization of enforced idleness, and Only less bad
than the physical degeneracy of Alf Smith's children, born on the P.A.C.
Everyone who saw Greenwood's play _Love on the Dole_ must remember that
dreadful moment when the poor, good, stupid working man beats on the
table and cries out, 'O God, send me some work!' This was not dramatic
exaggeration, it was a touch from life. That cry must have been uttered,
in almost those words, in tens of thousands, perhaps hundreds of
thousands of English homes, during the past fifteen years.

But, I think not again--or at least, not so often. That is the real
point: people are ceasing to kick against the pricks. After all, even
the middle classes--yes, even the bridge dubs in the country towns--are
beginning to realize that there is such a thing as unemployment. The 'My
dear, I don't believe in all this nonsense about unemployment. Why, only
last week we wanted a man to weed the garden, and we simply couldn't get
one. They don't want to work, that's all it is!' which you heard at
every decent tea-table five years ago, is growing perceptibly less
frequent. As for the working class themselves, they have gained
immensely in economic knowledge. I believe that the _Daily Worker_ has
accomplished a great deal here: its influence is out of all proportion
to its circulation. But in any case they have had their lesson well
rubbed into them, not only because unemployment is so widespread but
because it has lasted so long. When people live on the dole for years at
a time they grow used to it, and drawing the dole, though it remains
unpleasant, ceases to be shameful. Thus the old, independent,
workhouse-fearing tradition is undermined, just as the ancient fear of
debt is undermined by the hire-purchase system. In the back streets of
Wigan and Barnsley I saw every kind of privation, but I probably saw
much less _conscious_ misery than I should have seen ten years ago. The
people have at any rate grasped that unemployment is a thing they cannot
help. It is not only Alf Smith who is out of work now; Bert Jones is out
of work as well, and both of them have been 'out' for years. It makes a
great deal of difference when things are the same for everybody.

So you have whole populations settling down, as it were, to a lifetime
on the P.A.C. And what I think is admirable, perhaps even hopeful, is
that they have managed to do it without going spiritually to pieces. A
working man does not disintegrate under the strain of poverty as a
middle-class person does. Take, for instance, the fact that the working
class think nothing of getting married on the dole. It annoys the old
ladies in Brighton, but it is a proof of their essential good sense;
they realize that losing your job does not mean that you cease to be a
human being. So that in one way things in the distressed areas are not
as bad as they might be. Life is still fairly normal, more normal than
one really has the right to expect. Families are impoverished, but the
family-system has not broken up. The people are in effect living a
reduced version of their former lives. Instead of raging against their
destiny they have made things tolerable by lowering their standards.

But they don't necessarily lower their standards by cutting out
luxuries and concentrating on necessities; more often it is the other
way about--the more natural way, if you come to think of it. Hence the
fact that in a decade of unparalleled depression, the consumption of all
cheap luxuries has in-creased. The two things that have probably made
the greatest difference of all are the movies and the mass-production of
cheap smart clothes since the war. The youth who leaves school at
fourteen and gets a blind-alley job is out of work at twenty, probably
for life; but for two pounds ten on the hire-purchase he can buy himself
a suit which, for a little while and at a little distance, looks as
though it had been tailored in Savile Row. The girl can look like a
fashion plate at an even lower price. You may have three halfpence in
your pocket and not a prospect in the world, and only the corner of a
leaky bedroom to go home to; but in your new clothes you can stand on
the street corner, indulging in a private daydream of yourself as Clark
Gable or Greta Garbo, which compensates you for a great deal. And even
at home there is generally a cup of tea going--a 'nice cup of tea'--and
Father, who has been out of work since 1929, is temporarily happy
because he has a sure tip for the Cesarewitch.

Trade since the war has had to adjust itself to meet the demands of
underpaid, underfed people, with the result that a luxury is nowadays
almost always cheaper than a necessity. One pair of plain solid shoes
costs as much as two ultra-smart pairs. For the price of one square meal
you can get two pounds of cheap sweets. You can't get much meat for
threepence, but you can get a lot offish-and-chips. Milk costs
threepence a pint and even 'mild' beer costs fourpence, but aspirins are
seven a penny and you can wring forty cups of tea out of a quarter-pound
packet. And above all there is gambling, the cheapest of all luxuries.
Even people on the verge of starvation can buy a few days' hope
('Something to live for', as they call it) by having a penny on a
sweepstake. Organized gambling has now risen almost to the status of a
major industry. Consider, for instance, a phenomenon like the Football
Pools, with a turnover of about six million pounds a year, almost all of
it from the pockets of working-class people. I happened to be in
Yorkshire when Hitler re-occupied the Rhineland. Hitler, Locarno,
Fascism, and the threat of war aroused hardly a flicker of interest
locally, but the decision of the Football Association to stop publishing
their fixtures in advance (this was an attempt to quell the Football
Pools) flung all Yorkshire into a storm of fury. And then there is the
queer spectacle of modern electrical science showering miracles upon
people with empty bellies. You may shiver all night for lack of
bedclothes, but in the morning you can go to the public library and read
the news that has been telegraphed for your benefit from San Francisco
and Singapore. Twenty million people are underfed but literally everyone
in England has access to a radio. What we have lost in food we have
gained in electricity. Whole sections of the working class who have been
plundered of all they really need are being compensated, in part, by
cheap luxuries which mitigate the surface of life.

Do you consider all this desirable? No, I don't. But it may be that the
psychological adjustment which the working class are visibly making is
the best they could make in the circumstances. They have neither turned
revolutionary nor lost their self-respect; merely they have kept their
tempers and settled down to make the best of things on a fish-and-chip
standard. The alternative would be God knows what continued agonies of
despair; or it might be attempted insurrections which, in a strongly
governed country like England, could only lead to futile massacres and a
regime of savage repression.

Of course the post-war development of cheap luxuries has been a very
fortunate thing for our rulers. It is quite likely that fish-and-chips,
art-silk stockings, tinned salmon, cut-price chocolate (five two-ounce
bars for sixpence), the movies, the radio, strong tea, and the Football
Pools have between them averted revolution. Therefore we are some-times
told that the whole thing is an astute manoeuvre by the governing
class--a sort of 'bread and circuses' business--to hold the unemployed
down. What I have seen of our governing class does not convince me that
they have that much intelligence. The thing has happened, but by an
un-conscious process--the quite natural interaction between the
manufacturer's need for a market and the need of half-starved people for
cheap palliatives.




6

When I was a small boy at school a lecturer used to come once a term and
deliver excellent lectures on famous battles of the past, such as
Blenheim, Austerlitz, etc. He was fond of quoting Napoleon's maxim 'An
army marches on its stomach', and at the end of his lecture he would
suddenly turn to us and demand, 'What's the most important thing in the
world?' We were expected to shout 'Food!' and if we did not do so he was
disappointed.

Obviously he was right in a way. A human being is primarily a bag for
putting food into; the other functions and faculties may be more
godlike, but in point of time they come afterwards. A man dies and is
buried, and all his words and actions are forgotten, but the food he has
eaten lives after him in the sound or rotten bones of his children. I
think it could be plausibly argued that changes of diet are more
important than changes of dynasty or even of religion. The Great War,
for instance, could never have happened if tinned food had not been
invented. And the history of the past four hundred years in England
would have been immensely different if it had not been for the
introduction of root-crops and various other vegetables at the end of
the Middle Ages, and a little later the introduction of non-alcoholic
drinks (tea, coffee, cocoa) and also of distilled liquors to which the
beer-drinking English were not accustomed. Yet it is curious how seldom
the all-importance of food is recognized. You see statues everywhere to
politicians, poets, bishops, but none to cooks or bacon-curers or
market-gardeners. The Emperor Charles V is said to have erected a statue
to the inventor of bloaters, but that is the only case I can think of at
the moment.

So perhaps the really important thing about the unemployed, the really
basic thing if you look to the future, is the diet they are living on.
As I said earlier, the average unemployed family lives on an income of
round about thirty shillings a week, of which at least a quarter goes in
rent. It is worth considering in some detail how the remaining money is
spent. I have here a budget which was made out for me by an unemployed
miner and his wife. I asked them to make a list which represented as
exactly as possible their expenditure in a typical week. This man's
allowance was thirty-two shillings a week, and besides his wife he had
two children, one aged two years and five months and the other ten
months. Here is the list:


                              s. d.

Rent                          9 0 1/2
Clothing Club                 3 0
Coal                          2 0
Gas                           1 3
Milk                          0 10 1/2
Union Fees                    0 3
Insurance (on the children)   0 2
Meat                          2 6
Flour (2 stone)               3 4
Yeast                         0 4
Potatoes                      1 0
Dripping                      0 10
Margarine                     0 10
Bacon                         1 2
Sugar                         1 9
Tea                           1 0
Jam                           0 7 1/2
Peas and cabbage              0 6
Carrots and onions            0 4
Quaker oats                   0 4 1/2
Soap, powders, blue, etc.     0 10
                          --------
Total                      £1 12 0
                           -------


In addition to this, three packets of dried milk were sup-plied weekly
for the baby by the Infants' Welfare Clinic. One or two comments are
needed here. To begin with the list leaves out a great deal--blacking,
pepper, salt, vinegar, matches, kindling-wood, razor blades,
replacements of utensils, and wear and tear of furniture and bedding, to
name the first few that come to mind. Any money spent on these would
mean reduction on some other item. A more serious charge is tobacco.
This man happened to be a small smoker, but even so his tobacco would
hardly cost less than a shilling a week, meaning a further reduction on
food. The 'clothing clubs' into which unemployed people pay so much a
week are run by big drapers in all the industrial towns. Without them it
would be impossible for unemployed people to buy new clothes at all. I
don't know whether or not they buy bedding through these clubs. This
particular family, as I happen to know, possessed next to no bedding.

In the above list, if you allow a shilling for tobacco and deduct this
and the other non-food items, you are left with sixteen and fivepence
halfpenny. Call it sixteen shillings and leave the baby out of
account--for the baby was getting its weekly packets of milk from the
Welfare Clinic. This sixteen shillings has got to provide the entire
nourishment, _including fuel_, of three persons, two of them adult. The
first question is whether it is even theoretically possible for three
persons to be properly nourished on sixteen shillings a week. When the
dispute over the Means Test was in progress there was a disgusting
public wrangle about the minimum weekly sum on which a human being could
keep alive. So far as I remember, one school of dietitians worked it out
at five and ninepence, while another school, more generous, put it at
five and ninepence halfpenny. After this there were letters to the
papers from a number of people who claimed to be feeding themselves on
four shillings a week. Here is a weekly budget (it was printed in the
_New Statesman_ and also in the _News of the World_) which I picked out
from among a number of others:


                             s. d.

3 wholemeal loaves           1 0
1/2 lb. margarine            0 2 1/2
1/2 lb. dripping             0 3
1 lb. cheese                 0 7
1 lb. onions                 0 1 1/2
1 lb. carrots                0 1 1/2
1 lb. broken biscuits        0 4
2 lb. dates                  0 6
1 tin evaporated milk        0 5
10 oranges                   0 5
                            ----
Total                        3 11 1/2
                            ----


Please notice that this budget contains _nothing for fuel_. In fact, the
writer explicitly stated that he could not afford to buy fuel and ate
all his food raw. Whether the letter was genuine or a hoax does not
matter at the moment. What I think will be admitted is that this list
represents about as wise an expenditure as could be contrived; if you
_had_ to live on three and elevenpence halfpenny a week, you could
hardly extract more food-value from it than that. So perhaps it is
possible to feed yourself adequately on the P.A.C. allowance if you
concentrate on essential foodstuffs; but not otherwise.

Now compare this list with the unemployed miner's budget that I gave
earlier. The miner's family spend only tenpence a week on green
vegetables and tenpence half-penny on milk (remember that one of them is
a child less than three years old), and nothing on fruit; but they spend
one and nine on sugar (about eight pounds of sugar, that is) and a
shilling on tea. The half-crown spent on meat _might_ represent a small
joint and the materials for a stew; probably as often as not it would
represent four or five tins of bully beef. The basis of their diet,
therefore, is white bread and margarine, corned beef, sugared tea, and
potatoes--an appalling diet. Would it not be better if they spent more
money on wholesome things like oranges and wholemeal bread or if they
even, like the writer of the letter to the _New Statesman_, saved on
fuel and ate their carrots raw? Yes, it would, but the point is that no
ordinary human being is ever going to do such a thing. The ordinary
human being would sooner starve than live on brown bread and raw
carrots. And the peculiar evil is this, that the less money you have,
the less inclined you feel to spend it on wholesome food. A millionaire
may enjoy breakfasting off orange juice and Ryvita biscuits; an
unemployed man doesn't. Here the tendency of which I spoke at the end of
the last chapter comes into play. When you are unemployed, which is to
say when you are underfed, harassed, bored, and miserable, you don't
want to eat dull wholesome food. You want something a little bit
'tasty'. There is always some cheaply pleasant thing to tempt you. Let's
have three pennorth of chips! Run out and buy us a twopenny ice-cream!
Put the kettle on and we'll all have a nice cup of tea! _That_ is how
your mind works when you are at the P.A.C. level. White bread-and-marg
and sugared tea don't nourish you to any extent, but they are _nicer_
(at least most people think so) than brown bread-and-dripping and cold
water. Unemployment is an endless misery that has got to be constantly
palliated, and especially with tea, the English-man's opium. A cup of
tea or even an aspirin is much better as a temporary stimulant than a
crust of brown bread.

The results of all this are visible in a physical degeneracy which you
can study directly, by using your eyes, or inferentially, by having a
look at the vital statistics. The physical average in the industrial
towns is terribly low, lower even than in London. In Sheffield you have
the feeling of walking among a population of troglodytes. The miners are
splendid men, but they are usually small, and the mere fact that their
muscles are toughened by constant work does not mean that their children
start life with a better physique. In any case the miners are physically
the pick of the population. The most obvious sign of under-nourishment
is the badness of everybody's teeth. In Lancashire you would have to
look for a long time before you saw a working-class person with good
natural teeth. Indeed, you see very few people with natural teeth at
all, apart from the children; and even the children's teeth have a frail
bluish appearance which means, I suppose, calcium deficiency. Several
dentists have told me that in industrial districts a person over thirty
with any of his or her own teeth is coming to be an abnormality. In
Wigan various people gave me their opinion that it is best to get shut
of your teeth as early in life as possible. 'Teeth is just a misery,'
one woman said to me. In one house where I stayed there were, apart from
myself, five people, the oldest being forty-three and the youngest a boy
of fifteen. Of these the boy was the only one who possessed a single
tooth of his own, and his teeth were obviously not going to last long.
As for the vital statistics, the fact that in any large industrial town
the death rate and infant mortality of the poorest quarters are always
about double those of the well-to-do residential quarters--a good deal
more than double in some cases--hardly needs commenting on.

Of course one ought not to imagine that the prevailing bad physique is
due solely to unemployment, for it is probable that the physical average
has been declining all over England for a long time past, and not merely
among the unemployed in the industrial areas. This cannot be proved
statistically, but it is a conclusion that is forced upon you if you use
your eyes, even in rural places and even in a prosperous town like
London. On the day when King George V's body passed through London on
its way to Westminster, I happened to be caught for an hour or two in
the crowd in Trafalgar Square. It was impossible, looking about one
then, not to be struck by the physical degeneracy of modern England. The
people surrounding me were _not_ working-class people for the most part;
they were the shopkeeper--commercial-traveller type, with a sprinkling
of the well-to-do. But what a set they looked! Puny limbs, sickly faces,
under the weeping London sky! Hardly a well-built man or a
decent-looking woman, and not a fresh complexion anywhere. As the King's
coffin went by, the men took off their hats, and a friend who was in the
crowd at the other side of the Strand said to me afterwards, 'The only
touch of colour anywhere was the bald heads.' Even the Guards, it seemed
to me--there was a squad of guardsmen marching beside the coffin--were
not what they used to be. Where are the monstrous men with chests like
barrels and moustaches like the wings of eagles who strode across my
child-hood's gaze twenty or thirty years ago? Buried, I suppose, in the
Flanders mud. In their place there are these pale-faced boys who have
been picked for their height and consequently look like hop-poles in
overcoats--the truth being that in modern England a man over six feet
high is usually skin and bone and not much else. If the English physique
has declined, this is no doubt partly due to the fact that the Great War
carefully selected the million best men in England and slaughtered them,
largely before they had had time to breed. But the process must have
begun earlier than that, and it must be due ultimately to un-healthy
ways of living, i.e. to industrialism. I don't mean 'the habit of living
in towns--probably the town is healthier than the country, in many
ways--but the modern industrial technique which provides you with cheap
substitutes for everything. We may find in the long run that tinned food
is a deadlier weapon than the machine gun.

It is unfortunate that the English working class--the English nation
generally, for that matter--are exception-ally ignorant about and
wasteful of food. I have pointed out elsewhere how civilized is a French
navvy's idea of a meal compared with an Englishman's, and I cannot
believe that you would ever see such wastage in a French house as you
habitually see in English ones. Of course, in the very poorest homes,
where everybody is unemployed, you don't see much actual waste, but
those who can afford to waste food often do so. I could give startling
instances of this. Even the Northern habit of baking one's own bread is
slightly wasteful in itself, because an overworked woman cannot bake
more than once or, at most, twice a week and it is impossible to tell
beforehand how much bread will be wasted, so that a certain amount
generally has to be thrown away. The usual thing is to bake six large
loaves and twelve small ones at a time. All this is part of the old,
generous English attitude to life, and it is an amiable quality, but a
disastrous one at the present moment.

English working people everywhere, so far as I know, refuse brown bread;
it is usually impossible to buy whole-meal bread in a working-class
district. They sometimes give the reason that brown bread is 'dirty'. I
suspect the real reason is that in the past brown bread has been
confused with black bread, which is traditionally associated with Popery
and wooden shoes. (They have plenty of Popery and wooden shoes in
Lancashire. A pity they haven't the black bread as well!) But the
English palate, especially the working-class palate, now rejects good
food almost automatically. The number of people who prefer tinned peas
and tinned fish to real peas and real fish must be increasing every
year, and plenty of people who could afford real milk in their tea would
much sooner have tinned milk--even that dreadful tinned milk which is
made of sugar and corn-flour and has UNFIT FOR BABIES on the tin in huge
letters. In some districts efforts are now being made to teach the
unemployed more about food-values and more about the intelligent
spending of money. When you hear of a thing like this you feel yourself
torn both ways. I have heard a Communist speaker on the platform grow
very angry about it. In London, he said, parties of Society dames now
have the cheek to walk into East End houses and give shopping-lessons to
the wives of the unemployed. He gave this as an instance of the
mentality of the English governing class. First you condemn a family to
live on thirty shillings a week, and then you have the damned
impertinence to tell them how they are to spend their money. He was
quite right--I agree heartily. Yet all the same it is a pity that,
merely for the lack of a proper tradition, people should pour muck like
tinned milk down their throats and not even know that it is inferior to
the product of the cow.

I doubt, however, whether the unemployed would ultimately benefit if
they learned to spend their money more economically. For it is only the
fact that they are _not_ economical that keeps their allowances so high.
An English-man on the P.A.C. gets fifteen shillings a week because
fifteen shillings is the smallest sum on which he can conceivably keep
alive. If he were, say, an Indian or Japanese coolie, who can live on
rice and onions, he wouldn't get fifteen shillings a week--he would be
lucky if he got fifteen shillings a month. Our unemployment allowances,
miser-able though they are, are framed to suit a population with very
high standards and not much notion of economy. If the unemployed learned
to be better managers they would be visibly better off, and I fancy it
would not be long before the dole was docked correspondingly.

There is one great mitigation of unemployment in the North, and that is
the cheapness of fuel. Anywhere in the coal areas the retail price of
coal is about one and sixpence a hundredweight; in the South of England
it is about half a crown. Moreover, miners in work can usually buy coal
direct from the pit at eight or nine shillings a ton, and those who have
a cellar in their homes sometimes store a ton and sell it (illicitly, I
suppose) to those who are out of work. But apart from this there is
immense and systematic thieving of coal by the unemployed. I call it
thieving because technically it is that, though it does no harm to
anybody. In the 'dirt' that is sent up from the pits there is a certain
amount of broken coal, and unemployed people spend a lot of time in
picking it out of the slag-heaps. All day long over those strange grey
mountains you see people wandering to and fro with sacks and baskets
across the sulphurous smoke (many slag-heaps are on fire under the
surface), prising out the tiny nuggets of coal which are buried here and
there. You meet men coming away, wheeling strange and wonderful
home-made bicycles--bicycles made of rusty parts picked off refuse-tips,
without saddles, without chains and almost always without tyres--across
which are slung bags containing perhaps half a hundredweight of coal,
fruit of half a day's searching. In times of strikes, when everybody is
short of fuel, the miners turn out with pick and shovel and burrow into
the slag-heaps, whence the hummocky appearance which most slag-heaps
have. During long strikes, in places where there are outcrops of coal,
they have sunk surface mines and carried them scores of yards into the
earth.

In Wigan the competition among unemployed people for the waste coal has
become so fierce that it has led to an extraordinary custom called
'scrambling for the coal,' which is well worth seeing. Indeed I rather
wonder that it has never been filmed. An unemployed miner took me to see
it one afternoon. We got to the place, a mountain range of ancient
slag-heaps with a railway running through the valley below. A couple of
hundred ragged men, each with a sack and coal-hammer strapped under his
coat-tails, were waiting on the 'broo'. When the dirt comes up-from the
pit it is loaded on to trucks and an engine runs these to the top of
another slag-heap a quarter of a mile away and there leaves them. The
process of 'scrambling for the coal' consists in getting on to the train
while it is moving; any truck which you have succeeded in boarding while
it is in motion counts as 'your' truck. Presently the train hove in
sight. With a wild yell a hundred men dashed down the slope to catch her
as she rounded the bend. Even at the bend the train was making twenty
miles an hour. The men hurled themselves upon it, caught hold of the
rings at the rear of the trucks and hoisted themselves up by way of the
bumpers, five or ten of them on each truck. The driver took no notice,
He drove up to the top of the slag-heap, uncoupled the trucks, and ran
the engine back to the pit, presently returning with a fresh string of
trucks. There was the same wild rush of ragged figures as before. In the
end only about fifty men had failed to get on to either train.

We walked up to the top of the slag-heap. The men were shovelling the
dirt out of the trucks, while down below their wives and children were
kneeling, swiftly scrabbling with their hands in the damp dirt and
picking out lumps of coal the size of an egg or smaller. You would see a
woman pounce on a tiny fragment of stuff, wipe it on her apron,
scrutinize it to make sure it was coal, and pop it jealously into her
sack. Of course, when you are boarding a truck you don't know beforehand
what is in it; it may be actual 'dirt' from the roads or it may merely
be shale from the roofing. If it is a shale truck there will be no coal
in it, but there occurs among the shale another inflammable rock called
cannel, which looks very like ordinary shale but is slightly darker and
is known by splitting in parallel lines, like slate. It makes tolerable
fuel, not good enough to be commercially valuable, but good enough to be
eagerly sought after by the unemployed. The miners on the shale trucks
were picking out the cannel and splitting it up with their hammers. Down
at the bottom of the 'broo' the people who had failed to get on to
either train were gleaning the tiny chips of coal that came rolling down
from above--fragments no bigger than a hazel-nut, these, but the people
were glad enough to get them.

We stayed there till the train was empty. In a couple of hours the
people had picked the dirt over to the last grain. They slung their
sacks over shoulder or bicycle, and started on the two-mile trudge back
to Wigan. Most of the families had gathered about half a hundredweight
of coal or cannel, so that between them they must have stolen five or
ten tons of fuel. This business of robbing the dirt trains takes place
every day in Wigan, at any rate in winter, and at more collieries than
one. It is of course extremely dangerous. No one was hurt the afternoon
I was there, but a man had had both his legs cut off a few weeks
earlier, and another man lost several fingers a week later. Technically
it is stealing but, as everybody knows, if the coal were not stolen it
would simply be wasted. Now and again, for form's sake, the colliery
companies prosecute somebody for coal-picking, and in that morning's
issue of the local paper there was a paragraph saying that two men had
been fined ten shillings. But no notice is taken of the prosecutions--in
fact, one of the men named in the paper was there that afternoon--and
the coal-pickers subscribe among themselves to pay the fines. The thing
is taken for granted. Everyone knows that the unemployed have got to get
fuel somehow. So every afternoon several hundred men risk their necks
and several hundred women scrabble in the mud for hours--and all for
half a hundredweight of inferior fuel, value ninepence.

That scene stays in my mind as one of my pictures of Lancashire: the
dumpy, shawled women, with their sacking aprons and their heavy black
clogs, kneeling in the cindery mud and the bitter wind, searching
eagerly for tiny chips of coal. They are glad enough to do it. In winter
they are desperate for fuel; it is more important almost than food.
Meanwhile all round, as far as the eye can see, are the slag-heaps and
hoisting gear of collieries, and not one of those collieries can sell
all the coal it is capable of producing. This ought to appeal to Major
Douglas.




7

As you travel northward your eye, accustomed to the South or East, does
not notice much difference until you are beyond Birmingham. In Coventry
you might as well be in Finsbury Park, and the Bull Ring in Birmingham
is not unlike Norwich Market, and between all the towns of the Midlands
there stretches a villa-civilization indistinguishable from that of the
South. It is only when you get a little further north, to the pottery
towns and beyond, that you begin to encounter the real ugliness of
industrialism--an ugliness so frightful and so arresting that you are
obliged, as it were, to come to terms with it.

A slag-heap is at best a hideous thing, because it is so planless and
functionless. It is something just dumped on the earth, like the
emptying of a giant's dust-bin. On the outskirts of the mining towns
there are frightful landscapes where your horizon is ringed completely
round by jagged grey mountains, and underfoot is mud and ashes and
over-head the steel cables where tubs of dirt travel slowly across miles
of country. Often the slag-heaps are on fire, and at night you can see
the red rivulets of fire winding this way and that, and also the
slow-moving blue flames of sulphur, which always seem on the point of
expiring and always spring out again. Even when a slag-heap sinks, as it
does ultimately, only an evil brown grass grows on it, and it retains
its hummocky surface. One in the slums of Wigan, used as a playground,
looks like a choppy sea suddenly frozen; 'the flock mattress', it is
called locally. Even centuries hence when the plough drives over the
places where coal was once mined, the sites of ancient slag-heaps will
still be distinguishable from an aeroplane.

I remember a winter afternoon in the dreadful environs of Wigan. All
round was the lunar landscape of slag-heaps, and to the north, through
the passes, as it were, between the mountains of slag, you could see the
factory chimneys sending out their plumes of smoke. The canal path was a
mixture of cinders and frozen mud, criss-crossed by the imprints of
innumerable clogs, and all round, as far as the slag-heaps in the
distance, stretched the 'flashes'--pools of stagnant water that had
seeped into the hollows caused by the subsidence of ancient pits. It was
horribly cold. The 'flashes' were covered with ice the colour of raw
umber, the bargemen were muffled to the eyes in sacks, the lock gates
wore beards of ice. It seemed a world from which vegetation had been
banished; nothing existed except smoke, shale, ice, mud, ashes, and foul
water. But even Wigan is beautiful compared with Sheffield. Sheffield, I
suppose, could justly claim to be called the ugliest town in the Old
World: its inhabitants, who want it to be pre-eminent in everything,
very likely do make that claim for it. It has a population of half a
million and it contains fewer decent buildings than the average East
Anglian village of five hundred. And the stench! If at rare moments you
stop smelling sulphur it is because you have begun smelling gas. Even
the shallow river that runs through the town is-usually bright yellow
with some chemical or other. Once I halted in the street and counted the
factory chimneys I could see; there were thirty-three of them, but there
would have been far more if the air had not been obscured by smoke. One
scene especially lingers in my mind. A frightful patch of waste ground
(somehow, up there, a patch of waste ground attains a squalor that would
be impossible even in London) trampled bare of grass and littered with
newspapers and old saucepans. To the right an isolated row of gaunt
four-roomed houses, dark red, blackened by smoke. To the left an
interminable vista of factory chimneys, chimney beyond chimney, fading
away into a dim blackish haze. Behind me a railway embankment made of
the slag from furnaces. In front, across the patch of waste ground, a
cubical building of red and yellow brick, with the sign 'Thomas Grocock,
Haulage Contractor'.

At night, when you cannot see the hideous shapes of the houses and the
blackness of everything, a town like Sheffield assumes a kind of
sinister magnificence. Sometimes the drifts of smoke are rosy with
sulphur, and serrated flames, like circular saws, squeeze themselves out
from beneath the cowls of the foundry chimneys. Through the open doors
of foundries you see fiery serpents of iron being hauled to and fro by
redlit boys, and you hear the whizz and thump of steam hammers and the
scream of the iron under the blow. The pottery towns are almost equally
ugly in a pettier way. Right in among the rows of tiny blackened houses,
part of the street as it were, are the 'pot banks'--conical brick
chimneys like gigantic burgundy bottles buried in the soil and belching
their smoke almost in your face. You come upon monstrous clay chasms
hundreds of feet across and almost as deep, with little rusty tubs
creeping on chain railways up one side, and on the other workmen
clinging like samphire-gatherers and cutting into the face of the cliff
with their picks. I passed that way in snowy weather, and even the snow
was black. The best thing one can say for the pottery towns is that they
are fairly small and stop abruptly. Less than ten miles away you can
stand in un-defiled country, on the almost naked hills, and the pottery
towns are only a smudge in the distance.

When you contemplate such ugliness as this, there are two questions that
strike you. First, is it inevitable? Secondly, does it matter?

I do not believe that there is anything inherently and unavoidably ugly
about industrialism. A factory or even a gasworks is not obliged of its
own nature to be ugly, any more than a palace or a dog-kennel or a
cathedral. It all depends on the architectural tradition of the period.
The industrial towns of the North are ugly because they happen to have
been built at a time when modern methods of steel-construction and
smoke-abatement were unknown, and when everyone was too busy making
money to think about anything else. They go on being ugly largely
because the Northerners have got used to that kind of thing and do not
notice it. Many of the people in Sheffield or Manchester, if they
smelled the air along the Cornish cliffs, would probably declare that it
had no taste in it. But since the war, industry has tended to shift
southward and in doing so has grown almost comely. The typical post-war
factory is not a gaunt barrack or an awful chaos of blackness and
belching chimneys; it is a glittering white structure of concrete,
glass, and steel, surrounded by green lawns and beds of tulips. Look at
the factories you pass as you travel out of London on the G.W.R.; they
may not be aesthetic triumphs but certainly they are not ugly in the
same way as the Sheffield gasworks. But in any case, though the ugliness
of industrialism is the most obvious thing about it and the thing every
newcomer exclaims against, I doubt whether it is centrally important.
And perhaps it is not even desirable, industrialism being what it is,
that it should learn to disguise itself as something else. As Mr Aldous
Huxley has truly remarked, a dark Satanic mill ought to look like a dark
Satanic mill and not like the temple of mysterious and splendid gods.
Moreover, even in the worst of the industrial towns one sees a great
deal that is not ugly in the narrow aesthetic sense. A belching chimney
or a stinking slum is repulsive chiefly because it implies warped lives
and ailing children. Look at it from a purely aesthetic standpoint and
it may, have a certain macabre appeal. I find that anything outrageously
strange generally ends by fascinating me even when I abominate it. The
landscapes of Burma, which, when I was among them, so appalled me as to
assume the qualities of nightmare, afterwards stayed so hauntingly in my
mind that I was obliged to write a novel about them to get rid of them.
(In all novels about the East the scenery is the real subject-matter.)
It would probably be quite easy to extract a sort of beauty, as Arnold
Bennett did, from the blackness of the industrial towns; one can easily
imagine Baudelaire, for instance, writing a poem about a slag-heap. But
the beauty or ugliness of industrialism hardly matters. Its real evil
lies far deeper and is quite uneradicable. It is important to remember
this, because there is always a temptation to think that industrialism
is harmless so long as it is clean and orderly.

But when you go to the industrial North you are conscious, quite apart
from the unfamiliar scenery, of entering a strange country. This is
partly because of certain real differences which do exist, but still
more because of the North-South antithesis which has been rubbed into us
for such a long time past. There exists in England a curious cult of
Northernness, sort of Northern snobbishness. A Yorkshireman in the South
will always take care to let you know that he regards you as an
inferior. If you ask him why, he will explain that it is only in the
North that life is 'real' life, that the industrial work done in the
North is the only 'real' work, that the North is inhabited by 'real'
people, the South merely by rentiers and their parasites. The Northerner
has 'grit', he is grim, 'dour', plucky, warm-hearted, and democratic;
the Southerner is snobbish, effeminate, and lazy--that at any rate is
the theory. Hence the Southerner goes north, at any rate for the first
time, with the vague inferiority-complex of a civilized man venturing
among savages, while the Yorkshireman, like the Scotchman, comes to
London in the spirit of a barbarian out for loot. And feelings of this
kind, which are the result of tradition, are not affected by visible
facts. Just as an Englishman five feet four inches high and twenty-nine
inches round the chest feels that as an Englishman he is the physical
superior of Carnera (Carnera being a Dago), so also with the Northerner
and the Southerner. I remember a weedy little Yorkshireman, who would
almost certainly have run away if a fox-terrier had snapped at him,
telling me that in the South of England he felt 'like a wild invader'.
But the cult is often adopted by people who are not by birth Northerners
themselves. A year or two ago a friend of mine, brought up in the South
but now living in the North, was driving me through Suffolk in a car. We
passed through a rather beautiful village. He glanced disapprovingly at
the cottages and said:


'Of course most of the villages in Yorkshire are hideous; but the
Yorkshiremen are splendid chaps. Down here it's just the other way
about--beautiful villages and rotten people. All the people in those
cottages there are worthless, absolutely worthless.'


I could not help inquiring whether he happened to know anybody in that
village. No, he did not know them; but because this was East Anglia they
were obviously worthless. Another friend of mine, again a Southerner by
birth, loses no opportunity of praising the North to the detriment of
the South. Here is an extract from one of his letters to me:


I am in Clitheroe, Lancs...I think running water is much more
attractive in moor and mountain country than in the fat and sluggish
South. 'The smug and silver Trent,' Shakespeare says; and the South-er
the smugger, I say.


Here you have an interesting example of the Northern cult. Not only are
you and I and everyone else in the South of England written off as 'fat
and sluggish', but even water when it gets north of a certain latitude,
ceases to be H2O and becomes something mystically superior. But the
interest of this passage is that its writer is an extremely intelligent
man of 'advanced' opinions who would have nothing but con-tempt for
nationalism in its ordinary form. Put to him some such proposition as
'One Britisher is worth three foreigners', and he would repudiate it
with horror. But when it is a question of North versus South, he is
quite ready to generalize. _All_ nationalistic distinctions--all claims
to be better than somebody else because you have a different-shaped
skull or speak a different dialect--are entirely spurious, but they are
important so long as people believe in them. There is no doubt about the
Englishman's inbred conviction that those who live to the south of him
are his inferiors; even our foreign policy is governed by it to some
extent. I think, therefore, that it is worth pointing out when and why
it came into being.

When nationalism first became a religion, the English looked at the map,
and, noticing that their island lay very high in the Northern
Hemisphere, evolved the pleasing theory that the further north you live
the more virtuous you become. The histories I was given when I was a
little boy generally started off by explaining in the naivest way that a
cold climate made people energetic while a hot one made them lazy, and
hence the defeat of the Spanish Armada. This nonsense about the superior
energy of the English (actually the laziest people in Europe) has been
current for at least a hundred years. 'Better is it for us', writes a
Quarterly Reviewer of 1827, 'to be condemned to labour for our country's
good than to luxuriate amid olives, vines, and vices.' 'Olives, vines,
and vices' sums up the normal English attitude towards the Latin races.
In the mythology of Carlyle, Creasey, etc., the Northerner ('Teutonic',
later 'Nordic') is pictured as a hefty, vigorous chap with blond
moustaches and pure morals, while the Southerner is sly, cowardly, and
licentious. This theory was never pushed to its logical end, which would
have meant assuming that the finest people in the world were the
Eskimos, but it did involve admitting that the people who lived to the
north of us were superior to ourselves. Hence, partly, the cult of
Scotland and of Scotch things which has so deeply marked English life
during the past fifty years. But it was the industrialization of the
North that gave the North-South antithesis its peculiar slant. Until
comparatively recently the northern part of England was the backward and
feudal part, and such industry as existed was concentrated in London and
the South-East. In the Civil War for instance, roughly speaking a war of
money versus feudalism, the North and West were for the King and the
South and East for the Parliament. But with the increasing use of coal
industry passed to the North, and there grew up a new type of man, the
self-made Northern business man--the Mr Rouncewell and Mr Bounderby of
Dickens. The Northern business man, with his hateful 'get on or get out'
philosophy, was the dominant figure of the nineteenth century, and as a
sort of tyrannical corpse he rules us still. This is the type edified by
Arnold Bennett--the type who starts off with half a crown and ends up
with fifty thousand pounds, and whose chief pride is to be an even
greater boor after he has made his money than before. On analysis his
sole virtue turns out to be a talent for making money. We were bidden to
admire him because though he might be narrow-minded, sordid, ignorant,
grasping, and uncouth, he had 'grit', he 'got on'; in other words, he
knew how to make money.

This kind of cant is nowadays a pure anachronism, for the Northern
business man is no longer prosperous. But traditions are not killed by
facts, and the tradition of Northern' grit' lingers. It is still dimly
felt that a Northerner will 'get on', i.e. make money, where a
Southerner will fail. At the back of the mind of every Yorkshireman and
every Scotchman who comes to London is a sort of Dick Whittington
picture of himself as the boy who starts off by selling newspapers and
ends up as Lord Mayor. And that, really, is at the bottom of his
bumptiousness. But where one can make a great mistake is in imagining
that this feeling extends to the genuine working class. When I first
went to Yorkshire, some years ago, I imagined that I was going to a
country of boors. I was used to the London Yorkshireman with his
interminable harangues and his pride in the sup-posed raciness of his
dialect ('"A stitch in time saves nine", as we say in the West
Riding'), and I expected to meet with a good deal of rudeness. But I met
with nothing of the kind, and least of all among the miners. Indeed the
Lancashire and Yorkshire miners treated me with a kindness and courtesy
that were even embarrassing; for if there is one type of man to whom I
do feel myself inferior, it is a coal-miner. Certainly no one showed any
sign of despising me for coming from a different part of the country.
This has its importance when one remembers that the English regional
snobberies are nationalism in miniature; for it suggests that
place-snobbery is not a working-class characteristic.

There is nevertheless a real difference between North and South, and
there is at least a tinge of truth in that picture of Southern England
as one enormous Brighton inhabited by lounge-lizards. For climatic
reasons the parasitic dividend-drawing class tend to settle in the
South. In a Lancashire cotton-town you could probably go for months on
end without once hearing an 'educated' accent, whereas there can hardly
be a town in the South of England where you could throw a brick without
hitting the niece of a bishop. Consequently, with no petty gentry to set
the pace, the bourgeoisification of the working class, though it is
taking place in the North, is taking place more slowly. All the Northern
accents, for instance, persist strongly, while the Southern ones are
collapsing before the movies and the B.B.C. Hence your 'educated' accent
stamps you rather as a foreigner than as a chunk of the petty gentry;
and this is an immense advantage, for it makes it much easier to get
into contact with the working class.

But is it ever possible to be really intimate with the working class? I
shall have to discuss that later; I will only say here that I do not
think it is possible. But undoubtedly it is easier in the North than it
would be in the South to meet working-class people on approximately
equal terms. It is fairly easy to live in a miner's house and be
accepted as one of the family; with, say, a farm labourer in the
Southern counties it probably would be impossible. I have seen just
enough of the working class to avoid idealizing them, but I do know that
you can learn a great deal in a working-class home, if only you can get
there. The essential point is that your middle-class ideals and
prejudices are tested by contact with others which are not necessarily
better but are certainly different.

Take for instance the different attitude towards the family. A
working-class family hangs together as a middle-class one does, but the
relationship is far less tyrannical. A working man has not that deadly
weight of family prestige hanging round his neck like a millstone. I
have pointed out earlier that a middle-class person goes utterly to
pieces under the influence of poverty; and this is generally due to the
behaviour of his family--to the fact that he has scores of relations
nagging and badgering him night and day for failing to 'get on'. The
fact that the working class know how to combine and the middle class
don't is probably due to their different conceptions of family loyalty.
You cannot have an effective trade union of middle-class workers,
be-cause in times of strikes almost every middle-class wife would be
egging her husband on to blackleg and get the other fellow's job.
Another working-class characteristic, disconcerting at first, is their
plain-spokenness towards anyone they regard as an equal. If you offer a
working man something he doesn't want, he tells you that he doesn't want
it; a middle-class person would accept it to avoid giving offence. And
again, take the working-class attitude towards 'education'. How
different it is from ours, and how immensely sounder! Working people
often have a vague reverence for learning in others, but where
'education' touches their own lives they see through it and reject it by
a healthy instinct. The time was when I used to lament over quite
imaginary pictures of lads of fourteen dragged protesting from their
lessons and set to work at dismal jobs. It seemed to me dreadful that
the doom of a 'job' should descend upon anyone at fourteen. Of course I
know now that there is not one working-class boy in a thousand who does
not pine for the day when he will leave school. He wants to be doing
real work, not wasting his time on ridiculous rubbish like history and
geography. To the working class, the notion of staying at school till
you are nearly grown-up seems merely contemptible and unmanly. The idea
of a great big boy of eighteen, who ought to be bringing a pound a week
home to his parents, going to school in a ridiculous uniform and even
being caned for not doing his lessons! Just fancy a working-class boy of
eighteen allowing himself to be caned! He is a man when the other is
still a baby. Ernest Pontifex, in Samuel Butler's _Way of All Flesh_,
after he had had a few glimpses of real life, looked back on his public
school and university education and found it a 'sickly, debilitating
debauch'. There is much in middle-class life that looks sickly and
debilitating when you see it from a working-class angle.

In a working-class home--I am not thinking at the moment of the
unemployed, but of comparatively prosperous homes--you breathe a warm,
decent, deeply human atmosphere which it is not so easy to find
elsewhere. I should say that a manual worker, if he is in steady work
and drawing good wages--an 'if which gets bigger and bigger--has a
better chance of being happy than an 'educated' man. His home life seems
to fall more naturally into a sane and comely shape. I have often been
struck by the peculiar easy completeness, the perfect symmetry as it
were, of a working-class interior at its best. Especially on winter
evenings after tea, when the fire glows in the open range and dances
mirrored in the steel fender, when Father, in shirt-sleeves, sits in the
rocking chair at one side of the fire reading the racing finals, and
Mother sits on the other with her sewing, and the children are happy
with a pennorth of mint humbugs, and the dog lolls roasting himself on
the rag mat--it is a good place to be in, provided that you can be not
only in it but sufficiently _of_ it to be taken for granted.

This scene is still reduplicated in a majority of English homes, though
not in so many as before the war. Its happiness depends mainly upon one
question--whether Father is in work. But notice that the picture I have
called up, of a working-class family sitting round the coal fire after
kippers and strong tea, belongs only to our own moment of time and could
not belong either to the future or the past. Skip forward two hundred
years into the Utopian future, and the scene is totally different.
Hardly one of the things I have imagined will still be there. In that
age when there is no manual labour and everyone is 'educated', it is
hardly likely that Father will still be a rough man with enlarged hands
who likes to sit in shirt-sleeves and says 'Ah wur coomin' oop street'.
And there won't be a coal fire in the grate, only some kind of invisible
heater. The furniture will be made of rubber, glass, and steel. If there
are still such things as evening papers there will certainly be no
racing news in them, for gambling will be meaningless in a world where
there is no poverty and the horse will have vanished from the face of
the earth. Dogs, too, will have been suppressed on grounds of hygiene.
And there won't be so many children, either, if the birth-controllers
have their way. But move backwards into the Middle Ages and you are in a
world almost equally foreign. A windowless hut, a wood fire which smokes
in your face because there is no chimney, mouldy bread, 'Poor John',
lice, scurvy, a yearly child-birth and a yearly child-death, and the
priest terrifying you with tales of Hell.

Curiously enough it is not the triumphs of modern engineering, nor the
radio, nor the cinematograph, nor the five thousand novels which are
published yearly, nor the crowds at Ascot and the Eton and Harrow match,
but the memory of working-class interiors--especially as I sometimes saw
them in my childhood before the war, when England was still
prosperous--that reminds me that our age has not been altogether a bad
one to live in.




PART TWO


8

The road from Mandalay to Wigan is a long one and the reasons for taking
it are not immediately clear.

In the earlier chapters of this book I have given a rather fragmentary
account of various things I saw in the coal areas of Lancashire and
Yorkshire. I went there partly because I wanted to see what
mass-unemployment is like at its worst, partly in order to see the most
typical section of the English working class at close quarters. This was
necessary to me as part of my approach to Socialism, for before you can
be sure whether you are genuinely in favour of Socialism, you have got
to decide whether things at present are tolerable or not tolerable, and
you have got to take up a definite attitude on the terribly difficult
issue of class. Here I shall have to digress and explain how my own
attitude towards the class question was developed. Obviously this
involves writing a certain amount of autobiography, and I would not do
it if I did not think that I am sufficiently typical of my class, or
rather sub-caste, to have a certain symptomatic importance.

I was born into what you might describe as the lower-upper-middle class.
The upper-middle class, which had its heyday in the eighties and
nineties, with Kipling as its poet laureate, was a sort of mound of
wreckage left behind when the tide of Victorian prosperity receded. Or
perhaps it would be better to change the metaphor and describe it not as
a mound but as a layer--the layer of society lying between £2000 and
£300 a year: my own family was not far from the bottom. You notice that
I define it in terms of money, because that is always the quickest way
of making yourself understood. Nevertheless, the essential point about
the English class-system is that it is not entirely explicable in terms
of money. Roughly speaking it is a money-stratification, but it is also
interpenetrated by a sort of shadowy caste-system; rather like a
jerry-built modern bungalow haunted by medieval ghosts. Hence the fact
that the upper-middle class extends or extended to incomes as low as
£300 a year--to incomes, that is, much lower than those of merely
middle-class people with no social pretensions. Probably there are
countries where you can predict a man's opinions from his income, but it
is never quite safe to do so in England; you have always got to take his
traditions into consideration as well. A naval officer and his grocer
very likely have the same income, but they are not equivalent persons
and they would only be on the same side in very large issues such as a
war or a general strike--possibly not even then.

Of course it is obvious now that the upper-middle class is done for. In
every country town in Southern England, not to mention the dreary wastes
of Kensington and Earl's Court, those who knew it in the days of its
glory are dying, vaguely embittered by a world which has not behaved as
it ought. I never open one of Kipling's books or go into one of the huge
dull shops which were once the favourite haunt of the upper-middle
class, without thinking 'Change and decay in all around I see'. But
before the war the upper-middle class, though already none too
prosperous, still felt sure of itself. Before the war you were either a
gentleman or not a gentleman, and if you were a gentleman you struggled
to behave as such, whatever your income might be. Between those with
£400 a year and those with £2000 or even £1000 a year there was a great
gulf fixed, but it was a gulf which those with £400 a year did their
best to ignore. Probably the distinguishing mark of the upper-middle
class was that its traditions were not to any extent commercial, but
mainly military, official, and professional.

People in this class owned no land, but they felt that they were
landowners in the sight of God and kept up a semi-aristocratic outlook
by going into the professions and the fighting services rather than into
trade. Small boys used to count the plum stones on their plates and
foretell their destiny by chanting, 'Army, Navy, Church, Medicine, Law';
and even of these 'Medicine' was faintly inferior to the others and only
put in for the sake of symmetry. To belong to this class when you were
at the £400 a year level was a queer business, for it meant that your
gentility was almost purely theoretical. You lived, so to speak, at two
levels simultaneously. Theoretically you knew all about servants and how
to tip them, although in practice you had one, at most, two resident
servants. Theoretically you knew how to wear your clothes and how to
order a dinner, although in practice you could never afford to go to a
decent tailor or a decent restaurant. Theoretically you knew how to
shoot and ride, although in practice you had no horses to ride and not
an inch of ground to shoot over. It was this that explained the
attraction of India (more recently Kenya, Nigeria, etc.) for the
lower-upper-middle class. The people who went there as soldiers and
officials did not go there to make money, for a soldier or an official
does not want money; they went there because in India, with cheap
horses, free shooting, and hordes of black servants, it was so easy to
play at being a gentleman.

In the kind of shabby-genteel family that I am talking about there is
far more _consciousness_ of poverty than in any working-class family
above the level of the dole. Rent and clothes and school-bills are an
unending nightmare, and every luxury, even a glass of beer, is an
unwarrantable extravagance. Practically the whole family income goes in
keeping up appearances. It is obvious that people of this kind are in an
anomalous position, and one might 'be tempted to write them off as mere
exceptions and therefore unimportant. Actually, however, they are or
were fairly numerous. Most clergymen and schoolmasters, for instance,
nearly all Anglo-Indian officials, a sprinkling of soldiers and sailors,
and a fair number of professional men and artists, fall into this
category. But the real importance of this class is that they are the
shock-absorbers of the bourgeoisie. The real bourgeoisie, those in the
£2000 a year class and over, have their money as a thick layer of
padding between themselves and the class they plunder; in so far as they
are aware of the Lower Orders at all they are aware of them as
employees, servants, and tradesmen. But it is quite different for the
poor devils lower down who are struggling to live genteel lives on what
are virtually working-class incomes. These last are forced into close
and, in a sense, intimate contact with the working class, and I suspect
it is from them that the traditional upper-class attitude towards
'common' people is derived.

And what is this attitude? An attitude of sniggering superiority
punctuated by bursts of vicious hatred. Look at any number of Punch
during the past thirty years. You will find it everywhere taken for
granted that a working-class person, as such, is a figure of fun, except
at odd moments when he shows signs of being too prosperous, whereupon he
ceases to be a figure of fun and becomes a demon. It is no use wasting
breath in denouncing this attitude. It is better to consider how it has
arisen, and to do that one has got to realize what the working classes
look like to those who live among them but have different habits and
traditions.

A shabby genteel family is in much the same position as a family of
'poor whites' living in a street where everyone else is a Negro. In such
circumstances you have got to cling to your gentility because it is the
only thing you have; and meanwhile you are hated for your stuck-up-ness
and for the accent and manners which stamp you as one of the boss class.
I was very young, not much more than six, when I first became aware of
class-distinctions. Before that age my chief heroes had generally been
working-class people, because they always seemed to do such interesting
things, such as being fishermen and blacksmiths and bricklayers. I
remember the farm hands on a farm in Cornwall who used to let me ride on
the drill when they were sowing turnips and would sometimes catch the
ewes and milk them to give me a drink; and the workmen building the new
house next door, who let me play with the wet mortar and from whom I
first learned the word 'b----'; and the plumber up the road with whose
children I used to go out bird-nesting. But it was not long before I was
forbidden to play with the plumber's children; they were 'common' and I
was told to keep away from them. This was snobbish, if you like, but it
was also necessary, for middle-class people can-not afford to let their
children grow up with vulgar accents. So, very early, the working class
ceased to be a race of friendly and wonderful beings and became a race
of enemies. We realized that they hated us, but we could never
understand why, and naturally we set it down to pure, vicious malignity.
To me in my early boyhood, to nearly all children of families like mine,
'common' people seemed almost sub-human. They had coarse faces, hideous
accents, and gross manners, they hated everyone who was not like
themselves, and if they got half a chance they would insult you in
brutal ways. That was our view of them, and though it was false it was
understandable. For one must remember that before the war there was much
more _overt_ class-hatred in England than there is now. In those days
you were quite likely to be insulted simply for looking like a member of
the upper classes; nowadays, on the other hand, you are more likely to
be fawned upon. Anyone over thirty can remember the time when it was
impossible for a well-dressed person to walk through a slum street
without being hooted at. Whole quarters of big towns were considered
unsafe because of' hooligans' (now almost an extinct type), and the
London gutter-boy everywhere, with his loud voice and lack of
intellectual scruples, could make life a misery for people who
considered it beneath their dignity to answer back. A recurrent terror
of my holidays, when I was a small boy, was the gangs of' cads' who were
liable to set upon you five or ten to one. In term time, on the other
hand, it was we who were in the majority and the 'cads' who were
oppressed; I remember a couple of savage mass-battles in the cold winter
of 1916-17. And this tradition of open hostility between upper and lower
class had apparently been the same for at least a century past. A
typical joke in _Punch_ in the sixties is a picture of a small,
nervous-looking gentleman riding through a slum street and a crowd of
street-boys closing in on him with shouts ''Ere comes a swell! Let's
frighten 'is 'oss!' Just fancy the street boys trying to frighten his
horse now! They would be much likelier to hang round him in vague hopes
of a tip. During the past dozen years the English working class have
grown servile with a rather horrifying rapidity. It was bound to happen,
for the frightful weapon of unemployment has cowed them. Before the war
their economic position was comparatively strong, for though there was
no dole to fall back upon, there was not much unemployment, and the
power of the boss class was not so obvious as it is now. A man did not
see ruin staring him in the face every time he cheeked a 'toff', and
naturally he did cheek a 'toff' whenever it seemed safe to do so. G. J.
Renier, in his book on Oscar Wilde, points out that the strange, obscene
burst of popular fury which followed the Wilde trial was essentially
social in character. The 'London mob had caught a member of the upper
classes on the hop, and they took care to keep him hopping. All this was
natural and even proper. If you treat people as the English working
class have been treated during the past two centuries, you must expect
them to resent it. On the other hand the children of shabby-genteel
families could not be blamed if they grew up with a hatred of the
working class, typified for them by prowling gangs of 'cads'.

But there was another and more serious difficulty. Here you come to the
real secret of class distinctions in the West--the real reason why a
European of bourgeois upbringing, even when he calls himself a
Communist, cannot without a hard effort think of a working man as his
equal. It is summed up in four frightful words which people nowadays are
chary of uttering, but which were bandied about quite freely in my
childhood. The words were: _The lower classes smell_.

That was what we were taught--_the lower classes smell_. And here,
obviously, you are at an impassable barrier. For no feeling of like or
dislike is quite so fundamental as a physical feeling. Race-hatred,
religious hatred, differences of education, of temperament, of
intellect, even differences of moral code, can be got over; but
_physical_ repulsion cannot. You can have an affection for a murderer or
a sodomite, but you cannot have an affection for a man whose breath
stinks--habitually stinks, I mean. However well you may wish him,
however much you may admire his mind and character, if his breath stinks
he is horrible and in your heart of hearts you will hate him. It may not
greatly matter if the average middle-class person is brought up to
believe that the working classes are ignorant, lazy, drunken, boorish,
and dishonest; it is when he is brought up to believe that they are
dirty that the harm is done. And in my childhood we were brought up to
believe that they were dirty. Very early in life you acquired the idea
that there was something subtly repulsive about a working-class body;
you would not get nearer to it than you could help. You watched a great
sweaty navvy walking down the road with his pick over his shoulder; you
looked at his discoloured shirt and his corduroy trousers stiff with the
dirt of a decade; you thought of those nests and layers of greasy rags
below, and, under all, the unwashed body, brown all over (that was how I
used to imagine it), with its strong, bacon-like reek. You watched a
tramp taking off his boots in a ditch--ugh! It did not seriously occur
to you that the tramp might not enjoy having black feet. And even
'lower-class' people whom you knew to be quite clean--servants, for
instance--were faintly unappetizing. The smell of their sweat, the very
texture of their skins, were mysteriously different from yours.

Everyone who has grown up pronouncing his aitches and in a house with a
bathroom and one servant is likely to have grown up with these feelings;
hence the chasmic, impassable quality of class-distinctions in the West.
It is queer how seldom this is admitted. At the moment I can think of
only one book where it is set forth without humbug, and that is Mr
Somerset Maugham's _On a Chinese Screen_. Mr Maugham describes a high
Chinese official arriving at a wayside inn and blustering and calling
everybody names in order to impress upon them that he is a supreme
dignitary and they are only worms. Five minutes later, having asserted
his dignity in the way he thinks proper, he is eating his dinner in
perfect amity with the baggage coolies. As an official he feels that he
has got to make his presence felt, but he has no feeling that the
coolies are of different clay from himself. I have observed countless
similar scenes in Burma. Among Mongolians--among all Asiatics, for all I
know--there is a sort of natural equality, an easy intimacy between man
and man, which is simply unthinkable in the West. Mr Maugham adds:


In the West we are divided from our fellows by our sense of smell. The
working man is our master, inclined to rule us with an iron hand, but it
cannot be denied that he stinks: none can wonder at it, for a bath in
the dawn when you have to hurry to your work before the factory bell
rings is no pleasant thing, nor 'does heavy labour tend to sweetness;
and you do not change your linen more than you can help when the week's
washing must be done by a sharp-tongued wife. I do not blame the working
man because he stinks, but stink he does. It makes social intercourse
difficult to persons of sensitive nostril. The matutinal tub divides the
classes more effectually than birth, wealth, or education.


Meanwhile, _do_ the 'lower classes' smell? Of course, as a whole, they
are dirtier than the upper classes. They are bound to be, considering
the circumstances in which they live, for even at this late date less
than half the houses in England have bathrooms. Besides, the habit of
washing yourself all over every day is a very recent one in Europe, and
the working classes are generally more conservative than the
bourgeoisie. But the English are growing visibly cleaner, and we may
hope that in a hundred years they will be almost as clean as the
Japanese. It is a pity that those who idealize the working class so
often think it necessary to praise every working-class characteristic
and therefore to pretend that dirtiness is somehow meritorious in
itself. Here, curiously enough, the Socialist and the sentimental
democratic Catholic of the type of Chesterton sometimes join hands; both
will tell you that dirtiness is healthy and 'natural' and cleanliness is
a mere fad or at best a luxury.[According to Chesterton, dirtiness is
merely a kind of 'discomfort' and therefore ranks as self-mortification.
Unfortunately, the discomfort of dirtiness is chiefly suffered by other
people. It is not really very uncomfortable to be dirty--not nearly so
uncomfortable as having a cold bath on a winter morning.] They seem not
to see that they are merely giving colour to the notion that
working-class people are dirty from choice and not from necessity.
Actually, people who have access to a bath will generally use it. But
the essential thing is that middle-class people believe that the working
class are dirty--you see from the passage quoted above that Mr Maugham
himself believes it--and, what is worse, that they are some-how
_inherently_ dirty. As a child, one of the most dreadful things I could
imagine was to drink out of a bottle after a navvy. Once when I was
thirteen, I was in a train coming from a market town, and the
third-class carriage was packed full of shepherds and pig-men who had
been selling their beasts. Somebody produced a quart bottle of beer and
passed it round; it travelled from mouth to mouth to mouth, everyone
taking a swig. I cannot describe the horror I felt as that bottle worked
its way towards me. If I drank from it after all those lower-class male
mouths I felt certain I should vomit; on the other hand, if they offered
it to me I dared not refuse for fear of offending them--you see here how
the middle-class squeamishness works both ways. Nowadays, thank God, I
have no feelings of that kind. A working man's body, as such, is no more
repulsive to me than a millionaire's. I still don't like drinking out of
a cup or bottle after another person--another man, I mean; with women I
don't mind--but at least the question of class does not enter. It was
rubbing shoulders with the tramps that cured me of it. Tramps are not
really very dirty as English people go, but they have the name for being
dirty, and when you have shared a bed with a tramp and drunk tea out of
the same snuff-tin, you feel that you have seen the worst and the worst
has no terrors for you.

I have dwelt on these subjects because they are vitally important. To
get rid of class-distinctions you have got to start by understanding how
one class appears when seen through the eyes of another. It is useless
to say that the middle classes are 'snobbish' and leave it at that. You
get no further if you do not realize that snobbishness is bound up with
a species of idealism. It derives from the early training in which a
middle-class child is taught almost simultaneously to wash his neck, to
be ready to die for his country, and to despise the 'lower classes'.

Here I shall be accused of being behind the times, for I was a child
before and during the war and it may be claimed that children nowadays
are brought up with more enlightened notions. It is probably true that
class-feeling is for the moment a very little less bitter than it was.
The working class are submissive where they used to be openly hostile,
and the post-war manufacture of cheap clothes and the general softening
of manners have toned down the surface differences between class and
class. But undoubtedly the essential feeling is still there. Every
middle-class person has a dormant class-prejudice which needs only a
small thing to arouse it; and if he is over forty he probably has a firm
conviction that his own class has been sacrificed to the class below.
Suggest to the average unthinking person of gentle birth who is
struggling to keep up appearances on four or five hundred a year that he
is a member of an exploiting parasite class, and he will think you are
mad. In perfect sincerity he will point out to you a dozen ways in which
he is worse-off than a working man. In his eyes the workers are not a
submerged race of slaves, they are a sinister flood creeping upwards to
engulf himself and his friends and his family and to sweep all culture
and all decency out of existence. Hence that queer watchful anxiety lest
the working class shall grow too prosperous. In a number of _Punch_ soon
after the war, when coal was still fetching high prices, there is a
picture of four or five miners with grim, sinister faces riding in a
cheap motor-car. A friend they are passing calls out and asks them where
they have borrowed it. They answer, 'We've bought the thing!' This, you
see, is 'good enough for _Punch_'; for miners to buy a motor-car, even
one car between four or five of them, is a monstrosity, a sort of crime
against nature. That was the attitude of a dozen years ago, and I see no
evidence of any fundamental change. The notion that the working class
have been absurdly pampered, hopelessly demoralized by doles, old age
pensions, free education, etc., is still widely held; it has merely been
a little shaken, perhaps, by the recent recognition that unemployment
does exist. For quantities of middle-class people, probably for a large
majority of those over fifty, the typical working man still rides to the
Labour Exchange on a motor-bike and keeps coal in his bath-tub: 'And, if
you'll believe it, my dear, they actually _get married_ on the dole!'

The reason why class-hatred seems to be diminishing is that nowadays it
tends not to get into print, partly owing to the mealy-mouthed habits of
our time, partly because newspapers and even books now have to appeal to
a working-class public. As a rule you can best study it in private
conversations. But if you want some printed examples, it is worth having
a look at the _obiter dicta_ of the late Professor Saintsbury.
Saintsbury was a very learned man and along certain lines a judicious
literary critic, but when he talked of political or economic matters he
only differed from the rest of his class by the fact that he was too
thick-skinned and had been born too early to see any reason for
pretending to common decency. According to Saintsbury, unemployment
insurance was simply 'contributing to the support of lazy
ne'er-do-weels', and the whole trade union movement was no more than a
kind of organized mendicancy:


'Pauper' is almost actionable now, is it not, when used as a word?
though to be paupers, in the sense of being wholly or partly supported
at the expense of other people, is the ardent, and to a considerable
extent achieved, aspiration of a large proportion of our population, and
of an entire political party.

(_Second Scrap Book_)


It is to be noticed, however, that Saintsbury recognizes that
unemployment is bound to exist, and, in fact, thinks that it ought
to-.exist, so long as the unemployed are made to suffer as much as
possible:


Is not 'casual' labour the very secret and safety-valve of a safe and
sound labour-system generally?

...In a complicated industrial and commercial state constant employment
at regular wages is impossible; while dole-supported unemployment, at
anything like the wages of employment, is demoralizing to begin with and
ruinous at its more or less quickly arriving end.


(_Last Scrap Book_)


What exactly is to happen to the 'casual labourers' when no casual
labour happens to be available is not made clear. Presumably (Saintsbury
speaks approvingly of 'good Poor Laws') they are to go into the
work-house or sleep in the streets. As to the notion that every human
being ought as a matter of course to have the chance of earning at least
a tolerable livelihood, Saintsbury dismisses it with contempt:


Even the 'right to live'...extends no further than the right to
protection against murder. Charity certainly will, morality possibly
may, and public utility perhaps ought to add to this protection
supererogatory provision for continuance of life; but it is questionable
whether strict justice demands it.

As for the insane doctrine that being born in a country gives some right
to the possession of the soil of that country, it hardly requires
notice.

(_Last Scrap Book_)


It is worth reflecting for a moment upon the beautiful implications of
this last passage. The interest of passages like these (and they are
scattered all through Saintsbury's work) lies in their having been
printed at all. Most people are a little shy of putting that kind of
thing on paper. But what Saintsbury is saying here is what any little
worm with a fairly safe five hundred a year _thinks_, and therefore in a
way one must admire him for saying it. It takes a lot of guts to be
_openly_ such a skunk as that.

This is the outlook of a confessed reactionary. But how about the
middle-class person whose views are not reactionary but 'advanced'?
Beneath his revolutionary mask, is he really so different from the
other?

A middle-class person embraces Socialism and perhaps even joins the
Communist Party. How much real difference does it make? Obviously,
living within the framework of capitalist society, he has got to go on
earning his living, and one cannot blame him if he clings to his
bourgeois economic status. But is there any change in his tastes, his
habits, his manners, his imaginative background--his 'ideology', in
Communist jargon? Is there any change in him except that he now votes
Labour, or, when possible, Communist at the elections? It is noticeable
that he still habitually associates with his own class; he is vastly
more at home with a member of his own class, who thinks him a dangerous
Bolshie, than with a member of the working class who supposedly agrees
with him; his tastes in food, wine, clothes, books, pictures, music,
ballet, are still recognizably bourgeois tastes; most significant of
all, he invariably marries into his own class. Look at any bourgeois
Socialist. Look at Comrade X, member of the C.P.G.B. and author of
_Marxism for Infants_. Comrade X, it so happens, is an old Etonian. He
would be ready to die on the barricades, in theory anyway, but you
notice that he still leaves his bottom waistcoat button undone. He
idealizes the proletariat, but it is remarkable how little his habits
resemble theirs. Perhaps once, out of sheer bravado, he has smoked a
cigar with the band on, but it would be almost physically impossible for
him to put pieces of cheese into his mouth on the point of his knife, or
to sit indoors with his cap on, or even to drink his tea out of the
saucer. I have known numbers of bourgeois Socialists, I have listened by
the hour to their tirades against their own class, and yet never, not
even once, have I met one who had picked up proletarian table-manners.
Yet, after all, why not? Why should a man who thinks all virtue resides
in the proletariat still take such pains to drink his soup silently? It
can only be because in his heart he feels that proletarian manners are
disgusting. So you see he is still responding to the training of his
childhood, when he was taught to hate, fear, and despise the working
class.




9

When I was fourteen or fifteen I was an odious little snob, but no worse
than other boys of my own age and class. I suppose there is no place in
the world where snobbery is quite so ever-present or where it is
cultivated in such refined and subtle forms as in an English public
school. Here at least one cannot say that English 'education' fails to
do its job. You forget your Latin and Greek within a few months of
leaving school--I studied Greek for eight or ten years, and now, at
thirty-three, I cannot even repeat the Greek alphabet--but your
snobbishness, unless you persistently root it out like the bindweed it
is, sticks by you till your grave.

At school I was in a difficult position, for I was among boys who, for
the most part, were much richer than myself, and I only went to an
expensive public school because I happened to win a scholarship. This is
the common experience of boys of the lower-upper-middle class, the sons
of clergymen, Anglo-Indian officials, etc., and the effects it had on me
were probably the usual ones. On the one hand it made me cling tighter
than ever to my gentility; on the other hand it filled me with
resentment against the boys whose parents were richer than mine and who
took care to let me know it. I despised anyone who was not describable
as a 'gentleman', but also I hated the hoggishly rich, especially those
who had grown rich too recently. The correct and elegant thing, I felt,
was to be of gentle birth but to have no money. This is part of the
_credo_ of the lower-upper-middle class. It has a romantic,
Jacobite-in-exile feeling about it which is very comforting.

But those years, during and just after the war, were a queer time to be
at school, for England was nearer revolution than she has been since or
had been for a century earlier. Throughout almost the whole nation there
was running a wave of revolutionary feeling which has since been
reversed and forgotten, but which has left various deposits of sediment
behind. Essentially, though of course one could not then see it in
perspective, it was a revolt of youth against age, resulting directly
from the war. In the war the young had been sacrificed and the old had
behaved in a way which, even at this distance of time, is horrible to
contemplate; they had been sternly patriotic in safe places while their
sons went down like swathes of hay before the German machine guns.
Moreover, the war had been conducted mainly by old men and had been
conducted with supreme incompetence. By 1918 everyone under forty was in
a bad temper with his elders, and the mood of anti-militarism which
followed naturally upon the fighting was extended into a general revolt
against orthodoxy and authority. At that time there was, among the
young, a curious cult of hatred of 'old men'. The dominance of 'old men'
was held to be responsible for every evil known to humanity, and every
accepted institution from Scott's novels to the House of Lords was
derided merely because 'old men' were in favour of it. For several years
it was all the fashion to be a 'Bolshie', as people then called it.
England was full of half-baked antinomian opinions. Pacifism,
internationalism, humanitarianism of all kinds, feminism, free love,
divorce-reform, atheism, birth-control--things like these were getting a
better hearing than they would get in normal times. And of course the
revolutionary mood extended to those who had been too young to fight,
even to public schoolboys. At that time we all thought of ourselves as
enlightened creatures of a new age, casting off the orthodoxy that had
been forced upon us by those detested 'old men'. We retained, basically,
the snobbish outlook of our class, we took it for granted that we could
continue to draw our dividends or tumble into soft jobs, but also it
seemed natural to us to be 'agin the Government'.

We derided the O.T.C., the Christian religion, and perhaps even
compulsory games and the Royal Family, and we did not realize that we
were merely taking part in a world-wide gesture of distaste for war. Two
incidents stick in my mind as examples of the queer revolutionary
feeling of that time. One day the master who taught us English set us a
kind of general knowledge paper of which one of the questions was, 'Whom
do you consider the ten greatest men now living?' Of sixteen boys in the
class (our average age was about seventeen) fifteen included Lenin in
their list. This was at a snobbish expensive public school, and the date
was 1920, when the horrors of the Russian Revolution was still fresh in
everyone's mind. Also there were the so-called peace celebrations in
1919. Our elders had decided for us that we should celebrate peace in
the traditional manner by whooping over the fallen foe. We were to march
into the school-yard, carrying torches, and sing jingo songs of the type
of 'Rule Britannia'. The boys--to their honour, I think--guyed the whole
proceeding and sang blasphemous and seditious words to the tunes
provided. I doubt whether things would happen in quite that manner now.
Certainly the public schoolboys I meet nowadays, even the intelligent
ones, are much more right-wing in their opinions than I and my
contemporaries were fifteen years ago.

Hence, at the age of seventeen or eighteen, I was both a snob and a
revolutionary. I was against all authority. I had read and re-read the
entire published works of Shaw, Wells, and Galsworthy (at that time
still regarded as dangerously 'advanced' writers), and I loosely
described myself as a Socialist. But I had not much grasp of what
Socialism meant, and no notion that the working class were human beings.
At a distance, and through the medium of books--Jack London's _The
People of the Abyss_, for instance--I could agonize over their
sufferings, but I still hated them and despised them when I came
anywhere near them. I was still revolted by their accents and infuriated
by their habitual rudeness. One must remember that just then,
immediately after the war, the English working class were in a fighting
mood. That was the period of the great coal strikes, when a miner was
thought of as a fiend incarnate and old ladies looked under their beds
every night lest Robert Smillie should be concealed there. All through
the war and for a little time afterwards there had been high wages and
abundant employment; things were now returning to something worse than
normal, and naturally the working class resisted. The men who had fought
had been lured into the army by gaudy promises, and now they were coming
home to a world where there were no jobs and not even any houses.
Moreover, they had been at war and were coming home with the soldier's
attitude to life, which is fundamentally, in spite of discipline, a
lawless attitude. There was a turbulent feeling in the air. To that time
belongs the song with the memorable refrain:


  There's nothing sure but
  The rich get richer and the poor get children;
  In the mean time,
  In between time,
  Ain't we got fun?


People had not yet settled down to a lifetime of unemployment mitigated
by endless cups of tea. They still vaguely expected the Utopia for which
they had fought, and even more than before they were openly hostile to
the aitch-pronouncing class. So to the shock-absorbers of the
bourgeoisie, such as myself, 'common people' still appeared brutal and
repulsive. Looking back upon that period, I seem to have spent half the
time in denouncing the capitalist system and the other half in raging
over the insolence of bus-conductors.

When I was not yet twenty I went to Burma, in the Indian Imperial
Police. In an 'outpost of Empire' like Burma the class-question appeared
at first sight to have been shelved. There was no obvious class-friction
here, because the all-important thing was not whether you had been to
one of the right schools but whether your skin was technically white. As
a matter of fact most of the white men in Burma were not of the type who
in England would be called 'gentlemen', but except for the common
soldiers and a few nondescripts they lived lives appropriate to
'gentlemen'--had servants, that is, and called their evening meal
'dinner'--and officially they were regarded as being all of the same
class. They were 'white men', in contradistinction to the other and
inferior class, the 'natives'. But one did not feel towards the
'natives' as one felt to-wards the 'lower classes' at home. The
essential point was that the 'natives', at any rate the Burmese, were
not felt to be physically repulsive. One looked down on them as
'natives', but one was quite ready to be physically intimate with them;
and this, I noticed, was the case even with white men who had the most
vicious colour prejudice. When you have a lot of servants you soon get
into lazy habits, and I habitually allowed myself, for instance, to be
dressed and undressed by my Burmese boy. This was because he was a
Burman and undisgusting; I could not have endured to let an English
manservant handle me in that intimate manner. I felt towards a Burman
almost as I felt towards a woman. Like most other races, the Burmese
have a distinctive smell--I cannot describe it: it is a smell that makes
one's teeth tingle--but this smell never disgusted me. (Incidentally,
Orientals say that we smell. The Chinese, I believe, say that a white
man smells like a corpse. The Burmese say the same--though no Burman was
ever rude enough to say so to me.) And in a way my attitude was
defensible, for if one faces the fact one must admit that most
Mongolians have much nicer bodies than most white men. Compare the
firm-knit silken skin of the Burman, which does not wrinkle at all till
he is past forty, and then merely withers up like a piece of dry
leather, with the coarse-grained, flabby, sagging skin of the white man.
The white man has lank ugly hair growing down his legs and the backs of
his arms and in an ugly patch on his chest. The Burman has only a tuft
or two of stiff black hair at the appropriate places; for the rest he is
quite hairless and is usually beardless as well. The white man almost
always goes bald, the Burman seldom or never. The Burman's teeth are
perfect, though generally discoloured by betel juice, the white man's
teeth invariably decay. The white man is generally ill-shaped, and when
he grows fat he bulges in improbable places; the Mongol has beautiful
bones and in old age he is almost as shapely as in youth. Admittedly the
white races throw up a few individuals who for a few years are supremely
beautiful; but on the whole, say what you will, they are far less comely
than Orientals. But it was not of this that I was thinking when I found
the English 'lower classes' so much more repellent than Burmese
'natives'. I was still thinking in terms of my early-acquired
class-prejudice. When I was not much past twenty I was attached for a
short time to a British regiment. Of course I admired and liked the
private soldiers as any youth of twenty would admire and like hefty,
cheery youths five years older than himself with the medals of the Great
War on their chests. And yet, after all, they faintly repelled me; they
were 'common people' and I did not care to be too close to them. In the
hot mornings when the company marched down the road, myself in the rear
with one of the junior subalterns, the steam of those hundred sweating
bodies in front made my stomach turn. And this, you observe, was pure
prejudice. For a soldier is probably as inoffensive, physically, as it
is possible for a male white person to be. He is generally young, he is
nearly always healthy from fresh air and exercise, and a rigorous
discipline compels him to be clean. But I could not see it like that.
All I knew was that it was _lower-class_ sweat that I was smelling, and
the thought of it made me sick.

When later on I got rid of my class-prejudice, or part of it, it was in
a roundabout way and by a process that took several years. The thing
that changed my attitude to the class-issue was something only
indirectly connected with it--something almost irrelevant.

I was in the Indian Police five years, and by the end of that time I
hated the imperialism I was serving with a bitterness which I probably
cannot make clear. In the free air of England that kind of thing is not
fully intelligible. In order to hate imperialism you have got to be part
of it. Seen from the outside the British rule in India appears--indeed,
it _is_--benevolent and even necessary; and so no doubt are the French
rule in Morocco and the Dutch rule in Borneo, for people usually govern
foreigners better than they govern themselves. But it is not possible to
be a part of such a system without recognizing it as an unjustifiable
tyranny. Even the thickest-skinned Anglo-Indian is aware of this. Every
'native' face he sees in the street brings home to him his monstrous
intrusion. And the majority of Anglo-Indians, intermittently at least,
are not nearly so complacent about their position as people in England
believe. From the most unexpected people, from gin-pickled old
scoundrels high up in the Government service, I have heard some such
remark as: 'Of course we've no right in this blasted country at all.
Only now we're here for God's sake let's stay here.' The truth is that
no modern man, in his heart of hearts, believes that it is right to
invade a foreign country and hold the population down by force. Foreign
oppression is a much more obvious, understandable evil than economic
oppression. Thus in England we tamely admit to being robbed in order to
keep half a million worthless idlers in luxury, but we would fight to
the last man sooner than be ruled by Chinamen; similarly, people who
live on unearned dividends without a single qualm of conscience, see
clearly enough that it is wrong to go and lord it in a foreign country
where you are not wanted. The result is that every Anglo-Indian is
haunted by a sense of guilt which he usually conceals as best he can,
because there is no freedom of speech, and merely to be overheard making
a seditious remark may damage his career. All over India there are
Englishmen who secretly loathe the system of which they are part; and
just occasionally, when they are quite certain of being in the right
company, their hidden bitterness overflows. I remember a night I spent
on the train with a man in the Educational Service, a stranger to myself
whose name I never discovered. It was too hot to sleep and we spent the
night in talking. Half an hour's cautious questioning decided each of us
that the other was 'safe'; and then for hours, while the train jolted
slowly through the pitch-black night, sitting up in our bunks with
bottles of beer handy, we damned the British Empire--damned it from the
inside, intelligently and intimately. It did us both good. But we had
been speaking forbidden things, and in the haggard morning light when
the train crawled into Mandalay, we parted as guiltily as any adulterous
couple.

So far as my observation goes nearly all Anglo-Indian officials have
moments when their conscience troubles them. The exceptions are men who
are doing something which is demonstrably useful and would still have to
be done whether the British were in India or not: forest officers, for
instance, and doctors and engineers. But I was in the police, which is
to say that I was part of the actual machinery of despotism. Moreover,
in the police you see the dirty work of Empire at close quarters, and
there is an appreciable difference between doing dirty work and merely
profiting by it. Most people approve of capital punishment, but most
people wouldn't do the hangman's job. Even the other Europeans in Burma
slightly looked down on the police because of the brutal work they had
to do. I remember once when I was inspecting a police station, an
American missionary whom I knew fairly well came in for some purpose or
other. Like most Nonconformist missionaries he was a complete ass but
quite a good fellow. One of my native sub-inspectors was bullying a
suspect (I described this scene in _Burmese Days_). The American watched
it, and then turning to me said thoughtfully, 'I wouldn't care to have
your job.' It made me horribly ashamed. So _that_ was the kind of job I
had! Even an ass of an American missionary, a teetotal cock-virgin from
the Middle West, had the right to look down on me and pity me! But I
should have felt the same shame even if there had been no one to bring
it home to me. I had begun to have an indescribable loathing of the
whole machinery of so-called justice. Say what you will, our criminal
law (far more humane, by the way, in India than in England) is a
horrible thing. It needs very insensitive people to administer it. The
wretched prisoners squatting in the reeking cages of the lock-ups, the
grey cowed faces of the long-term convicts, the scarred buttocks of the
men who had been flogged with bamboos, the women and children howling
when their menfolk were led away under arrest--things like these are
beyond bearing when you are in any way directly responsible for them. I
watched a man hanged once; it seemed to me worse than a thousand
murders. I never went into a jail without feeling (most visitors to
jails feel the same) that my place was on the other side of the bars. I
thought then--I think now, for that matter--that the worst criminal who
ever walked is morally superior to a hanging judge. But of course I had
to keep these notions to myself, because of the almost utter silence
that is imposed on every Englishman in the East. In the end I worked out
an anarchistic theory that all government is evil, that the punishment
always does more harm than the crime and that people can be trusted to
behave decently if only you will let them alone. This of course was
sentimental nonsense. I see now as I did not see then, that it is always
necessary to protect peaceful people from violence. In any state of
society where crime can be profitable you have got to have a harsh
criminal law and administer it ruthlessly; the alternative is Al Capone.
But the feeling that punishment is evil arises inescapably in those who
have to administer it. I should expect to find that even in England many
policemen, judges, prison warders, and the like are haunted by a secret
horror of what they do. But in Burma it was a double oppression that we
were committing. Not only were we hanging people and putting them in
jail and so forth; we were doing it in the capacity of unwanted foreign
invaders. The Burmese themselves never really recognized our
jurisdiction. The thief whom we put in prison did not think of himself
as a criminal justly punished, he thought of himself as the victim of a
foreign conqueror. The thing that was done to him was merely a wanton
meaningless cruelty. His face, behind the stout teak bars of the lock-up
and the iron bars of the jail, said so clearly. And unfortunately I had
not trained myself to be indifferent to the expression of the human
face.

When I came home on leave in 1927 I was already half determined to throw
up my job, and one sniff of English air decided me. I was not going back
to be a part of that evil despotism. But I wanted much more than merely
to escape from my job. For five years I had been part of an oppressive
system, and it had left me with a bad conscience. Innumerable remembered
faces--faces of prisoners in the dock, of men waiting in the condemned
cells, of subordinates I had bullied and aged peasants I had snubbed, of
servants and coolies I had hit with my fist in moments of rage (nearly
everyone does these things in the East, at any rate occasionally:
Orientals can be very provoking)--haunted me intolerably. I was
conscious of an immense weight of guilt that I had got to expiate. I
suppose that sounds exaggerated; but if you do for five years a job that
you thoroughly disapprove of, you will probably feel the same. I had
reduced everything to the simple theory that the oppressed are always
right and the oppressors are always wrong: a mistaken theory, but the
natural result of being one of the oppressors yourself. I felt that I
had got to escape not merely from imperialism but from every form of
man's dominion over man. I wanted to submerge myself, to get right down
among the oppressed, to be one of them and on their side against their
tyrants. And, chiefly because I had had to think everything out in
solitude, I had carried my hatred of oppression to extraordinary
lengths. At that time failure seemed to me to be the only virtue. Every
suspicion of self-advancement, even to 'succeed' in life to the extent
of making a few hundreds a year, seemed to me spiritually ugly, a
species of bullying.

It was in this way that my thoughts turned towards the English working
class. It was the first time that I had ever been really aware of the
working class, and to begin with it was only because they supplied an
analogy. They were the symbolic victims of injustice, playing the same
part in England as the Burmese played in Burma. In Burma the issue had
been quite simple. The whites were up and the blacks were down, and
therefore as a matter of course one's sympathy was with the blacks. I
now realized that there was no need to go as far as Burma to find
tyranny and exploitation. Here in England, down under one's feet, were
the submerged working class, suffering miseries which in their different
way were as bad as any an Oriental ever knows. The word 'unemployment'
was on everyone's lips. That was more or less new to me, after Burma,
but the drivel which the middle classes were still talking ('These
unemployed are all unemployables', etc., etc.) failed to deceive me. I
often wonder whether that kind of stuff deceives even the fools who
utter it. On the other hand I had at that time no interest in Socialism
or any other economic theory. It seemed to me then--it sometimes seems
to me now, for that matter--that economic injustice will stop the moment
we want it to stop, and no sooner, and if we genuinely want it to stop
the method adopted hardly matters.

But I knew nothing about working-class conditions. I had read the
unemployment figures but I had no notion of what they implied; above
all, I did not know the essential fact that 'respectable' poverty is
always the worst. The frightful doom of a decent working man suddenly
thrown on the streets after a lifetime of steady work, his agonized
struggles against economic laws which he does not under-stand, the
disintegration of families, the corroding sense of shame--all this was
outside the range of my experience. When I thought of poverty I thought
of it in terms of brute starvation. Therefore my mind turned immediately
towards the extreme cases, the social outcasts: tramps, beggars,
criminals, prostitutes. These were 'the lowest of the low', and these
were the people with whom I wanted to get in contact. What I profoundly
wanted, at that time, was to find some way of getting out of the
respectable world altogether. I meditated upon it a great deal, I even
planned parts of it in detail; how one could sell everything, give
everything away, change one's name and start out with no money and
nothing but the clothes one stood up in. But in real life nobody ever
does that kind of thing; apart from the relatives and friends who have
to be considered, it is doubtful whether an educated man _could_ do it
if there were any other course open to him. But at least I could go
among these people, see what their lives were like and feel myself
temporarily part of their world. Once I had been among them and accepted
by them, I should have touched bottom, and--this is what I felt: I was
aware even then that it was irrational--part of my guilt would drop from
me.

I thought it over and decided what I would do. I would go suitably
disguised to Limehouse and Whitechapel and such places and sleep in
common lodging-houses and pal up with dock labourers, street hawkers,
derelict people, beggars, and, if possible, criminals. And I would find
out about tramps and how you got in touch with them and what was the
proper procedure for entering the casual ward; and then, when I felt
that I knew the ropes well enough, I would go on the road myself.

At the start it was not easy. It meant masquerading and I have no talent
for acting. I cannot, for instance, disguise my accent, at any rate not
for more than a very few minutes. I imagined--notice the frightful
class-consciousness of the Englishman--that I should be spotted as a
'gentleman' the moment I opened my mouth; so I had a hard luck story
ready in case I should be questioned, I got hold of the right kind of
clothes and dirtied them in appropriate places. I am a difficult person
to disguise, being abnormally tall, but I did at least know what a tramp
looks like. (How few people do know this, by the way! Look at any
picture of a tramp in _Punch_. They are always twenty years out of
date.) One evening, having made ready at a friend's house, I set out and
wandered eastward till I landed up at a common lodging-house in
Limehouse Causeway. It was a dark, dirty-looking place. I knew it was a
common lodging-house by the sign 'Good Beds for Single Men' in the
window. Heavens, how I had to screw up my courage before I went in! It
seems ridiculous now. But you see I was still half afraid of the working
class. I wanted to get in touch with them, I even wanted to become one
of them, but I still thought of them as alien and dangerous; going into
the dark doorway of that common lodging-house seemed to me like going
down into some dreadful subterranean place--a sewer full of rats, for
instance. I went in fully expecting a fight. The people would spot that
I was not one of themselves and immediately infer that I had come to spy
on them; and then they would set upon me and throw me out--that was what
I expected. I felt that I had got to do it, but I did not enjoy the
prospect.

Inside the door a man in shirt-sleeves appeared from somewhere or other.
This was the 'deputy', and I told him that I wanted a bed for the night.
My accent did not make him stare, I noticed; he merely demanded
ninepence and then showed me the way to a frowsy firelit kitchen
underground. There were stevedores and navvies and a few sailors sitting
about and playing draughts and drinking tea. They barely glanced at me
as I entered. But this was Saturday night and a hefty young stevedore
was drunk and was reeling about the room. He turned, saw me, and lurched
towards me with broad red face thrust out and a dangerous-looking fishy
gleam in his eyes. I stiffened myself. So the fight was coming already!
The next moment the stevedore collapsed on my chest and flung his arms
round my neck. ''Ave a cup of tea, chum!' he cried tear-fully; ''ave a
cup of tea!'

I had a cup of tea. It was a kind of baptism. After that my fears
vanished. Nobody questioned me, nobody showed offensive curiosity;
everybody was polite and gentle and took me utterly for granted. I
stayed two or three days in that common lodging-house, and a few weeks
later, having picked up a certain amount of information about the habits
of destitute people, I went on the road for the first time.

I have described all this in _Down and Out in Paris and London_ (nearly
all the incidents described there actually happened, though they have
been rearranged) and I do not want to repeat it. Later I went on the
road for much longer periods, sometimes from choice, sometimes from
necessity. I have lived in common lodging-houses for months together.
But it is that first expedition that sticks most vividly in my mind,
because of the strangeness of it--the strangeness of being at last down
there among 'the lowest of the low', and on terms of utter equality with
working-class people. A tramp, it is true, is not a typical
working-class person; still, when you are among tramps you are at any
rate merged in one section--one sub-caste--of the working class, a thing
which so far as I know can happen to you in no other way. For several
days I wandered through the northern outskirts of London with an Irish
tramp. I was his mate, temporarily. We shared the same cell at night,
and he told me the history of his life and I told him a fictitious
history of mine, and we took it in turns to beg at likely-looking houses
and divided up the proceeds. I was very happy. Here I was; among 'the
lowest of the low', at the bedrock of the Western world! The class-bar
was down, or seemed to be down. And down there in the squalid and, as a
matter of fact, horribly boring sub-world of the tramp I had a feeling
of release, of adventure, which seems absurd when I look back, but which
was sufficiently vivid at the time.




10

But unfortunately you do not solve the class problem by making friends
with tramps. At most you get rid of some of your own class-prejudice by
doing so.

Tramps, beggars, criminals, and social outcasts generally are very
exceptional beings and no more typical of the working class as a whole
than, say, the literary intelligentsia are typical of the bourgeoisie.
It is quite easy to be on terms of intimacy with a foreign
'intellectual', but it is not at all easy to be on terms of intimacy
with an ordinary respectable foreigner of the middle class. How many
Englishmen have seen the inside of an ordinary French bourgeois family,
for instance? Probably it would be quite impossible to do so, short of
marrying into it. And it is rather similar with the English working
class. Nothing is easier than to be bosom pals with a pickpocket, if you
know where to look for him; but it is very difficult to be bosom pals
with a bricklayer.

But why is it so easy to be on equal terms with social outcasts? People
have often said to me, 'Surely when you are with the tramps they don't
really accept you as one of themselves? Surely they notice that you are
different--notice the difference of accent?' etc., etc. As a matter of
fact, a fair proportion of tramps, well over a quarter I should say,
notice nothing of the kind. To begin with, many people have no ear for
accent and judge you entirely by your clothes. I was often struck by
this fact when I was begging at back doors. Some people were obviously
surprised by my 'educated' accent, others completely failed to notice
it; I was dirty and ragged and that was all they saw. Again, tramps come
from all parts of the British Isles and the variation in English accents
is enormous. A tramp is used to hearing all kinds of accents among his
mates, some of them so strange to him that he can hardly understand
them, and a man from, say, Cardiff or Durham or Dublin does not
necessarily know which of the south English accents is an 'educated'
one. In any case men with 'educated' accents, though rare among tramps,
are not unknown. But even when tramps are aware that you are of
different origin from themselves, it does not necessarily alter their
attitude. From their point of view all that matters is that you, like
themselves, are 'on the bum'. And in that world it is not done to ask
too many questions. You can tell people the history of your life if you
choose, and most tramps do so on the smallest provocation, but you are
under no compulsion to tell it and whatever story you tell will be
accepted without question. Even a bishop could be at home among tramps
if he wore the right clothes; and even if they knew he was a bishop it
might not make any difference, provided that they also knew or believed
that he was genuinely destitute. Once you are in that world and
seemingly _of_ it, it hardly matters what you have been in the past. It
is a sort of world-within-a-world where everyone is equal, a small
squalid democracy--perhaps the nearest thing to a democracy that exists
in England.

But when you come to the normal working class the position is totally
different. To begin with, there is no short cut into their midst. You
can become a tramp simply by putting on the right clothes and going to
the nearest casual ward, but you can't become a navvy or a coal-miner.
You couldn't get a job as a navvy or a coal-miner even if you were equal
to the work. Via Socialist politics you can get in touch with the
working-class intelligentsia, but they are hardly more typical than
tramps or burglars. For the rest you can only mingle with the working
class by staying in their houses as a lodger, which always has a
dangerous resemblance to 'slumming'. For some months I lived entirely in
coal-miners' houses. I ate my meals with the family, I washed at the
kitchen sink, I shared bedrooms with miners, drank beer with them,
played darts with them, talked to them by the hour together. But though
I was among them, and I hope and trust they did not find me a nuisance,
I was not one of them, and they knew it even better than I did. However
much you like them, however interesting you find their conversation,
there is always that accursed itch of class-difference, like the pea
under the princess's mattress. It is not a question of dislike or
distaste, only of _difference_, but it is enough to make real intimacy
impossible. Even with miners who described themselves as Communists I
found that it needed tactful manoeuvrings to prevent them from calling
me 'sir'; and all of them, except in moments of great animation,
softened their northern accents for my benefit. I liked them and hoped
they liked me; but I went among them as a foreigner, and both of us were
aware of it. Whichever way you turn this curse of class-difference
confronts you like a wall of stone. Or rather it is not so much like a
stone wall as the plate-glass pane of an aquarium; it is so easy to
pretend that it isn't there, and so impossible to get through it.

Unfortunately it is nowadays the fashion to pretend that the glass is
penetrable. Of course everyone knows that class-prejudice exists, but at
the same time everyone claims that _he_, in some mysterious way, is
exempt from it. Snobbishness is one of those vices which we can discern
in everyone else but' never in ourselves. Not only the _croyant et
pratiquant_ Socialist, but every 'intellectual' takes it as a matter of
course that _he_ at least is outside the class-racket; he, unlike his
neighbours, can see through the absurdity of wealth, ranks, titles,
etc., etc. 'I'm not a snob' is nowadays a kind of universal _credo_. Who
is there who has not jeered at the House of Lords, the military caste,
the Royal Family, the public schools, the huntin' and shootin' people,
the old ladies in Cheltenham boarding-houses, the horrors of 'county'
society, and the social hierarchy generally? To do so has become an
automatic gesture. You notice this particularly in novels. Every
novelist of serious pretensions adopts an ironic attitude towards his
upper-class characters. Indeed when a novelist has to put a definitely
upper-class person--a duke or a baronet or whatnot--into one of his
stories he guys him more or less instinctively. There is an important
subsidiary cause of this in the poverty of the modern upper-class
dialect. The speech of 'educated' people is now so lifeless and
characterless that a novelist can do nothing with it. By far the easiest
way of making it amusing is to burlesque it, which means pretending that
every upper-class person is an ineffectual ass. The trick is imitated
from novelist to novelist, and in the end becomes almost a reflex
action.

And yet all the while, at the bottom of his heart, every-one knows that
this is humbug. We all rail against class-distinctions, but very few
people seriously want to abolish them. Here you come upon the important
fact that every revolutionary opinion draws part of its strength from a
secret conviction that nothing can be changed.

If you want a good illustration of this, it is worth studying the novels
and plays of John Galsworthy, keeping one eye on their chronology.
Galsworthy is a very fine specimen of the thin-skinned, tear-in-the-eye,
pre-war humanitarian. He starts out with a morbid pity-complex which
extends even to thinking that every married woman is an angel chained to
a satyr. He is in a perpetual quiver of indignation over the sufferings
of overworked clerks, of under-paid farm hands, of fallen women, of
criminals, of prostitutes, of animals. The world, as he sees it in his
earlier books (_The Man of Property_, _Justice_, etc.), is divided into
oppressors and oppressed, with the oppressors sitting on top like some
monstrous stone idol which all the dynamite in the world cannot
overthrow. But is it so certain that he really wants it overthrown? On
the contrary, in his fight against an immovable tyranny he is upheld by
the consciousness that it is immovable. When things happen unexpectedly
and the world-order which he has known begins to crumble, he feels
somewhat differently about it. So, having set out to be the champion of
the underdog against tyranny and injustice, he ends by advocating (_vide
The Silver Spoon_) that the English working class, to cure their
economic ills, shall be deported to the colonies like batches of cattle.
If he had lived ten years longer he would quite probably have arrived at
some genteel version of Fascism. This is the inevitable fate of the
sentimentalist. All his opinions change into their opposites at the
first brush of reality.

The same streak of soggy half-baked insincerity runs through all
'advanced' opinion. Take the question of imperialism, for instance.
Every left-wing 'intellectual' is, as a matter of course, an
anti-imperialist. He claims to be outside the empire-racket as
automatically and self-righteously as he claims to be outside the
class-racket. Even the right-wing 'intellectual', who is not definitely
in revolt against British imperialism, pretends to regard it with a sort
of amused detachment. It is so easy to be witty about the British
Empire. The White Man's Burden and 'Rule, Britannia' and Kipling's
novels and Anglo-Indian bores--who could even mention such things
without a snigger? And is there any cultured person who has not at least
once in his life made a joke about that old Indian havildar who said
that if the British left India there would not be a rupee or a virgin
left between Peshawar and Delhi (or wherever it was)? That is the
attitude of the typical left-winger towards imperialism, and a
thoroughly flabby, boneless attitude it is. For in the last resort, the
only important question is. Do you want the British Empire to hold
together or do you want it to disintegrate? And at the bottom of his
heart no Englishman, least of all the kind of person who is witty about
Anglo-Indian colonels, does want it to disintegrate. For, apart from any
other consideration, the high standard of life we enjoy in England
depends upon our keeping a tight hold on the Empire, particularly the
tropical portions of it such as India and Africa. Under the capitalist
system, in order that England may live in comparative comfort, a hundred
million Indians must live on the verge of starvation--an evil state of
affairs, but you acquiesce in it every time you step into a taxi or eat
a plate of strawberries and cream. The alternative is to throw the
Empire overboard and reduce England to a cold and unimportant little
island where we should all have to work very hard and live mainly on
herrings and potatoes. That is the very last thing that any left-winger
wants. Yet the left-winger continues to feel that he has no moral
responsibility for imperialism. He is perfectly ready to accept the
products of Empire and to save his soul by sneering at the people who
hold the Empire together.

It is at this point that one begins to grasp the unreality of most
people's attitude towards the class question. So long as it is merely a
question of ameliorating the worker's lot, every decent person is
agreed. Take a coal-miner, for example. Everyone, barring fools and
scoundrels, would like to see the miner better off. If, for instance,
the miner could ride to the coal face in a comfortable trolley instead
of crawling on his hands and knees, if he could work a three-hour shift
instead of seven and a half hours, if he could live in a decent house
with five bedrooms and a bath-room and have ten pounds a week
wages--splendid! Moreover, anyone who uses his brain knows perfectly
well that this is within the range of possibility. The world,
potentially at least, is immensely rich; develop it as it might be
developed, and we could all live like princes, supposing that we wanted
to. And to a very superficial glance the social side of the question
looks equally simple. In a sense it is true that almost everyone would
like to see class-distinctions abolished. Obviously this perpetual
uneasiness between man and man, from which we suffer in modern England,
is a curse and a nuisance. Hence the temptation few scoutmasterish
bellows of good-will. Stop calling me 'sir', you chaps! Surely we're all
men? Let's pal up and get our shoulders to the wheel and remember that
we're all equal, and what the devil does it matter if I know what kind
of ties to wear and you don't, and I drink my soup comparatively quietly
and you drink yours with the noise of water going down a waste-pipe--and
so on and so on and so on; all of it the most pernicious rubbish, but
quite alluring when it is suitably expressed.

But unfortunately you get no further by merely wishing
class-distinctions away. More exactly, it is necessary to wish them
away, but your wish has no efficacy unless you grasp what it involves.
The fact that has got to be faced is that to abolish class-distinctions
means abolishing a part of yourself. Here am I, a typical member of the
middle class. It is easy for me to say that I want to get rid of
class-distinctions, but nearly everything I think and do is a result of
class-distinctions. All my notions--notions of good and evil, of
pleasant and unpleasant, of funny and serious, of ugly and
beautiful--are essentially _middle-class_ notions; my taste in books and
food and clothes, my sense of honour, my table manners, my turns of
speech, my accent, even the characteristic movements of my body, are the
products of a special kind of upbringing and a special niche about
half-way up the social hierarchy. When I grasp this I grasp that it is
no use clapping a proletarian on the back and telling him that he is as
good a man as I am; if I want real contact with him, I have got to make
an effort for which very likely I am unprepared. For to get outside the
class-racket I have got to suppress not merely my private snobbishness,
but most of my other tastes and prejudices as well. I have got to alter
myself so completely that at the end I should hardly be recognizable as
the same person. What is involved is not merely the amelioration of
working-class conditions, nor an avoidance of the more stupid forms of
snobbery, but a complete abandonment of the upper-class and middle-class
attitude to life. And whether I say Yes or No probably depends upon the
extent to which I grasp what is demanded of me.

Many people, however, imagine that they can abolish class-distinctions
without making any uncomfortable change in their own habits and
'ideology'. Hence the eager class-breaking activities which one can see
in progress on all sides. Everywhere there are people of goodwill who
quite honestly believe that they are working for the overthrow of
class-distinctions. The middle-class Socialist enthuses over the
proletariat and runs 'summer schools' where the proletarian and the
repentant bourgeois are supposed to fall upon one another's necks and be
brothers for ever; and the bourgeois visitors come away saying how
wonderful and inspiring it has all been (the proletarian ones come away
saying something different). And then there is the outer-suburban
creeping Jesus, a hangover from the William Morris period, but still
surprisingly common, who goes about saying 'Why must we level _down_?
Why not level up?' and proposes to level the working class 'up' (up to
his own standard) by means of hygiene, fruit-juice, birth-control,
poetry, etc. Even the Duke of York (now King George VI) runs a yearly
camp where public-school boys and boys from the slums are supposed to
mix on exactly equal terms, and _do_ mix for the time being, rather like
the animals in one of those 'Happy Family' cages where a dog, a cat, two
ferrets, a rabbit, and three canaries preserve an armed truce while the
showman's eye is on them.

All such deliberate, conscious efforts at class-breaking are, I am
convinced, a very serious mistake. Sometimes they are merely futile, but
where they do show a definite result it is usually to _intensify_
class-prejudice. This, if you come to think of it, is only what might be
expected. You have forced the pace and set up an uneasy, unnatural
equality between class and class; the resultant friction brings to the
surface all kinds of feelings that might other-wise have remained
buried, perhaps for ever. As I said apropos of Galsworthy, the opinions
of the sentimentalist change into their opposites at the first touch of
reality. Scratch the average pacifist and you find a jingo. The
middle-class I.L.P.'er and the bearded fruit-juice drinker are all for a
classless society so long as they see the proletariat through the wrong
end of the telescope; force them into any _real_ contact with a
proletarian--let them get into a fight with a drunken fish-porter on
Saturday night, for instance--and they are capable of swinging back to
the most ordinary middle-class snobbishness. Most middle-class
Socialists, however, are very unlikely to get into fights with drunken
fish-porters; when they do make a genuine contact with the working
class, it is usually with the working-class intelligentsia. But the
working-class intelligentsia is sharply divisible into two different
types. There is the type who remains working-class--who goes on working
as a mechanic or a dock-labourer or whatever it may be and does not
bother to change his working-class accent and habits, but who 'improves
his mind' in his spare time and works for the I.L.P. or the Communist
Party; and there is the type who does alter his way of life, at least
externally, and who by means of State scholarships succeeds in climbing
into the middle class. The first is one of the finest types of man we
have. I can think of some I have met whom not even the most hidebound
Tory could help liking and admiring. The other type, with exceptions--D.
H. Lawrence, for example--is less admirable.

To begin with, it is a pity, though it is a natural result of the
scholarship system, that the proletariat should tend to interpenetrate
the middle class via the literary intelligentsia. For it is not easy to
crash your way into the literary intelligentsia if you happen to be a
decent human being. The modern English literary world, at any rate the
high-brow section of it, is a sort of poisonous jungle where only weeds
can flourish. It is just possible to be a literary gent and to keep your
decency if you are a definitely _popular_ writer--a writer of detective
stories, for instance; but to be a highbrow, with a footing in the
snootier magazines, means delivering yourself over to horrible campaigns
of wire-pulling and backstairs-crawling. In the highbrow world you 'get
on', if you 'get on' at all, not so much by your literary ability as by
being the life and soul of cocktail parties and kissing the bums of
verminous little lions. This, then, is the world that most readily opens
its doors to the proletarian who is climbing out of his own class. The
'clever' boy of a working-class family, the sort of boy who wins
scholarships and is obviously not fitted for a life of manual labour,
may find other ways of rising into the class above--a slightly different
type, for instance, rises via Labour Party politics--but the literary
way is by far the most usual. Literary London now teems with young men
who are of proletarian origin and have been educated by means of
scholarships. Many of them are very disagreeable people, quite
unrepresentative of their class, and it is most unfortunate that when a
person of bourgeois origin does succeed in meeting a proletarian face to
face on equal terms, this is the type he most commonly meets. For the
result is to drive the bourgeois, who has idealized the proletariat so
long as he knew nothing about them, back into frenzies of snobbishness.
The process is sometimes very comic to watch, if you happen to be
watching it from the outside. The poor well-meaning bourgeois, eager to
embrace his proletarian brother, leaps forward with open arms; and only
a little while later he is in retreat, minus a borrowed five pounds and
exclaiming dolefully, 'But, dash it, the fellow's not a gentleman!'

The thing that disconcerts the bourgeois in a contact of this kind is to
find certain of his own professions being taken seriously. I have
pointed out that the left-wing opinions of the average 'intellectual'
are mainly spurious. From pure imitativeness he jeers at things which in
fact he believes in. As one example out of many, take the public-school
code of honour, with its 'team spirit' and 'Don't hit a man when he's
down', and all the rest of that familiar bunkum. Who has not laughed at
it? Who, calling himself an 'intellectual', would dare _not_ to laugh at
it? But it is a bit different when you meet somebody who laughs at it
_from the outside_; just as we spend our lives in abusing England but
grow very angry when we hear a foreigner saying exactly the same things.
No one has been more amusing about the public schools than 'Beachcomber'
of the _Express_. He laughs, quite rightly, at the ridiculous code which
makes cheating at cards the worst of all sins. But would 'Beachcomber'
like it if one of his own friends was caught cheating at cards? I doubt
it. It is only when you meet someone of a different culture from
yourself that you begin to realize what your own beliefs really are. If
you are a bourgeois 'intellectual' you too readily imagine that you have
somehow become unbourgeois because you find it easy to laugh at
patriotism and the G. of E. and the Old School Tie and Colonel Blimp and
all the rest of it. But from the point of view of the proletarian
'intellectual', who at least by origin is genuinely outside the
bourgeois culture, your resemblances to Colonel Blimp may be more
important than your differences. Very likely he looks upon you and
Colonel Blimp as practically equivalent persons; and in a way he is
right, though neither you nor Colonel Blimp would admit it. So that the
meeting of proletarian and bourgeois, when they do succeed in meeting,
is not always the embrace of long-lost brothers; too often it is the
clash of alien cultures which can only meet in war.

I have been looking at this from the point of view of the bourgeois who
finds his secret beliefs challenged and is driven back to a frightened
conservatism. But one has also got to consider the antagonism that is
aroused in the proletarian 'intellectual'. By his own efforts and
sometimes with frightful agonies he has struggled out of his own class
into another where he expects to find a wider freedom and a greater
intellectual refinement; and all he finds, very often, is a sort of
hollowness, a deadness, a lack of any warm human feeling--of any real
life whatever. Sometimes the bourgeoisie seem to him just dummies with
money and water in their veins instead of blood. This at any rate is
what he _says_, and almost any young highbrow of proletarian origin will
spin you this line of talk. Hence the 'proletarian' cant from which we
now suffer. Everyone knows, or ought to know by this time, how it runs:
the bourgeoisie are 'dead' (a favourite word of abuse nowadays and very
effective be-cause meaningless), bourgeois culture is bankrupt,
bourgeois 'values' are despicable, and so on and so forth; if you want
examples, see any number of the _Left Review_ or any of the younger
Communist writers such as Alee Brown, Philip Henderson, etc. The
sincerity of much of this is suspect, but D. H. Lawrence, who was
sincere, whatever else he may not have been, expresses the same thought
over and over again. It is curious how he harps upon that idea that the
English bourgeoisie are all _dead_, or at least gelded. Mellors, the
gamekeeper in _Lady Chatterley's Lover_ (really Lawrence himself), has
had the opportunity to get out of his own class and does not
particularly want to return to it, because English working people have
various 'disagree-able habits'; on the other hand the bourgeoisie, with
whom he has also mixed to some extent, seem to him half dead, a race of
eunuchs. Lady Chatterley's husband, symbolically, is impotent in the
actual physical sense. And then there is the poem about the young man
(once again Lawrence himself) who 'got up to the top of the tree' but
came down saying:


  Oh you've got to be like a monkey
  if you climb up the tree!
  You've no more use for the solid earth
  and the lad you used to be.
  You sit in the boughs and gibber
  with superiority.

  They all gibber and gibber and chatter,
  and never a word they say
  comes really out of their guts, lad,
  they make it up half-way...

  I tell you something's been done to 'em,
  to the pullets up above;
  there's not a cock bird among 'em, etc., etc.


You could hardly have it in plainer terms than that. Possibly by the
people at 'the top of the tree' Lawrence only means the real
bourgeoisie, those in the £2000 a year class and over, but I doubt it.
More probably he means everyone who is more or less within the bourgeois
culture--everyone who was brought up with a mincing accent and in a
house where there were one or two servants. And at this point you
realize the danger of the 'proletarian' cant--realize, I mean, the
terrible antagonism that it is capable of arousing. For when you come to
such an accusation as this, you are up against a blank wall. Lawrence
tells me that because I have been to a public school I am a eunuch.
Well, what about it? I can produce medical evidence to the contrary, but
what good will that do? Lawrence's condemnation remains. If you tell me
I am a scoundrel I may mend my ways, but if you tell me I am a eunuch
you are tempting me to hit back in any way that seems feasible. If you
want to make an enemy of a man, tell him that his ills are incurable.

This then is the net result of most meetings between proletarian and
bourgeois: they lay bare a real antagonism which is intensified by the
'proletarian' cant, itself the product of forced contacts between class
and class. The only sensible procedure is to go slow and not force the
pace. If you secretly think of yourself as a gentleman and as such the
superior of the greengrocer's errand boy, it is far better to say so
than to tell lies about it. Ultimately you have got to drop your
snobbishness, but it is fatal to pretend to drop it before you are
really ready to do so.

Meanwhile one can observe on every side that dreary phenomenon, the
middle-class person who is an ardent Socialist at twenty-five and a
sniffish Conservative at thirty-five. In a way his recoil is natural
enough--at any rate, one can see how his thoughts run. Perhaps a
classless society doesn't mean a beatific state of affairs in which we
shall all go on behaving exactly as before except that there will be no
class-hatred and no snobbishness; perhaps it means a bleak world in
which all our ideals, our codes, our tastes--our 'ideology', in
fact--will have no meaning. Perhaps this class-breaking business isn't
so simple as it looked! On the contrary, it is a wild ride into the
darkness, and it may be that at the end of it the smile will be on the
face of the tiger. With loving though slightly patronizing smiles we set
out to greet our proletarian brothers, and behold! our proletarian
brothers--in so far as we understand them--are not asking for our
greetings, they are asking us to commit suicide. When the bourgeois sees
it in that form he takes to flight, and if his flight is rapid enough it
may carry him to Fascism.




11

Meanwhile what about Socialism?

It hardly needs pointing out that at this moment we are in a very
serious mess, so serious that even the dullest-witted people find it
difficult to remain unaware of it. We are living in a world in which
nobody is free, in which hardly anybody is secure, in which it is almost
impossible to be honest and to remain alive. For enormous blocks of the
working class the conditions of life are such as I have described in the
opening chapters of this book, and there is no chance of those
conditions showing any fundamental improvement. The very best the
English-working class can hope for is an occasional temporary decrease
in unemployment when this or that industry is artificially stimulated
by, for instance, rearmament. Even the middle classes, for the first
time in their history, are feeling the pinch. They have not known actual
hunger yet, but more and more of them find themselves floundering in a
sort of deadly net of frustration in which it is harder and harder to
persuade yourself that you are either happy, active, or useful. Even the
lucky ones at the top, the real bourgeoisie, are haunted periodically by
a consciousness of the miseries below, and still more by fears of the
menacing future. And this is merely a preliminary stage, in a country
still rich with the loot of a hundred years. Presently there may be
coining God knows what horrors--horrors of which, in this sheltered
island, we have not even a traditional knowledge.

And all the while everyone who uses his brain knows that Socialism, as a
world-system and wholeheartedly applied, is a way out. It would at least
ensure our getting enough to eat even if it deprived us of everything
else. Indeed, from one point of view, Socialism is such elementary
common sense that I am sometimes amazed that it has not established
itself already. The world is a raft sailing through space with,
potentially, plenty of provisions for everybody; the idea that we must
all cooperate and see to it that every-one does his fair share of the
work and gets his fair share of the provisions seems so blatantly
obvious that one would say that no one could possibly fail to accept it
unless he had some corrupt motive for clinging to the present system.
Yet the fact that we have got to face is that Socialism is not
establishing itself. Instead of going forward, the cause of Socialism is
visibly going back. At this moment Socialists almost everywhere are in
retreat before the onslaught of Fascism, and events are moving at
terrible speed. As I write this the Spanish Fascist forces are
bombarding Madrid, and it is quite likely that before the book is
printed we shall have another Fascist country to add to the list, not to
mention a Fascist control of the Mediterranean which may have the effect
of delivering British foreign policy into the hands of Mussolini. I do
not, however, want here to discuss the wider political issues. What I am
concerned with is the fact that Socialism is losing ground exactly where
it ought to be gaining it. With so much in its favour--for every empty
belly is an argument for Socialism--the _idea_ of Socialism is less
widely accepted than it was ten years ago. The average thinking person
nowadays is not merely not a Socialist, he is actively hostile to
Socialism. This must be due chiefly to mistaken methods of propaganda.
It means that Socialism, in the form of which it is now presented to us,
has about it something inherently distasteful--something that drives
away the very people who ought to be nocking to its support.

A few years ago this might have seemed unimportant. It seems only
yesterday that Socialists, especially orthodox Marxists, were telling me
with superior smiles that Socialism was going to arrive of its own
accord by some mysterious process called 'historic necessity'. Possibly
that belief still lingers, but it has been shaken, to say the least of
it. Hence the sudden attempts of Communists in various countries to ally
themselves with democratic forces which they have been sabotaging for
years past. At a moment like this it is desperately necessary to
discover just _why_ Socialism has failed in its appeal. And it is no use
writing off the current distaste for Socialism as the product of
stupidity or corrupt motives. If you want to remove that distaste you
have got to understand it, which means getting inside the mind of the
ordinary objector to Socialism, or at least regarding his viewpoint
sympathetically. No case is really answered until it has had a fair
hearing. Therefore, rather paradoxically, in order to defend Socialism
it is necessary to start by attacking it.

In the last three chapters I tried to analyse the difficulties that are
raised by our anachronistic class-system; I shall have to touch on that
subject again, because I believe that the present intensely stupid
handling of the class-issue may stampede quantities of potential
Socialists into Fascism. In the chapter following this one I want to
discuss certain underlying assumptions that alienate sensitive minds
from Socialism. But in the present chapter I am merely dealing with the
obvious, preliminary objections--the kind of thing that the person who
is not a Socialist (I don't mean the 'Where's the money to come from?'
type) always starts by saying when you tax him on the subject. Some of
these objections may appear frivolous or self-contradictory, but that is
beside the point; I am merely discussing symptoms. Anything is relevant
which helps to make clear why Socialism is not accepted. And please
notice that I am arguing _for_ Socialism, not _against_ it. But for the
moment I am _advocatus diaboli_. I am making out a case for the sort of
person who is in sympathy with the fundamental aims of Socialism, who
has the brains to see that Socialism would 'work', but who in practice
always takes to flight when Socialism is mentioned.

Question a person of this type, and you will often get the
semi-frivolous answer: 'I don't object to Socialism, but I do object to
Socialists.' Logically it is a poor argument, but it carries weight with
many people. As with the Christian religion, the worst advertisement for
Socialism is its adherents.

The first thing that must strike any outside observer is that Socialism,
in its developed form is a theory confined entirely to the middle
classes. The typical Socialist is not, as tremulous old ladies imagine,
a ferocious-looking working man with greasy overalls and a raucous
voice. He is either a youthful snob-Bolshevik who in five years' time
will quite probably have made a wealthy marriage and been converted to
Roman Catholicism; or, still more typically, a prim little man with a
white-collar job, usually a secret teetotaller and often with vegetarian
leanings, with a history of Nonconformity behind him, and, above all,
with a social position which he has no intention of forfeiting. This
last type is surprisingly common in Socialist parties of every shade; it
has perhaps been taken over _en bloc_ from the old Liberal
Party. In addition to this there is the horrible--the really
disquieting--prevalence of cranks wherever Socialists are gathered
together. One sometimes gets the impression that the mere words
'Socialism' and 'Communism' draw towards them with magnetic force every
fruit-juice drinker, nudist, sandal-wearer, sex-maniac, Quaker, 'Nature
Cure' quack, pacifist, and feminist in England. One day this summer I
was riding through Letchworth when the bus stopped and two
dreadful-looking old men got on to it. They were both about sixty, both
very short, pink, and chubby, and both hatless. One of them was
obscenely bald, the other had long grey hair bobbed in the Lloyd George
style. They were dressed in pistachio-coloured shirts and khaki shorts
into which their huge bottoms were crammed so tightly that you could
study every dimple. Their appearance created a mild stir of horror on
top of the bus. The man next to me, a commercial traveller I should say,
glanced at me, at them, and back again at me, and murmured 'Socialists',
as who should say, 'Red Indians'. He was probably right--the I.L.P. were
holding their summer school at Letchworth. But the point is that to him,
as an ordinary man, a crank meant a Socialist and a Socialist meant a
crank. Any Socialist, he probably felt, could be counted on to have
_something_ eccentric about him. And some such notion seems to exist
even among Socialists themselves. For instance, I have here a prospectus
from another summer school which states its terms per week and then asks
me to say 'whether my diet is ordinary or vegetarian'. They take it for
granted, you see, that it is necessary to ask this question. This kind
of thing is by itself sufficient to alienate plenty of decent people.
And their instinct is perfectly sound, for the food-crank is by
definition a person willing to cut himself off from human society in
hopes of adding five years on to the life of his carcase; that is, a
person but of touch with common humanity.

To this you have got to add the ugly fact that most middle-class
Socialists, while theoretically pining for a class-less society, cling
like glue to their miserable fragments of social prestige. I remember my
sensations of horror on first attending an I.L.P. branch meeting in
London. (It might have been rather different in the North, where the
bourgeoisie are less thickly scattered.) Are _these_ mingy little
beasts, I thought, the champions of the working class? For every person
there, male and female, bore the worst stigmata of sniffish middle-class
superiority. If a real working man, a miner dirty from the pit, for
instance, had suddenly walked into their midst, they would have been
embarrassed, angry, and disgusted; some, I should think, would have fled
holding their noses. You can see the same tendency in Socialist
literature, which, even when it is not openly written _de haut en bas_,
is always completely removed from the working class in idiom and manner
of thought. The Coles, Webbs, Stracheys, etc., are not _exactly_
proletarian writers. It is doubtful whether anything describable as
proletarian literature now exists--even the _Daily Worker_ is written in
standard South English--but a good music-hall comedian comes nearer to
producing it than any Socialist writer I can think of. As for the
technical jargon of the Communists, it is as far removed from the common
speech as the language of a mathematical textbook. I remember hearing a
professional Communist speaker address a working-class audience. His
speech was the usual bookish stuff, full of long sentences and
parentheses and 'Notwithstanding' and 'Be that as it may', besides the
usual jargon of 'ideology' and 'class-consciousness' and 'proletarian
solidarity' and all the rest of it. After him a Lancashire working man
got up and spoke to the crowd in their own broad lingo. There was not
much doubt which of the two was nearer to his audience, but I do not
suppose for a moment that the Lancashire working man was an orthodox
Communist.

For it must be remembered that a working man, so long as he remains a
genuine working man, is seldom or never a Socialist in the complete,
logically consistent sense. Very likely he votes Labour, or even
Communist if he gets the chance, but his conception of Socialism is
quite different from that of the, book-trained Socialist higher up. To
the ordinary working man, the sort you would meet in any pub on Saturday
night, Socialism does not mean much more than better wages and shorter'
hours and nobody bossing you about. To the more revolutionary type, the
type who is a hunger-marcher and is blacklisted by employers, the word
is a sort of rallying-cry against the forces of oppression, a vague
threat of future violence. But, so far as my experience goes, no genuine
working man grasps the deeper implications of Socialism. Often, in my
opinion, he is a truer Socialist than the orthodox Marxist, because he
does remember, what the other so often forgets, that Socialism means
justice and common decency. But what he does not grasp is that Socialism
cannot be narrowed down to mere economic justice' and that a reform of
that magnitude is bound to work immense changes in our civilization and
his own way of life. His vision of the Socialist future is a vision of
present society with the worst abuses left out, and with interest
centring round the same things as at present--family life, the pub,
football, and local politics. As for the philosophic side of Marxism,
the pea-and-thimble trick with those three mysterious entities, thesis,
antithesis, and synthesis, I have never met a working man who had the
faintest interest in it. It is of course true that plenty of people of
working-class _origin_ are Socialists of the theoretical bookish type.
But they are never people who have _remained_ working men; they don't
work with their hands, that is. They belong either to the type I
mentioned in the last chapter, the type who squirms into the middle
class via the literary intelligentsia, or the type who becomes a Labour
M.P. or a high-up trade union official. This last type is one of the
most desolating spectacles the world contains. He has been picked out to
fight for his mates, and all it means to him is a soft job and the
chance of 'bettering' himself. Not merely while but _by_ fighting the
bourgeoisie he becomes a bourgeois himself. And meanwhile it is quite
possible that he has remained an orthodox Marxist. But I have yet to
meet a _working_ miner, steel-worker, cotton-weaver, docker, navvy, or
whatnot who was 'ideologically' sound.

One of the analogies between Communism and Roman Catholicism is that
only the 'educated' are completely orthodox. The most immediately
striking thing about the English Roman Catholics--I don't mean the real
Catholics, I mean the converts: Ronald Knox, Arnold Lunn _et hoc
genus_--is their intense self-consciousness. Apparently they never
think, certainly they never write, about anything but the fact that they
are Roman Catholics; this single fact and the self-praise resulting from
it form the entire stock-in-trade of the Catholic literary man. But the
really interesting thing about these people is the way in which they
have worked out the supposed implications of orthodoxy until the tiniest
details of life are involved. Even the liquids you drink, apparently,
can be orthodox or heretical; hence the campaigns of Chesterton,
'Beachcomber', etc., against tea and in favour of beer. According to
Chesterton, tea-drinking' is 'pagan', while beer-drinking is
'Christian', and coffee is 'the puritan's opium'. It is unfortunate for
this theory that Catholics abound in the 'Temperance' movement and the
greatest tea-boozers in the world are the Catholic Irish; but what I am
interested in here is the attitude of mind that can make even food and
drink an occasion for religious intolerance. A working-class Catholic
would never be so absurdly consistent as that. He does not spend his
time in brooding on the fact that he is a Roman Catholic, and he is not
particularly conscious of being different from his non-Catholic
neighbours. Tell an Irish dock-labourer in the slums of Liverpool that
his cup of tea is 'pagan', and he will call you a fool. And even in more
serious matters he I does not always grasp the implications of his
faith. In the I Roman Catholic homes of Lancashire you see the crucifix
I on the wall and the _Daily Worker_ on the table. It is only the
'educated' man, especially the literary man, who knows how to be a
bigot. And, _mutatis mutandis_, it is the same with Communism. The creed
is never found in its pure form in a genuine proletarian.

It may be said, however, that even if the theoretical book-trained
Socialist is not a working man himself, at least he is actuated by a
love of the working class. He is endeavouring to shed his bourgeois
status and fight on the side of the proletariat--that, obviously, must
be his motive.

But is it? Sometimes I look at a Socialist--the intellectual,
tract-writing type of Socialist, with his pullover, his fuzzy hair, and
his Marxian quotation--and wonder what the devil his motive really is.
It is often difficult to believe that it is a love of anybody,
especially of the working class, from whom he is of all people the
furthest removed. The underlying motive of many Socialists, I believe,
is simply a hypertrophied sense of order. The present state of affairs
offends them not because it causes misery, still less because it makes
freedom impossible, but because it is untidy; what they desire,
basically, is to reduce the world to something resembling a chessboard.
Take the plays of a lifelong Socialist like Shaw. How much understanding
or even awareness of working-class life do they display? Shaw himself
declares that you can only bring a working man on the stage 'as an
object of compassion'; in practice he doesn't bring him on even as that,
but merely as a sort of W. W. Jacobs figure of fun--the ready-made comic
East Ender, like those in _Major Barbara_ and _Captain Brassbound's
Conversion_. At best his attitude to the working class is the sniggering
_Punch_ attitude, in more serious moments (consider, for instance, the
young man who symbolizes the dispossessed classes in _Misalliance_) he
finds them merely contemptible and disgusting. Poverty and, what is
more, the habits of mind created by poverty, are something to be
abolished _from above_, by violence if necessary; perhaps even
preferably by violence. Hence his worship of 'great' men and appetite
for dictatorships, Fascist or Communist; for to him, apparently (_vide_
his remarks apropos of the Italo-Abyssinian war and the Stalin-Wells
conversations), Stalin and Mussolini are almost equivalent persons. You
get the same thing in a more mealy-mouthed form in Mrs Sidney Webb's
autobiography, which gives, unconsciously, a most revealing picture of
the high-minded Socialist slum-visitor. The truth is that, to many
people calling themselves Socialists, revolution does not mean a
movement of the masses with which they hope to associate themselves; it
means a set of reforms which 'we', the clever ones, are going to impose
upon 'them', the Lower Orders. On the other hand, it would be a mistake
to regard the book-trained Socialist as a bloodless creature entirely
incapable of emotion. Though seldom giving much evidence of affection
for the exploited, he is perfectly capable of displaying hatred--a sort
of queer, theoretical, _in vacuo_ hatred--against the exploiters. Hence
the grand old Socialist sport of denouncing the bourgeoisie. It is
strange how easily almost any Socialist writer can lash himself into
frenzies of rage against the class to which, by birth or by adoption, he
himself invariably belongs. Sometimes the hatred of bourgeois habits and
'ideology' is so far-reaching that it extends even to bourgeois
characters in books. According to Henri Barbusse, the characters in the
novels of Proust, Gide, etc., are 'characters whom one would dearly love
to have at the other side of a barricade'. 'A barricade', you observe.
Judging from _Le Feu_, I should have thought Barbusse's experience of
barricades had left him with a distaste for them. But the imaginary
bayoneting of 'bourgeois', who presumably don't hit back, is a bit
different from the real article.

The best example of bourgeois-baiting literature that I have yet come
across is Mirsky's _Intelligentsia of Great Britain_. This is a very
interesting and ably-written book, and it should be read by everyone who
wants to understand the rise of Fascism. Mirsky (formerly Prince Mirsky)
was a White Russian _émigré_ who came to England and was for some years
a lecturer in Russian literature at London University. Later he was
converted to Communism, returned to Russia, and produced his book as a
sort of 'show-up' of the British intelligentsia from a Marxist
standpoint. It is a viciously malignant book, with an unmistakable note
of 'Now I'm out of your reach I can say what I like about you' running
all through it, and apart from a general distortion it contains some
quite definite and probably intentional misrepresentation: as, for
instance, when Conrad is declared to be 'no less imperialist than
Kipling', and D. H. Lawrence is described as writing 'bare-bodied
pornography' and as having 'succeeded in erasing all clues to his
proletarian origin'--as though Lawrence had been a pork-butcher climbing
into the House of Lords! This kind of thing is very disquieting when one
remembers that it is addressed to a Russian audience who have no means
of checking its accuracy. But what I am thinking of at the moment is the
effect of such a book on the English public. Here you have a literary
man of aristocratic extraction, a man who had probably never in his life
spoken to a working man on any-thing approaching equal terms, uttering
venomous screams of libel against his 'bourgeois' colleagues. Why? So
far as appearances go, from pure malignity. He is battling _against_ the
British intelligentsia, but what is he battling _for_? Within the book
itself there is no indication. Hence the net effect of books like this
is to give outsiders the impression that there is nothing in Communism
except _hatred_. And here once again you come upon that queer
resemblance between Communism and (convert) Roman Catholicism. If you
want to find a book as evil-spirited as _The Intelligentsia of Great
Britain_, the likeliest place to look is among the popular Roman
Catholic apologists. You will find there the same venom and the same
dishonesty, though, to do the Catholic justice, you will not usually
find the same bad manners. Queer that Comrade Mirsky's spiritual brother
should be Father---! The Communist and the Catholic are not saying the
same thing, in a sense they are even saying opposite things, and each
would gladly boil the other in oil if circumstances permitted; but from
the point of view of an outsider they are very much alike.

The fact is that Socialism, _in the form in which it is now presented_,
appeals chiefly to unsatisfactory or even inhuman types. On the one hand
you have the warm-hearted un-thinking Socialist, the typical
working-class Socialist, who only wants to abolish poverty and does not
always grasp what this implies. On the other hand, you have the
intellectual, book-trained Socialist, who understands that it is
necessary to throw our present civilization down the sink and is quite
willing to do so. And this type is drawn, to begin with, entirely from
the middle class, and from a rootless town-bred section of the middle
class at that. Still more unfortunately, it includes--so much so that to
an outsider it even appears to be composed of--the kind of people I have
been discussing; the foaming denouncers of the bourgeoisie, and the
more-water-in-your-beer reformers of whom Shaw is the prototype, and the
astute young social-literary climbers who are Communists now, as they
will be Fascists five years hence, because it is all the go, and all
that dreary tribe of high-minded' women and sandal-wearers and bearded
fruit-juice drinkers who come nocking towards the smell of 'progress'
like bluebottles to a dead cat. The ordinary decent person, who is in
sympathy with the _essential_ aims of Socialism, is given the impression
that there is no room for his kind in any Socialist party that means
business. Worse, he is driven to the cynical conclusion that Socialism
is a kind of doom which is probably coming but must be staved off as
long as possible. Of course, as I have suggested already, it is not
strictly fair to judge a movement by its adherents; but the point is
that people invariably do so, and that the popular conception of
Socialism is coloured by the conception of a Socialist as a dull or
disagreeable person. 'Socialism' is pictured as a state of affairs in
which our more vocal Socialists would feel thoroughly at home. This does
great harm to the cause. The ordinary man may not flinch from a
dictatorship of the proletariat, if you offer it tactfully; offer him a
dictatorship of the prigs, and he gets ready to fight.

There is a widespread feeling that any civilization in which Socialism
was a reality would bear the same relation to our own as a brand-new
bottle of colonial burgundy, bears to a few spoonfuls of first-class
Beaujolais. We live, admittedly, amid the wreck of a civilization, but
it has been a great civilization in its day, and in patches it still
flourishes almost undisturbed. It still has its bouquet, so to speak;
whereas the imagined Socialist future, like the colonial burgundy,
tastes only of iron and water. Hence the fact, which is really a
disastrous one, that artists of any consequence can never be persuaded
into the Socialist fold. This is particularly the case with the writer
whose political opinions are more directly and obviously connected with
his work than those of, say, a painter. If one faces facts one must
admit that nearly everything describable as Socialist literature is
dull, tasteless, and bad. Consider the situation in England at the
present moment. A whole generation has grown up more or less in
familiarity with the idea of Socialism; and yet the higher-water mark,
so to speak, of Socialist literature is W. H. Auden, a sort of gutless
Kipling,[Orwell somewhat retracted this remark later. See 'Inside the
Whale', _England Your England_, p. 120 (Seeker & Warburg Collected
Edition).] and the even feebler poets who are associated with him. Every
writer of consequence and every book worth reading is on the other side.
I am willing to believe that it is otherwise in Russia--about which I
know nothing, however--for presumably in post-revolutionary Russia the
mere violence of events would tend to throw up a vigorous literature of
sorts. But it is certain that in Western Europe Socialism has produced
no literature worth having. A little while ago, when the issues were
less clear, there were writers of some vitality who called themselves
Socialists, but they were using the word as a vague label. Thus, if
Ibsen and Zola described themselves as Socialists, it did not mean much
more than that they were 'progressives', while in the case of Anatole
France it meant merely that he was an anticlerical. The real Socialist
writers, the propagandist writers, have always been dull, empty
windbags--Shaw, Barbusse, Upton Sinclair, William Morris, Waldo Frank,
etc., etc. I am not, of course, suggesting that Socialism is to be
condemned because literary gents don't like it; I am not even suggesting
that it ought necessarily to produce literature on its own account,
though I do think it a bad sign that it has produced no songs worth
singing. I am merely pointing to the fact that writers of genuine
talent are usually indifferent to Socialism, and sometimes actively and
mischievously hostile. And this is a disaster, not only for the writers
themselves, but for the cause of Socialism, which has great need of
them.

This, then, is the superficial aspect of the ordinary man's recoil from
Socialism. I know the whole dreary argument very thoroughly, because I
know it from both sides. Every-thing that I say here I have both said to
ardent Socialists who were trying to convert me, and had said to me by
bored non-Socialists whom I was trying to convert. The whole thing
amounts to a kind of _malaise_ produced by dislike of individual
Socialists, especially of the cocksure Marx-quoting type. Is it childish
to be influenced by that kind of thing? Is it silly? Is it even
contemptible? It is all that, but the point is that _it happens_, and
therefore it is important to keep it in mind.




12

However, there is a much more serious difficulty than the local and
temporary objections which I discussed in the last chapter.

Faced by the fact that intelligent people are so often on the other
side, the Socialist is apt to set it down to corrupt motives (conscious
or unconscious), or to an ignorant belief that Socialism would not
'work', or to a mere dread of the horrors and discomforts of the
revolutionary period before Socialism is established. Undoubtedly all
these are important, but there are plenty of people who are influenced
by none of them and are nevertheless hostile to Socialism. Their reason
for recoiling from Socialism is spiritual, or 'ideological'. They object
to it not on the ground that it would not 'work', but precisely because
it would 'work' too well. What they are afraid of is not the things that
are going to happen in their own lifetime, but the things that are going
to happen in a remote future when Socialism is a reality.

I have very seldom met a convinced Socialist who could grasp that
thinking people may be repelled by the _objective_ towards which
Socialism appears to be moving. The Marxist, especially, dismisses this
kind of thing as bourgeois sentimentality. Marxists as a rule are not
very good at reading the minds of their adversaries; if they were, the
situation in Europe might be less desperate than it is at present.
Possessing a technique which seems to explain everything, they do not
often bother to discover what is going on inside other people's heads.
Here, for instance, is an illustration of the kind of thing I mean.
Discussing the widely held theory--which in one sense is certainly
true--that Fascism is a product of Communism, Mr N. A. Holdaway, one of
the ablest Marxist writers we possess, writes as follows:


The hoary legend of Communism leading to Fascism...The element of
truth in it is this: that the appearance of Communist activity warns the
ruling class that democratic Labour Parties are no longer capable of
holding the working class in check, and that capitalist dictatorship
must assume another form if it is to survive.


You see here the defects of the method. Because he has detected the
underlying economic cause of Fascism, he tacitly assumes that the
spiritual side of it is of no importance. Fascism is written off as a
manoeuvre of the 'ruling class', which at bottom it is. But this in
itself would only explain why Fascism appeals to capitalists. What about
the millions who are not capitalists, who in a material sense have
nothing to gain from Fascism and are often aware of it, and who,
nevertheless, are Fascists? Obviously their approach has been purely
along the ideological line. They could only be stampeded into Fascism
because Communism attacked or seemed to attack certain things
(patriotism, religion, etc.) which lay deeper than the economic motive;
and in _that_ sense it is perfectly true that Communism leads to
Fascism. It is a pity that Marxists nearly always concentrate on letting
economic cats out of ideological bags; it does in one sense reveal the
truth, but with this penalty, that most of their propaganda misses its
mark. It is the spiritual recoil from Socialism, especially as it
manifests itself in sensitive people, that I want to discuss in this
chapter. I shall have to analyse it at some length, because it is very
widespread, very powerful, and, among Socialists, almost completely
ignored.

The first thing to notice is that the idea of Socialism is bound up,
more or less inextricably, with the idea of machine-production.
Socialism is essentially an _urban_ creed. It grew up more or less
concurrently with industrialism, it has always had its roots in the town
proletariat and the town intellectual, and it is doubtful whether it
could ever have arisen in any but an industrial society. Granted
industrialism, the idea of Socialism presents itself naturally, because
private ownership is only tolerable when every individual (or family or
other unit) is at least moderately self-supporting; but the effect of
industrialism is to make it impossible for anyone to be self-supporting
even for a moment. Industrialism, once it rises above a fairly low
level, must lead to some form of collectivism. Not necessarily to
Socialism, of course; conceivably it might lead to the Slave-State of
which Fascism is a kind of prophecy. And the converse is also true.
Machine-production suggests Socialism, but Socialism as a world-system
implies machine-production, because it demands certain things not
compatible with a primitive way of life. It demands, for instance,
constant intercommunication and exchange of goods between all parts of
the earth; it demands some degree of centralized control; it demands an
approximately equal standard of life for all human beings and probably a
certain uniformity of education. We may take it, therefore, that any
world in which Socialism was a reality would be at least as highly
mechanized as the United States at this moment, probably much more so.
In any case, no Socialist would think of denying this. The Socialist
world is always pictured as a completely mechanized, immensely organized
world, depending on the machine as the civilizations of antiquity depend
on the slave.

So far so good, or so bad. Many, perhaps a majority, of thinking people
are not in love with machine-civilization, but everyone who is not a
fool knows that it is nonsense to talk at this moment about scrapping
the machine. But the unfortunate thing is that Socialism, as usually
presented, is bound up with the idea of mechanical progress, not merely
as a necessary development but as an end in itself, almost as a kind of
religion. This idea is implicit in, for instance, most of the
propagandist stuff that is written about the rapid mechanical advance in
Soviet Russia (the Dneiper dam, tractors, etc., etc.). Karel Capek hits
it off well enough in the horrible ending of _R.U.R._, when the Robots,
having slaughtered the last human being, announce their intention to
'build many houses' (just for the sake of building houses, you see). The
kind of person who most readily accepts Socialism is also the kind of
person who views mechanical progress, _as such_, with enthusiasm. And
this is so much the case that Socialists are often unable to grasp that
the opposite opinion exists. As a rule the most persuasive argument they
can think of is to tell you that the present mechanization of the world
is as nothing to what we shall see when Socialism is established. Where
there is one aeroplane now, in those days there will be fifty! All the
work that is now done by hand will then be done by machinery: everything
that is now made of leather, wood, or stone will be made of rubber,
glass, or steel; there will be no disorder, no loose ends, no
wildernesses, no wild animals, no weeds, no disease, no poverty, no
pain--and so on and so forth. The Socialist world is to be above all
things an _ordered_ world, an _efficient_ world. But it is precisely
from that vision of the future as a sort of glittering Wells-world that
sensitive minds recoil. Please notice that this essentially fat-bellied
version of 'progress' is not an integral part of Socialist doctrine; but
it has come to be thought of as one, with the result that the
temperamental conservatism which is latent in all kinds of people is
easily mobilized against Socialism.

Every sensitive person has moments when he is suspicious of machinery
and to some extent of physical science. But it is important to sort out
the various motives, which have differed greatly at different times, for
hostility to science and machinery, and to disregard the jealousy of the
modern literary gent who hates science because science has stolen
literature's thunder. The earliest full-length attack on science and
machinery that I am acquainted with is in the third part of _Gulliver's
Travels_. But Swift's attack, though brilliant as a _tour de force_, is
irrelevant and even silly, because it is written from the
standpoint--perhaps this seems a queer thing to say of the author of
_Gulliver's Travels_--of a man who lacked imagination. To Swift, science
was merely a kind of futile muckraking and the machines were nonsensical
contraptions that would never work. His standard was that of practical
usefulness, and he lacked the vision to see that an experiment which is
not demonstrably useful at the moment may yield results in the future.
Elsewhere in the book he names it as the best of all achievements 'to
make two blades of grass grow where one grew before'; not 'seeing,
apparently, that this is just what the machine can do. A little later
the despised machines began working, physical science increased its
scope, and there came the celebrated conflict between religion and
science which agitated our grandfathers. That conflict is over and both
sides have retreated and claimed a victory, but an anti-scientific bias
still lingers in the minds of most religious believers. All through the
nineteenth century protesting voices were raised against science and
machinery (see Dickens's _Hard Times_, for instance), but usually for
the rather shallow reason that industrialism in its first stages was
cruel and ugly. Samuel Butler's attack on the machine in the well-known
chapter of _Erewhon_ is a different matter. But Butler himself lives in
'a less desperate age than our own, an age in which it was still
possible for a first-rate man to be a dilettante part of the time, and
therefore the whole thing appeared to him as a kind of intellectual
exercise. He saw clearly enough our abject dependence on the machine,
but instead of bothering to work out its consequences he preferred to
exaggerate it for the sake of what was not much more than a joke. It is
only in our own age, when mechanization has finally triumphed, that we
can actually _feel_ the tendency of the machine to make a fully human
life impossible. There is probably no one capable of thinking and
feeling who has not occasionally looked at a gas-pipe chair and
reflected that the machine is the enemy of life. As a rule, however,
this feeling is instinctive rather than reasoned.

People know that in some way or another 'progress' is a swindle, but
they reach this conclusion by a kind of mental shorthand; my job here is
to supply the logical steps that are usually left out. But first one
must ask, what is the function of the machine? Obviously its primary
function is to save work, and the type of person to whom
machine-civilization is entirely acceptable seldom sees any reason for
looking further. Here for instance is a person who claims, or rather
screams, that he is thoroughly at home in the modern mechanized world. I
am quoting from _World Without Faith_, by Mr John Beevers. This is what
he says:


It is plain lunacy to say that the average £2 10s. to £4 a week man of
today is a lower type than an eighteenth-century farm labourer. Or than
the labourer or peasant of any exclusively agricultural community now or
in the past. It just isn't true. It is so damn silly to cry out about
the civilizing effects of work in the fields and farmyards as against
that done in a big locomotive works or an automobile factory. Work is a
nuisance. We work because we have to and all work is done to provide us
with leisure and the means of spending that leisure as enjoyably as
possible.


And again:


Man is going to have time enough and power enough to hunt for his own
heaven on earth without worrying about the super-natural one. The earth
will be so pleasant a place that the priest and the parson won't be left
with much of a tale to tell. Half the stuffing is knocked out of them by
one neat blow. Etc., etc., etc.


There is a whole chapter to this effect (Chapter 4 of Mr Beevers's
book), and it is of some interest as an exhibition of machine-worship in
its most completely vulgar, ignorant, and half-baked form. It is the
authentic voice of a large section of the modern world. Every
aspirin-eater in the outer suburbs would echo it fervently. Notice the
shrill wail of anger ('It just isn't troo-o-o!', etc.) with which Mr
Beevers meets the suggestion that his grandfather may have been a better
man than himself; and the still more horrible suggestion that if we
returned to a simpler way of life he might have to toughen his muscles
with a job of work. Work, you see, is done 'to provide us with leisure'.
Leisure for what? Leisure to become more like Mr Beevers, presumably.
Though as a matter of fact, from that line of talk about 'heaven on
earth', you can make a fairly good guess at what he would like
civilization to be; a sort of Lyons Comer House lasting in _saecula
saeculorum_ and getting bigger and noisier all the time. And in any book
by anyone who feels at home in the machine-world--in any book by H. G.
Wells, for instance--you will find passages of the same kind. How often
have we not heard it, that glutinously uplifting stuff about 'the
machines, our new race of slaves, which will set humanity free', etc.,
etc., etc. To these people, apparently, the only danger of the machine
is its possible use for destructive purposes; as, for instance,
aero-planes are used in war. Barring wars and unforeseen disasters, the
future is envisaged as an ever more rapid march of mechanical progress;
machines to save work, machines to save thought, machines to save pain,
hygiene, efficiency, organization, more hygiene, more efficiency, more
organization, more machines--until finally you land up in the by now
familiar Wellsian Utopia, aptly caricatured by Huxley in _Brave New
World_, the paradise of little fat men. Of course in their day-dreams of
the future the little fat men are neither fat nor little; they are Men
Like Gods. But why should they be? All mechanical progress is towards
greater and greater efficiency; ultimately, therefore, towards a world
in which _nothing goes wrong_. But in a world in which nothing went
wrong, many of the qualities which Mr Wells regards as 'godlike' would
be no more valuable than the animal faculty of moving the ears. The
beings in _Men Like Gods_ and _The Dream_ are represented, for example,
as brave, generous, and physically strong. But in a world from which
physical danger had been banished--and obviously mechanical progress
tends to eliminate danger--would physical courage be likely to survive?
_Could_ it survive? And why should physical strength survive in a world
where there was never the need for physical labour? As for such
qualities as loyalty, generosity, etc., in a world where nothing went
wrong, they would be not only irrelevant but probably unimaginable. The
truth is that many of the qualities we admire in human beings can only
function in opposition to some kind of disaster, pain, or difficulty;
but the tendency of mechanical progress is to eliminate disaster, pain,
and difficulty. In books like _The Dream_ and _Men Like Gods_ it is
assumed that such qualities as strength, courage, generosity, etc., will
be kept alive because they are comely qualities and necessary attributes
of a full human being. Presumably, for instance, the inhabitants of
Utopia would create artificial dangers in order to exercise their
courage, and do dumb-bell exercises to harden muscles which they would
never be obliged to use. And here you observe the huge contradiction
which is usually present in the idea of progress. The tendency of
mechanical progress is to make your environment safe and soft; and yet
you are striving to keep yourself brave and hard. You are at the same
moment furiously pressing forward and desperately holding back. It is as
though a London stockbroker should go to his office in a suit of chain
mail and insist on talking medieval Latin. So in the last analysis the
champion of progress is also the champion of anachronisms.

Meanwhile I am assuming that the tendency of mechanical progress _is_ to
make life safe and soft. This may be disputed, because at any given
moment the effect of some recent mechanical invention may appear to be
the opposite. Take for instance the transition from horses to motor
vehicles. At a first glance one might say, considering the enormous toll
of road deaths, that the motor-car does not exactly tend to make life
safer. Moreover it probably needs as much toughness to be a first-rate
dirt-track rider as to be a broncho-buster or to ride in the Grand
National. Nevertheless the _tendency_ of all machinery is to become
safer and easier to handle. The danger of accidents would disappear if
we chose to tackle our road-planning problem seriously, as we shall do
sooner or later; and meanwhile the motor-car has evolved to a point at
which anyone who is not blind or paralytic can drive it after a few
lessons. Even now it needs far less nerve and skill to drive a car
ordinarily well than to ride a horse ordinarily well; in twenty years'
time it may need no nerve or skill at all. Therefore, one must say that,
taking society as a whole, the result of the transition from horses to
cars has been an increase in human softness. Presently somebody comes
along with another invention, the aeroplane for instance, which does not
at first sight appear to make life safer. The first men who went up in
aeroplanes were superlatively brave, and even today it must need an
exceptionally good nerve to be a pilot. But the same tendency as before
is at work. The aeroplane, like the motor-car, will be made foolproof; a
million engineers are working, almost unconsciously, in that direction.
Finally--this is the objective, though it may never quite be
reached--you will get an aeroplane whose pilot needs no more skill or
courage than a baby needs in its perambulator. And all mechanical
progress is and must be in this direction. A machine evolves by becoming
more efficient, that is, more foolproof; hence the objective of
mechanical progress is a foolproof world--which may or may not mean a
world inhabited by fools. Mr Wells would probably retort that the world
can never become fool-proof, because, however high a standard of
efficiency you have reached, there is always some greater difficulty
ahead. For example (this is Mr Wells's favourite idea--he has used it in
goodness knows how many perorations), when you have got this planet of
ours perfectly into trim, you start upon the enormous task of reaching
and colonizing another. But this is merely to push the objective further
into the future; the objective itself remains the same. Colonize another
planet, and the game of mechanical progress begins anew; for the
foolproof world you have substituted the foolproof solar system--the
foolproof universe. In tying yourself to the ideal of mechanical
efficiency, you tie yourself to the ideal of softness. But softness is
repulsive; and thus all progress is seen to be a frantic struggle
towards an objective which you hope and pray will never be reached. Now
and again, but not often, you meet somebody who grasps that what is
usually called progress also entails what is usually called degeneracy,
and who is nevertheless in favour of progress. Hence the fact that in Mr
Shaw's Utopia a statue was erected to Falstaff, as the first man who
ever made a speech in favour of cowardice.

But the trouble goes immensely deeper than this. Hitherto I have only
pointed out the absurdity of aiming at mechanical progress and also at
the preservation of qualities which mechanical progress makes
unnecessary. The question one has got to consider is whether there is
_any_ human activity which would not be maimed by the dominance of the
machine.

The function of the machine is to save work. In a fully mechanized world
all the dull drudgery will be done by machinery, leaving us free for
more interesting pursuits. So expressed, this sounds splendid. It makes
one sick to see half a dozen men sweating their guts out to dig a trench
for a water-pipe, when some easily devised machine would scoop the earth
out in a couple of minutes. Why not let the machine do the work and the
men go and do something else. But presently the question arises, what
else are they to do? Supposedly they are set free from 'work' in order
that they may do something which is not 'work'. But what is work and
what is not work? Is it work to dig, to carpenter, to plant trees, to
fell trees, to ride, to fish, to hunt, to feed chickens, to play the
piano, to take photographs, to build a house, to cook, to sew, to trim
hats, to mend motor bicycles? All of these things are work to somebody,
and all of them are play to somebody. There are in fact very few
activities which cannot be classed either as work or play according as
you choose to regard them. The labourer set free from digging may want
to spend his leisure, or part of it, in playing the piano, while the
professional pianist may be only too glad to get out and dig at the
potato patch. Hence the antithesis between work, as something
intolerably tedious, and not-work, as something desirable, is false. The
truth is that when a human being is riot eating, drinking, sleeping,
making love, talking, playing games, or merely lounging about--and these
things will not fill up a lifetime--he needs work and usually looks for
it, though he may not call it work. Above the level of a third- or
fourth-grade moron, life has got to be lived largely in terms of effort.
For man is not, as the vulgarer hedonists seem to suppose, a kind of
walking stomach; he has also got a hand, an eye, and a brain. Cease to
use your hands, and you have lopped off a huge chunk of your
consciousness. And now consider again those half-dozen men who were
digging the trench for the water-pipe. A machine has set them free from
digging, and they are going to amuse themselves with something
else--carpentering, for instance. But whatever they want to do, they
will find that another machine has set them free from _that_. For in a
fully mechanized world there would be no more need to carpenter, to
cook, to mend motor bicycles, etc., than there would be to dig. There is
scarcely anything, from catching a whale to carving a cherry stone, that
could not conceivably be done by machinery. The machine would even
encroach upon the activities we now class as 'art'; it is doing so
already, via the camera and the radio. Mechanize the world as fully as
it might be mechanized, and whichever way you turn there will be some
machine cutting you off from the chance of working--that is, of living.

At a first glance this might not seem to matter. Why should you not get
on with your 'creative work' and disregard the machines that would do it
for you? But it is not so simple as it sounds. Here am I, working eight
hours a day in an insurance office; in my spare time I want to do
something 'creative', so I choose to do a bit of carpentering--to make
myself a table, for instance. Notice that from the very start there is a
touch of artificiality about the whole business, for the factories can
turn me out a far better table than I can make for myself. But even when
I get to work on my table, it is not possible for me to feel towards it
as the cabinet-maker of a hundred years ago felt towards his table,
still less as Robinson Crusoe felt towards his. For before I start, most
of the work has already been done for me by machinery. The tools I use
demand the minimum of skill. I can get, for instance, planes which will
cut out any moulding; the cabinet-maker of a hundred years ago would
have had to do the work with chisel and gouge, which demanded real skill
of eye and hand. The boards I buy are ready planed and the legs are
ready turned by the lathe. I can even go to the wood-shop and buy all
the parts of the table ready-made and only needing to be fitted
together; my work being reduced to driving in a few pegs and using a
piece of sandpaper. And if this is so at present, in the mechanized
future it will be enormously more so. With the tools and materials
available _then_, there will be no possibility of mistake, hence no room
for skill. Making a table will be easier and duller than peeling a
potato. In such circumstances it is nonsense to talk of 'creative work'.
In any case the arts of the hand (which have got to be transmitted by
apprenticeship) would long since have disappeared. Some of them have
disappeared already, under the competition of the machine. Look round
any country churchyard and see whether you can find a decently-cut
tombstone later than 1820. The art, or rather the craft, of stonework
has died out so completely that it would take centuries to revive it.

But it may be said, why not retain the machine and retain 'creative
work'? Why not cultivate anachronisms as a spare-time hobby? Many people
have played with this idea; it seems to solve with such beautiful ease
the problems set by the machine. The citizen of Utopia, we are told,
coming home from his daily two hours of turning a handle in the
tomato-canning factory, will deliberately revert to a more primitive way
of life and solace his creative instincts with a bit of fretwork,
pottery-glazing, or handloom-weaving. And why is this picture an
absurdity--as it is, of course? Because of a principle that is not
always recognized, though always acted upon: that so long as the machine
is _there_, one is under an obligation to use it. No one draws water
from the well when he can turn on the tap. One sees a good illustration
of this in the matter of travel. Everyone who has travelled by primitive
methods in an undeveloped country knows that the difference between that
kind of travel and modern travel in trains, cars, etc., is the
difference between life and death. The nomad who walks or rides, with
his baggage stowed on a camel or an ox-cart, may suffer every kind of
discomfort, but at least he is living while he is travelling; whereas
for the passenger in an express train or a luxury liner his journey is
an interregnum, a kind of temporary death. And yet so long as the
railways exist, one has got to travel by train--or by car or aeroplane.
Here am I, forty miles from London. When I want to go up to London why
do I not pack my luggage on to a mule and set out on foot, making a two
days of it? Because, with the Green Line buses whizzing past me every
ten minutes, such a journey would be intolerably irksome. In order that
one may enjoy primitive methods of travel, it is necessary that no other
method should be available. No human being ever wants to do anything in
a more cumbrous way than is necessary. Hence the absurdity of that
picture of Utopians saving their souls with fretwork. In a world where
every-thing could be done by machinery, everything would be done by
machinery. Deliberately to revert to primitive methods to use archaic
took, to put silly little difficulties in your own way, would be a piece
of dilettantism, of pretty-pretty arty and craftiness. It would be like
solemnly sitting down to eat your dinner with stone implements. Revert
to handwork in a machine age, and you are back in Ye Olde Tea Shoppe or
the Tudor villa with the sham beams tacked to the wall.

The tendency of mechanical progress, then, is to frustrate the human
need for effort and creation. It makes unnecessary and even impossible
the activities of the eye and the hand. The apostle of 'progress' will
sometimes declare that this does not matter, but you can usually drive
him into a comer by pointing out the horrible lengths to which the
process can be carried. Why, for instance, use your hands at all--why
use them even for blowing your nose or sharpening a pencil? Surely you
could fix some kind of steel and rubber contraption to your shoulders
and let your arms wither into stumps of skin and bone? And so with every
organ and every faculty. There is really no reason why a human being
should do more than eat, drink, sleep, breathe, and procreate;
_everything_ else could be done for him by machinery. Therefore the
logical end of mechanical progress is to reduce the human being to
something resembling a brain in a bottle. That is the goal towards which
we are already moving, though, of course, we have no intention of
getting there; just as a man who drinks a bottle of whisky a day does
not actually intend to get cirrhosis of the liver. The implied objective
of 'progress' is--not _exactly_, perhaps, the brain in the bottle, but
at any rate some frightful subhuman depth of softness and helplessness.
And the unfortunate thing is that at present the word 'progress' and the
word 'Socialism' are linked in-separably in almost everyone's mind. The
kind of person who hates machinery also takes it for granted to hate
Socialism; the Socialist is always in favour of mechanization,
rationalization, modernization--or at least thinks that he ought to be
in favour of them. Quite recently, for instance, a prominent I.L.P.'er
confessed to me with a sort of wistful shame--as though it were
something faintly improper--that he was 'fond of horses'. Horses, you
see, belong to the vanished agricultural past, and all sentiment for the
past carries with it a vague smell of heresy. I do not believe that this
need necessarily be so, but undoubtedly it is so. And in itself it is
quite enough to explain the alienation of decent minds from Socialism.

A generation ago every intelligent person was in some sense a
revolutionary; nowadays it would be nearer the mark to say that every
intelligent person is a reactionary. In this connexion it is worth
comparing H. G. Wells's The Sleeper Awakes with Aldous Huxley's _Brave
New World_, written thirty years later. Each is a pessimistic Utopia, a
vision of a sort of prig's paradise in which all the dreams of the
'progressive' person come true. Considered merely as a piece of
imaginative construction _The Sleeper Awakes_ is, I think, much
superior, but it suffers from vast contradictions because of the fact
that Wells, as the arch-priest of 'progress', cannot write with any
conviction against 'progress'. He draws a picture of a glittering,
strangely sinister world in which the privileged classes live a life of
shallow gutless hedonism, and the workers, reduced to a state of utter
slavery and sub-human ignorance, toil like troglodytes in caverns
underground. As soon as one examines this idea--it is further developed
in a splendid short story in _Stories of Space and Time_--one sees its
inconsistency. For in the immensely mechanized world that Wells is
imagining, why should the workers have to work harder than at present?
Obviously the tendency of the machine is to eliminate work, not to
increase it. In the machine-world the workers might be enslaved,
ill-treated, and even under-fed, but they certainly would not be
condemned to ceaseless manual toil; because in that case what would be
the function of the machine? You can have machines doing all the work or
human beings doing all the work, but you can't have both. Those armies
of underground workers, with their blue uniforms and their debased,
half-human language, are only put in 'to make your flesh creep'. Wells
wants to suggest that 'progress' might take a wrong turning; but the
only evil he cares to imagine is inequality--one class grabbing all the
wealth and power and oppressing the others, apparently out of pure
spite. Give it quite a small twist, he seems to suggest, overthrow the
privileged class--change over from world-capitalism to Socialism, in
fact--and all will be well. The machine-civilization is to continue, but
its products are to be shared out equally. The thought he dare not face
is that the machine itself may be the enemy. So in his more
characteristic Utopias (_The Dream_, _Men Like Gods_, etc.), he returns
to optimism and to a vision of humanity, 'liberated' by the machine, as
a race of enlightened sunbathers whose sole topic of conversation is
their own superiority to their ancestors. _Brave New World_ belongs to a
later time and to a generation which has seen through the swindle of
'progress'. It contains its own contradictions (the most important of
them is pointed out in Mr John Strachey's _The Coming Struggle for
Power_), but it is at least a memorable assault on the more fat-bellied
type of perfectionism. Allowing for the exaggerations of caricature, it
probably expresses what a majority of thinking people feel about
machine-civilization.

The sensitive person's hostility to the machine is in one sense
unrealistic, because of the obvious fact that the machine has come to
stay. But as an attitude of mind there is a great deal to be said for
it. The machine has got to be accepted, but it is probably better to
accept it rather as one accepts a drug--that is, grudgingly and
suspiciously. Like a drug, the machine is useful, dangerous, and
habit-forming. The oftener one surrenders to it the tighter its grip
becomes. You have only to look about you at this moment to realize with
what sinister speed the machine is getting us into its power. To begin
with, there is the frightful debauchery of taste that has already been
effected by a century of mechanization. This is almost too obvious and
too generally admitted to need pointing out. But as a single instance,
take taste in its narrowest sense--the taste for decent food. In the
highly mechanized countries, thanks to tinned food, cold storage,
synthetic flavouring matters, etc., the palate is almost a dead organ.
As you can see by looking at any greengrocer's shop, what the majority
of English people mean by an apple is a lump of highly-coloured cotton
wool from America or Australia; they will devour these things,
apparently with pleasure, and let the English apples rot under the
trees. It is the shiny, standardized, machine-made look of the American
apple that appeals to them; the superior taste of the English apple is
something they simply do not notice. Or look at the factory-made,
foil-wrapped cheese and 'blended' butter in any grocer's; look at the
hideous rows of tins which usurp more and more of the space in any
food-shop, even a dairy; look at a sixpenny Swiss roll or a twopenny
ice-cream; look at the filthy chemical by-product that people will pour
down their throats under the name of beer. Wherever you look you will
see some slick machine-made article triumphing over the old-fashioned
article that still tastes of something other than sawdust. And what
applies to food applies also to furniture, houses, clothes, books,
amusements, and everything else that makes up our environment. There are
now millions of people, and they are increasing every year, to whom the
blaring of a radio is not only a more accept-able but a more _normal_
background to their thoughts than the lowing of cattle or the song of
birds. The mechanization of the world could never proceed very far while
taste, even the taste-buds of the tongue, remained uncorrupted, be-cause
in that case most of the products of the machine would be simply
unwanted. In a healthy world there would be no demand for tinned foods,
aspirins, gramophones, gaspipe chairs, machine guns, daily newspapers,
telephones, motor-cars, etc., etc.; and on the other hand there would be
a constant demand for the things the machine cannot produce. But
meanwhile the machine is here, and its corrupting effects are almost
irresistible. One inveighs against it, but one goes on using it. Even a
bare-arse savage, given the chance, will learn the vices of civilization
within a few months. Mechanization leads to the decay of taste, the
decay of taste leads to the demand for machine-made articles and hence
to more mechanization, and so a vicious circle is established.

But in addition to this there is a tendency for the mechanization of the
world to proceed as it were automatically, whether we want it or not.
This is due to the fact that in modern Western man the faculty of
mechanical invention has been fed and stimulated till it has reached
almost the status of an instinct. People invent new machines and improve
existing ones almost unconsciously, rather as a somnambulist will go on
working in his sleep. In the past, when it was taken for granted that
life on this planet is harsh or at any rate laborious, it Seemed the
natural fate to go on using the clumsy implements of your forefathers,
and only a few eccentric persons, centuries apart, proposed innovations;
hence throughout enormous ages such things as the ox-cart, the plough,
the sickle, etc., remained radically unchanged. It is on record that
screws have been in use since remote antiquity and yet that it was not
till the middle of the nineteenth century that anyone thought of making
screws with points on them, for several thousand years they remained
flat-ended and holes had to be drilled for them before they could be
inserted. In our own epoch such a thing would be unthinkable. For almost
every modern Western man has his inventive faculty to some extent
developed; the Western man invents machines as naturally as the
Polynesian islander swims. Give a Western man a job of work and he
immediately begins devising a machine that would do it for him; give him
a machine and he thinks of ways of improving it. I understand this
tendency well enough, for in an ineffectual sort of way I have that type
of mind myself. I have not either the patience or the mechanical skill
to devise any machine that would work, but I am perpetually seeing, as
it were, the ghosts of possible machines that might save me the trouble
of using my brain or muscles. A person with a more definite mechanical
turn would probably construct some of them and put them into operation.
But under our present economic system, whether he constructed them--or
rather, whether anyone else had the benefit of them--would depend upon
whether they were commercially valuable. The Socialists are right,
therefore, when they claim that the rate of mechanical progress will be
much more rapid once Socialism is established. Given a mechanical
civilization the process of invention and improvement will always
continue, but the tendency of capitalism is to slow it down, because
under capitalism any invention which does not promise fairly immediate
profits is neglected; some, indeed, which threaten to reduce profits are
suppressed almost as ruthlessly as the flexible glass mentioned by
Petronius.[For example: Some years ago someone invented a gramophone
needle that would last for decades. One of the big gramophone companies
bought up the patent rights, and that was the last that was ever beard
of it.] Establish Socialism--remove the profit principle--and the
inventor will have a free hand. The mechanization of the world, already
rapid enough, would be or at any rate could be enormously accelerated.

And this prospect is a slightly sinister one, because it is obvious even
now that the process of mechanization is out of control. It is happening
merely because humanity has got the habit. A chemist perfects a new
method of synthesizing rubber, or a mechanic devises a new pattern of
gudgeon-pin. Why? Not for any clearly understood purpose, but simply
from the impulse to invent and improve, which has now become
instinctive. Put a pacifist to work in a bomb-factory and in two months
he will be devising a new type of bomb. Hence the appearance of such
diabolical things as poison gases, which are not expected even by their
inventors to be beneficial to humanity. Our attitude towards such things
as poison gases _ought_ to be the attitude of the king of Brobdingnag
towards gunpowder; but because we live in a mechanical and scientific
age we are infected with the notion that, whatever else happens,
'progress' must continue and knowledge must never be suppressed.
Verbally, no doubt, we would agree that machinery is made for man and
not man for machinery; in practice any attempt to check the development
of the machine appears to us an attack on knowledge and therefore a kind
of blasphemy. And even if the whole of humanity suddenly revolted
against the machine and decided to escape to a simpler way of life, the
escape would still be immensely difficult. It would not do, as in
Butler's _Erewhon_, to smash every machine invented after a certain
date; we should also have to smash the habit of mind that would, almost
involuntarily, devise fresh machines as soon as the old ones were
smashed. And in all of us there is at least a tinge of that habit of
mind. In every country in the world the large army of scientists and
technicians, with the rest of us panting at their heels, are marching
along the road of 'progress' with the blind persistence of a column of
ants. Comparatively few people want it to happen, plenty of people
actively want it not to happen, and yet it is happening. The process of
mechanization has itself become a machine, a huge glittering vehicle
whirling us we are not certain where, but probably towards the padded
Wells-world and the brain in the bottle.

This, then, is the case against the machine. Whether it is a sound or
unsound case hardly matters. The point is that these or very Similar
arguments would be echoed by every person who is hostile to
machine-civilization. And unfortunately, because of that nexus of thought,
'Socialism-progress-machinery-Russia-tractor-hygiene-machinery-progress',
which exists in almost everyone's mind, it is usually the _same_ person
who is hostile to Socialism. The kind of person who hates central
heating and gaspipe chairs is also the kind of person who, when you
mention Socialism, murmurs something about' beehive state' and moves
away with a pained expression. So far as my observation goes, very few
Socialists grasp why this _is_ so, or even that it is so. Get the more
vocal type of Socialist into a comer, repeat to him the substance of
what I have said in this chapter, and see what kind of answer you get.
As a matter of fact you will get several answers; I am so familiar with
them that I know them almost by heart.

In the first place he will tell you that it is impossible to 'go back'
(or to 'put back the hand of progress'--as though the hand of progress
hadn't been pretty violently put back several times in human history!),
and will then accuse you of being a medievalist and begin to descant
upon the horrors of the Middle Ages, leprosy, the Inquisition, etc. As a
matter of fact, most attacks upon the Middle Ages and the past generally
by apologists of modernity are beside the point, because their essential
trick is to project a modern man, with his squeamishness and his high
standards of comfort, into an age when such things were unheard of. But
notice that in any case this is not an answer. For a dislike of the
mechanized future does not imply the smallest reverence for any period
of the past. D. H. Lawrence, wiser than the medievalist, chose to
idealize the Etruscans about whom we know conveniently little. But there
is no need to idealize even the Etruscans or the Pelasgians, or the
Aztecs, or the Sumerians, or any other vanished and romantic people.
When one pictures a desirable civilization, one pictures it merely as an
objective; there is no need to pretend that it has ever existed in space
and time. Press this point home, explain that you wish to aim at making
life simpler and harder instead of softer and more complex, and the
Socialist will usually assume that you want to revert to a 'state of
nature'--meaning some stinking palaeolithic cave: as though there were
nothing between a flint scraper and the steel mills of Sheffield, or
between a skin coracle and the _Queen Mary_.

Finally, however, you will get an answer which is rather more to the
point and which runs roughly as follows: 'Yes, what you are saying is
all very well in its way. No doubt it would be very noble to harden
ourselves and do without aspirins and central heating and so forth. But
the point is, you see, that nobody seriously wants it. It would mean
going back to an agricultural way of life, which means beastly hard work
and isn't at all the same thing as playing at gardening. I don't want
hard work, you don't want hard work--nobody wants it who knows what it
means. You only talk as you do because you've never done a day's work in
your life,' etc., etc.

Now this in a sense is true. It amounts to saying, 'We're soft--for
God's sake let's stay soft!' which at least is realistic. As I have
pointed out already, the machine has got us in its grip and to escape
will be immensely difficult. Nevertheless this answer is really an
evasion, because it fails to make dear what we mean when we say that we
'want' this or that. I am a degenerate modern semi-intellectual who
would die if I did not get my early morning cup of tea and my _New
Statesman_ every Friday. Clearly I do not, in a sense, 'want' to return
to a simpler, harder, probably agricultural way of life. In the same
sense I don't 'want' to cut down my drinking, to pay my debts, to take
enough exercise, to be faithful to my wife, etc., etc. But in another
and more permanent sense I do want these things, and perhaps in the same
sense I want a civilization in which 'progress' is not definable as
making the world safe for little fat men. These that I have outlined are
practically the only arguments that I have been able to get from
Socialists--thinking, book-trained Socialists--when I have tried to
explain to them just _how_ they are driving away possible adherents. Of
course there is also the old argument that Socialism is going to arrive
anyway, whether people like it or not, because of that trouble-saving
thing, 'historic necessity'. But 'historic necessity', or rather the
belief in it, has failed to survive Hitler.

Meanwhile the thinking person, by intellect usually left-wing but by
temperament often right-wing, hovers at the gate of the Socialist fold.
He is no doubt aware that he ought to be a Socialist. But he observes
first the dullness of individual Socialists, then the apparent
flabbiness of Socialist ideals, and veers away. Till quite recently it
was natural to veer towards indifferentism. Ten years ago, even five
years ago, the typical literary gent wrote books on baroque architecture
and had a soul above politics. But that attitude is becoming difficult
and even unfashionable. The times are growing harsher, the issues are
clearer, the belief that nothing, will ever change (i.e. that your
dividends will always be safe) is less prevalent. The fence on which the
literary gent sits, once as comfortable as the plush cushion of a
cathedral stall, is now pinching his bottom intolerably; more and more
he shows a disposition to drop off on one side or the other. It is
interesting to notice how many of our leading writers, who a dozen years
ago were art for art's saking for all they were worth and would have
considered it too vulgar for words even to vote at a general election,
are now taking a definite political standpoint; while most of the
younger writers, at least those of them who are not mere footlers, have
been 'political' from the start. I believe that when the pinch comes
there is a terrible danger that the main movement of the intelligentsia
will be towards Fascism. Just how soon the pinch will come it is
difficult to say; it depends, probably, upon events in Europe; but it
may be that within two years or even a year we shall have reached the
decisive moment. That will also be the moment when every person with any
brains or any decency will know in his bones that he ought to be on the
Socialist side. But he will not necessarily come there of his own
accord; there are too many ancient prejudices standing in the way. He
will have to be persuaded, and by methods that imply an understanding of
his viewpoint. Socialists cannot afford to waste any more time in
preaching to the converted. Their job now is to make Socialists as
rapidly as possible; instead of which, all too often, they are making
Fascists.

When I speak of Fascism in England, I am not necessarily thinking of
Mosley and his pimpled followers. English Fascism, when it arrives, is
likely to be of a sedate and subtle kind (presumably, at any rate at
first, it won't be _called_ Fascism), and it is doubtful whether a
Gilbert and Sullivan heavy dragoon of Mosley's stamp would ever be much
more than a joke to the majority of English people; though even Mosley
will bear watching, for experience shows (_vide_ the careers of Hitler,
Napoleon III) that to a political climber it is sometimes an advantage
not to be taken too seriously at the beginning of his career. But what I
am thinking of at this moment is the Fascist attitude of mind, which
beyond any doubt is gaining ground among people who ought to know
better. Fascism as it appears in the intellectual is a sort of
mirror-image--not actually of Socialism but of a plausible travesty of
Socialism. It boils down to a determination to do the _opposite_ of
whatever the mythical Socialist does. If you present Socialism in a bad
and misleading light--if you let people imagine that it does not mean
much more than pouring European civilization down the sink at the
command of Marxist prigs--you risk driving the intellectual into
Fascism. You frighten him into a sort of angry defensive attitude in
which he simply refuses to listen to the Socialist case. Some such
attitude is already quite clearly discernible in writers like Pound,
Wyndham Lewis, Roy Campbell, etc., in most of the Roman Catholic writers
and many of the Douglas Credit group, in certain popular novelists, and
even, if one looks below the surface, in so-superior conservative
highbrows like Eliot and his countless followers. If you want some
unmistakable illustrations of the growth of Fascist feeling in England,
have a look at some of the innumerable letters that were written to the
Press during the Abyssinian war, approving the Italian action, and also
the howl of glee that went up from both Catholic and Anglican pulpits
(see the _Daily Mail_ of 17 August 1936) over the Fascist rising in
Spain.

In order to combat Fascism it is necessary to understand it, which
involves admitting that it contains some good as well as much evil. In
practice, of course, it is merely an infamous tyranny, and its methods
of attaining and holding power are such that even its most ardent
apologists prefer to talk about something else. But the underlying
feeling of Fascism, the feeling that first draws people into the Fascist
camp, may be less contemptible. It is not _always_, as the _Saturday
Review_ would lead one to suppose, a squealing terror of the Bolshevik
bogey-man. Everyone who has given the movement so much as a glance knows
that the rank-and-file Fascist is often quite a well-meaning
person--quite genuinely anxious, for instance, to better the lot of the
unemployed. But more important than this is the fact that Fascism draws
its strength from the good as well as the bad varieties of conservatism.
To anyone with a feeling for tradition and for discipline it comes with
its appeal ready-made. Probably it is very easy, when you have had a
bellyful of the more tactless kind of Socialist propaganda, to see
Fascism as the last line defence of all that is good in European
civilization. Even the Fascist bully at his symbolic worst, with rubber
truncheon in one hand and castor oil bottle in the other, does not
necessarily feel himself a bully; more probably he feels like Roland in
the pass at Roncevaux, defending Christendom against the barbarian. We
have got to admit that if Fascism is everywhere advancing, this is
largely the fault of Socialists themselves. Partly it is due to the
mistaken Communist tactic of sabotaging democracy, i.e. sawing off the
branch you are sitting on; but still more to the fact that Socialists
have, so to speak, presented their case wrong side foremost. They have
never made it sufficiently clear that the essential aims of Socialism
are justice and liberty. With their eyes glued to economic facts, they
have proceeded on the assumption that man has no soul, and explicitly or
implicitly they have set up the goal of a materialistic Utopia. As a
result Fascism has been able to play upon every instinct that revolts
against hedonism and a cheap conception of 'progress'. It has been able
to pose as the upholder of the European tradition, and to appeal to
Christian belief, to patriotism, and to the military virtues. It is far
worse than useless to write Fascism off as 'mass sadism', or some easy
phrase of that kind. If you pretend that it is merely an aberration
which will presently pass off of its own accord, you are dreaming a
dream from which you will awake when somebody coshes you with a rubber
truncheon. The only possible course is to examine the Fascist case,
grasp that there is something to be said for it, and then make it clear
to the world that whatever good Fascism contains is also implicit in
Socialism.

At present the situation is desperate. Even if nothing worse befalls us,
there are the conditions which I described in the earlier part of this
book and which are not going to improve under our present economic
system. Still more urgent is the danger of Fascist domination in Europe.
And unless Socialist doctrine, in an effective form, can be diffused
widely and very quickly, there is no certainty that Fascism will ever be
overthrown. For Socialism is the only real enemy that Fascism has to
face. The capitalist-imperialist governments, even though they
themselves are about to be plundered, will not fight with any conviction
against Fascism as such. Our rulers, those of them who understand the
issue, would probably prefer to hand over every square inch of the
British Empire to Italy, Germany, and Japan than to see Socialism
triumphant. It was easy to laugh at Fascism when we imagined that it was
based on hysterical nationalism, because it seemed obvious that the
Fascist states, each regarding itself as the chosen people and patriotic
_contra mundum_, would clash with one another. But nothing of the kind
is happening. Fascism is now an international movement, which means not
only that the Fascist nations can combine for purposes of loot, but that
they are groping, perhaps only half consciously as yet, towards a
world-system. For the vision of the totalitarian state there is being
substituted the vision of the totalitarian world. As I pointed out
earlier, the advance of machine-technique must lead ultimately to some
form of collectivism, but that form need not necessarily be
equalitarian; that is, it need not be Socialism. _Pace_ the economists,
it is quite easy to imagine a world-society, economically
collectivist--that is, with the profit principle eliminated--but with
all political, military, and educational power in the hands of a small
caste of rulers and their bravos. That or something like it is the
objective of Fascism. And that, of course, is the slave-state, or rather
the slave-world; it would probably be a stable form of society, and the
chances are, considering the enormous wealth of the world if
scientifically exploited, that the slaves would be well-fed and
contented. It is usual to speak of the Fascist objective as the 'beehive
state', which does a grave injustice to bees. A world of rabbits ruled
by stoats would be nearer the mark. It is against this beastly
possibility that we have got to combine.

The only thing _for_ which we can combine is the underlying ideal of
Socialism; justice and liberty. But it is hardly strong enough to call
this ideal 'underlying'. It is almost completely forgotten. It has been
buried beneath layer after layer of doctrinaire priggishness, party
squabbles, and half-baked 'progressivism' until it is like a diamond
hidden under a mountain of dung. The job of the Socialist is to get it
out again. Justice and liberty! _Those_ are the words that have got to
ring like a bugle across the world. For a long time past, certainly for
the last ten years, the devil has had all the best tunes. We have
reached a stage when the very word 'Socialism' calls up, on the one
hand, a picture of aeroplanes, tractors, and huge glittering factories
of glass and concrete; on the other, a picture of vegetarians with
wilting beards, of Bolshevik commissars (half gangster, half
gramophone), of earnest ladies in sandals, shock-headed Marxists chewing
polysyllables, escaped Quakers, birth-control fanatics, and Labour Party
backstairs-crawlers. Socialism, at least in this island, does not smell
any longer of revolution and the overthrow of tyrants; it smells of
crankishness, machine-worship, and the stupid cult of Russia. Unless you
can remove that smell, and very rapidly, Fascism may win.




13

And finally, is there anything one can do about it?

In the first part of this book I illustrated, by a few brief
sidelights, the kind of mess we are in; in this second part I have been
trying to explain why, in my opinion, so many normal decent people are
repelled by the only remedy, namely by Socialism. Obviously the most urgent
need of the next few years is to capture those normal decent ones before
Fascism plays its trump card. I do not want to raise here the question of
parties and political expedients. More important than any party label
(though doubtless the mere menace of Fascism will presently bring some kind
of Popular Front into existence) is the diffusion of Socialist doctrine in
an effective form. People have got to be made ready to act as Socialists.
There are, I believe, countless people who, without being aware of it, are
in sympathy with the essential aims of Socialism, and who could be won over
almost with-out a struggle if only one could find the word that would move
them. Everyone who knows the meaning of poverty, everyone who has a genuine
hatred of tyranny and war, is on the Socialist side, potentially. My job
here, therefore, is to suggest--necessarily in very general terms--how
a  reconciliation might be effected between Socialism and its more
intelligent enemies.

First, as to the enemies themselves--I mean all those people who
grasp that capitalism is evil but who are conscious of a sort of queasy,
shuddering sensation when Socialism is mentioned. As I have pointed out,
this is traceable to two main causes. One is the personal inferiority of
many individual Socialists; the other is the fact that Socialism is too
often coupled with a fat-bellied, godless conception of 'progress' which
revolts anyone with a feeling for tradition or the rudiments of an
aesthetic sense. Let me take the second point first.

The distaste for 'progress' and machine-civilization which is so common
among sensitive people is only defensible as an attitude of mind. It is
not valid as a reason for rejecting Socialism, because it presupposes an
alternative which does not exist. When you say, 'I object to
mechanization and standardization--therefore I object to Socialism', you
are saying in effect, 'I am free to do without the machine if I choose',
which is nonsense. We are all dependent upon the machine, and if the
machines stopped working most of us would die. You may hate the
machine-civilization, probably you are right to hate it, but for the
present there can be no question of accepting or rejecting it. The
machine-civilization _is here_, and it can only be criticized from the
inside, because all of us are inside it. It is only romantic fools who
natter themselves that they have escaped, like the literary gent in his
Tudor cottage with bathroom h. and c., and the he-man who goes off to
live a 'primitive' life in the jungle with a Mannlicher rifle
and four wagon-loads of tinned food. And almost certainly the
machine-civilization will continue to triumph. There is no reason to
think that it will destroy itself or stop functioning of its own accord.
For some time past it has been fashionable to say that war is presently
going to 'wreck civilization' altogether; but, though the next
full-sized war will certainly be horrible enough to make all previous
ones seem a joke, it is immensely unlikely that it will put a stop to
mechanical progress. It is true that a very vulnerable country like
England, and perhaps the whole of western Europe, could be reduced to
chaos by a few thousand well-placed bombs, but no war is at present
thinkable which could wipe out industrialization in all countries
simultaneously. We may take it that the return to a simpler, free, less
mechanized way of life, however desirable it may be, is not going to
happen. This is not fatalism, it is merely acceptance of facts. It is
meaningless to oppose Socialism on the ground that you object to the
beehive State, for the beehive State _is here_. The choice is not, as
yet, between a human and an inhuman world. It is simply between
Socialism and Fascism, which at its very best is Socialism with the
virtues left out.

The job of the thinking person, therefore, is not to reject Socialism
but to make up his mind to humanize it. Once Socialism is in a way to
being established, those who can see through the swindle of 'progress'
will probably find themselves resisting. In fact, it is their special
function to do so. In the machine-world they have got to be a sort of
permanent opposition, which is not the same thing as being an
obstructionist or a traitor. But in this I am speaking of the future.
For the moment the only possible course for any decent person, however
much of a Tory or an anarchist by temperament, is to work for the
establishment of Socialism. Nothing else can save us from the misery of
the present or the nightmare of the future. To oppose Socialism now,
when twenty million Englishmen are underfed and Fascism has conquered
half Europe, is suicidal. It is like starting a civil war when the Goths
are crossing the frontier.

Therefore it is all the more important to get rid of that mere nervous
prejudice against Socialism which is not founded on any serious
objection. As I have pointed out already, many people who are not
repelled by Socialism are repelled by Socialists. Socialism, as now
presented, is unattractive largely because it appears, at any rate from
the outside, to be the plaything of cranks, doctrinaires, parlour
Bolsheviks, and so forth. But it is worth remembering that this is only
so because the cranks, doctrinaires, etc., have been allowed to get
there first J if the movement were invaded by better brains and more
common decency, the objectionable types would cease to dominate it. For
the present one must just set one's teeth and ignore them; they will
loom much smaller when the movement has been humanized. Besides, they
are irrelevant. We have got to fight for justice and liberty, and
Socialism does mean justice and liberty when the nonsense is stripped
off it. It is only the essentials that are worth remembering. To recoil
from Socialism because so many individual Socialists are inferior people
is as absurd as refusing to travel by train because you dislike the
ticket-collector's face.

And secondly, as to the Socialist himself--more especially the vocal,
tract-writing type of Socialist.

We are at a moment when it is desperately necessary for left-wingers of
all complexions to drop their differences and hang together. Indeed this
is already happening to a small extent. Obviously, then, the more
intransigent kind of Socialist has now got to ally himself with people
who are not in perfect agreement with him. As a rule he is rightly
unwilling to do so, because he sees the very real danger of watering the
whole Socialist movement down to some kind of pale-pink humbug even more
ineffectual than the parliamentary Labour Party. At the moment, for
instance, there is great danger that the Popular Front which Fascism
will presumably bring into existence will not be genuinely Socialist in
character, but will simply be a manoeuvre against German and Italian
(not English) Fascism. Thus the need to unite against Fascism might draw
the Socialist into alliance with his very worst enemies. But the
principle to go upon is this: that you are never in danger of allying
yourself with the wrong people provided that you keep the essentials of
your movement in the foreground. And what are the essentials of
Socialism? What is the mark of a real Socialist? I suggest that the real
Socialist is one who wishes--not merely conceives it as desirable, but
actively wishes--to see tyranny overthrown. But I fancy that the
majority of orthodox Marxists would not accept that definition, or would
only accept it very grudgingly. Sometimes, when I listen to these people
talking, and still more when I read their books, I get the impression
that, to them, the whole Socialist movement is no more than a kind of
exciting heresy-hunt--a leaping to and fro of frenzied witch-doctors to
the beat of tom-toms and the tune of 'Fee fi, fo, fum, I smell the blood
of a right-wing deviationist!' It is because of this kind of thing that
it is so much easier to feel yourself a Socialist when you are among
working-class people. The working-class Socialist, like the
working-class Catholic, is weak on doctrine and can hardly open his
mouth without uttering a heresy, but he has the heart of the matter in
him. He does grasp the central fact that Socialism means the overthrow
of tyranny, and the 'Marseillaise', if it were translated for his
benefit, would appeal to him more deeply than any learned treatise on
dialectical materialism. At this moment it is waste of time to insist
that acceptance of Socialism means acceptance of the philosophic side of
Marxism, plus adulation of Russia. The Socialist movement has not time
to be a league of dialectical materialists; it has got to be a league of
the oppressed against the oppressors. You have got to attract the man
who means business, and you have got to drive away the mealy-mouthed
Liberal who wants foreign Fascism destroyed in order that he may go on
drawing his dividends peacefully--the type of hum-bug who passes
resolutions 'against Fascism and Communism', i.e. against rats and
rat-poison. Socialism means the overthrow of tyranny, at home as well as
abroad. So long as you keep _that_ fact well to the front, you will
never be in much doubt as to who are your real supporters. As for minor
differences--and the profoundest philosophical difference is unimportant
compared with saving the twenty million Englishmen whose bones are
rotting from malnutrition--the time to argue about them is afterwards.

I do not think the Socialist need make any sacrifice of essentials, but
certainly he will have to make a great sacrifice of externals. It would
help enormously, for instance, if the smell of crankishness which still
clings to the Socialist movement could be dispelled. If only the sandals
and the pistachio-coloured shirts could be put in a pile and burnt, and
every vegetarian, teetotaller, and creeping Jesus sent home to Welwyn
Garden City to do his yoga exercises quietly! But that, I am afraid, is
not going to happen. What _is_ possible, however, is for the more
intelligent kind of Socialist to stop alienating possible supporters in
silly and quite irrelevant ways. There are so many minor priggishness
which could so easily be dropped. Take for instance the dreary attitude
of the typical Marxist towards literature. Out of the many that come
into my mind, I will give just one example. It sounds trivial, but it
isn't. In the old _Worker's Weekly_ (one of the forerunners of the
_Daily Worker_) there used to be a column of literary chat of the 'Books
on the Editor's Table' type. For several weeks miming there had been a
certain amount of talk about Shakespeare; whereupon an incensed reader
wrote to say, 'Dear Comrade, we don't want to hear about these bourgeois
writers like Shakespeare. Can't you give us something a bit more
proletarian?' etc., etc. The editor's reply was simple. 'If you will
turn to the index of Marx's _Capital_,' he wrote, 'you will find that
Shakespeare is mentioned several times.' And please notice that this was
enough to silence the objector. Once Shakespeare had received the
benediction of Marx, he became respectable. _That_ is the mentality that
drives ordinary sensible people away from the Socialist movement. You do
not need to care about Shakespeare to be repelled by that kind of thing.
Again, there is the horrible jargon that nearly all Socialists think it
necessary to employ. When the ordinary person hears phrases like
'bourgeois ideology' and 'proletarian solidarity' and 'expropriation of
the expropriators', he is not inspired by them, he is merely disgusted.
Even the single word 'Comrade' has done its dirty little bit towards
discrediting the Socialist movement. How many a waverer has halted on
the brink, gone perhaps to some public meeting and watched
self-conscious Socialists dutifully addressing one another as 'Comrade',
and then slid away, disillusioned, into the nearest four-ale bar! And
his instinct is sound; for where is the sense of sticking on to yourself
a ridiculous label which even after long practice can hardly be
mentioned without a gulp of shame? It is fatal to let the ordinary
inquirer get away with the idea that being a Socialist means wearing
sandals and burbling about dialectical materialism. You have got to make
it clear that there is room in the Socialist movement for human beings,
or the game is up.

And this raises a great difficulty. It means that the issue of class, as
distinct from mere economic status, has got to be faced more
realistically than it is being faced at present.

I devoted three chapters to discussing the class-difficulty. The
principal fact that will have emerged, I think, is that though the
English class-system has outlived its usefulness, it _has_ outlived it
and shows no signs of dying. It greatly confuses the issue to assume, as
the orthodox Marxist so often does (see for instance Mr Alee Brown's in
some ways interesting book. _The Fate of the Middle Classes_), that
social status is determined solely by income. Economically, no doubt,
there are only two classes, the rich and the poor, but socially there is
a whole hierarchy of classes, and the manners and traditions learned by
each class in childhood are not only very different but--this is the
essential point--generally persist from birth to death. 'Hence the
anomalous individuals that you find in every class of society. You find
writers like Wells and Bennett who have grown immensely rich and have
yet preserved intact their lower-middle-class Nonconformist prejudices;
you find millionaires who cannot pronounce their aitches; you find petty
shopkeepers whose income is far lower than that of the bricklayer and
who, nevertheless, consider themselves (and are considered) the
bricklayer's social superiors; you find board-school boys ruling Indian
provinces and public-school men touting vacuum cleaners. If social
stratification corresponded precisely to economic stratification, the
public-school man would assume a cockney accent the day his income
dropped below £200 a year. But does he? On the contrary, he immediately
becomes twenty times more Public School than before. He clings to the
Old School Tie as to a life-line. And even the aitchless millionaire,
though sometimes he goes to an elocutionist and learns a B.B.C. accent,
seldom succeeds in disguising himself as completely as he would like to.
It is in fact very difficult to escape, culturally, from the class into
which you have been born.

As prosperity declines, social anomalies grow commoner. You don't get
more aitchless millionaires, but you do get more and more public-school
men touting vacuum cleaners and more and more small shopkeepers driven
into the workhouse. Large sections of the middle class are being
gradually proletarianized; but the important point is that they do not,
at any rate in the first generation, adopt a proletarian outlook. Here
am I, for instance, with a bourgeois upbringing and a working-class
income. Which class do I belong to? Economically I belong to the working
class, but it is almost impossible for me to think of myself as anything
but a member of the bourgeoisie. And supposing I had to take sides, whom
should I side with, the upper class which is trying to squeeze me out of
existence, or the working class whose manners are not my manners? It is
probable that I personally, in any important issue, would side with the
working class. But what about the tens or hundreds of thousands of
others who are in approximately the same position? And what about that
far larger class, running into millions this time--the office-workers
and black-coated employees of all kinds--whose traditions are less
definitely middle class but who would certainly not thank you if you
called them proletarians? All of these people have the same interests
and the same enemies as the working class. All are being robbed and
bullied by the same system. Yet how many of them realize it? When the
pinch came nearly all of them would side with their oppressors and
against those who ought to be their allies. It is quite easy to imagine
a middle class crushed down to the worst depths of poverty and still
remaining bitterly anti-working-class in sentiment; this being, of
course, a ready-made Fascist Party.

Obviously the Socialist movement has got to capture the exploited middle
class before it is too late; above all it must capture the
office-workers, who are so numerous and, if they knew how to combine, so
powerful. Equally obviously it has so far failed to do so. The very last
person in whom you can hope to find revolutionary opinions is a clerk or
a commercial traveller. Why? Very largely, I think, because of the
'proletarian' cant with which Socialist propaganda is mixed up. In order
to symbolize the class war, there has been set up the more or less
mythical figure of a 'proletarian', a muscular but downtrodden man in
greasy overalls, in contradistinction to a 'capitalist', a fat, wicked
man in a top hat and fur coat. It is tacitly assumed that there is no
one in between; the truth being, of course, that in a country like
England about a quarter of the population is in between. If you are
going to harp on the 'dictatorship of the proletariat', it is an
elementary precaution to start by explaining who the proletariat _are_.
But because of the Socialist tendency to idealize the manual worker as
such, this has never been made sufficiently clear. How many of the
wretched shivering army of clerks and shopwalkers, who in some ways are
actually worse off than a miner or a dock-hand, think of themselves as
proletarians? A proletarian--so they have been taught to think--means a
man without a collar. So that when you try to move them by talking about
'class war', you only succeed in scaring them; they forget their incomes
and remember their accents, and fly to the defence of the class that is
exploiting them.

Socialists have a big job ahead of them here. They have got to
demonstrate, beyond possibility of doubt, just where the line of
cleavage between exploiter and exploited comes. Once again it is a
question of sticking to essentials; and the essential point here is that
all people with small, insecure incomes are in the same boat and ought
to be fighting on the same side. Probably we could do with a little less
talk about' capitalist' and 'proletarian' and a little more about the
robbers and the robbed. But at any rate we must drop that misleading
habit of pretending that the only proletarians are manual labourers. It
has got to be brought home to the clerk, the engineer, the commercial
traveller, the middle-class man who has 'come down in the world', the
village grocer, the lower-grade civil servant, and all other doubtful
cases that they are the proletariat, and that Socialism means a fair
deal for them as well as for the navvy and the factory-hand. They must
not be allowed to think that the battle is between those who pronounce
their aitches and those who don't; for if they think that, they will
join in on the side of the aitches.

I am implying that different classes must be persuaded to act together
without, for the moment, being asked to drop their class-differences.
And that sounds dangerous. It sounds rather too like the Duke of York's
summer camp and that dismal line of talk about class-cooperation and
putting our shoulders to the wheel, which is eyewash or Fascism, or
both. There can be no cooperation between classes whose real interests
are opposed. The capitalist cannot cooperate with the proletarian. The
cat cannot cooperate with the mouse; and if the cat does suggest
cooperation and the mouse is fool enough to agree, in a very little
while the mouse will be disappearing down the cat's throat. But it is
always possible to cooperate so long as it is upon a basis of common
interests. The people who have got to act together are all those who
cringe to the boss and all those who shudder when they think of the
rent. This means that the small-holder has got to ally himself with the
factory-hand, the typist with the coal-miner, the schoolmaster with the
garage mechanic. There is some hope of getting them to do so if they can
be made to understand where their interest lies. But this will not
happen if their social prejudices, which in some of them are at least as
strong as any economic consideration, arc needlessly irritated. There
is, after all, a real difference of manners and traditions between a
bank clerk and a dock labourer, and the bank clerk's feeling of
superiority is very deeply rooted. Later on he will have to get rid of
it, but this is not a good moment for asking him to do so. Therefore it
would be a very great advantage if that rather meaningless and
mechanical bourgeois-baiting, which is a part of nearly all Socialist
propaganda, could be dropped for the time being. Throughout left-wing
thought and writing--and the whole way through it, from the leading
articles in the _Daily Worker_ to the comic columns in the _News
Chronicle_--there runs an anti-genteel tradition, a persistent and often
very stupid gibing at genteel mannerisms and genteel loyalties (or, in
Communist jargon, 'bourgeois values'). It is largely hum-bug, coming as
it does from bourgeois-baiters who are bourgeois themselves, but it does
great harm, because it allows a minor issue to block a major one. It
directs attention away from the central fact that poverty is poverty,
whether the tool you work with is a pick-axe or a fountain-pen.

Once again, here am I, with my middle-class origins and my income of
about three pounds a week from all sources. For what I am worth it would
be better to get me in on the Socialist side than to turn me into a
Fascist. But if you are constantly bullying me about my 'bourgeois
ideology', if you give me to understand that in some subtle way I. am an
inferior person because I have never worked with my hands, you will only
succeed in antagonizing me. For you are telling me either that I am
inherently useless or that I ought to alter myself in some way that is
beyond my power. I cannot proletarianize my accent or certain of my
tastes and beliefs, and I would not if I could. Why should I? I don't
ask anybody else to speak my dialect; why should anybody else ask me to
speak his? It would be far better to take those miserable class-stigmata
for granted and emphasize them as little as possible. They are
comparable to a race-difference, and experience shows that one can
cooperate with foreigners, even with foreigners whom one dislikes, when
it is really necessary. Economically, I am in the same boat with the
miner, the navvy, and the farm-hand; remind me of that and I will fight
at their side. But culturally I am different from the miner, the navvy,
and the farm-hand: lay the emphasis on that and you may arm me against
them. If I were a solitary anomaly I should not matter, but what is true
of myself is true of countless others. Every bank clerk dreaming of the
sack, every shop-keeper teetering on the brink of bankruptcy, is in
essentially the same position. These are the sinking middle class, and
most of them are clinging to their gentility under the impression that
it keeps them afloat. It is not good policy to start by telling them to
throw away the life-belt. There is a quite obvious danger that in the
next few years large sections of the middle class will make a sudden and
violent swing to the Right. In doing so they may become formidable. The
weakness of the middle class hitherto has lain in the fact that they
have never learned to combine; but if you frighten them into combining
_against_ you, you may find that you have raised up a devil. We had a
brief glimpse of this possibility in the General Strike.

To sum up: There is no chance of righting the conditions I described in
the earlier chapters of this book, or of saving England from Fascism,
unless we can bring an effective Socialist party into existence. It will
have to be a party with genuinely revolutionary intentions, and it will
have to be numerically strong enough to act. We can only get it if we
offer an objective which fairly ordinary people will recognize as
desirable. Beyond all else, therefore, we need intelligent propaganda.
Less about 'class consciousness', 'expropriation of the expropriators',
'bourgeois ideology', and 'proletarian solidarity', not to mention the
sacred sisters, thesis, antithesis, and synthesis; and more about
justice, liberty, and the plight of the unemployed. And less about
mechanical progress, tractors, the Dnieper dam, and the latest
salmon-canning factory in Moscow; that kind of thing is not an integral
part of Socialist doctrine, and it drives away many people whom the
Socialist cause needs, including most of those who can hold a pen. All
that is needed is to hammer two facts home into the public
consciousness. One, that the interests of all exploited people are the
same; the other, that Socialism is compatible with common decency.

As for the terribly difficult issue of class-distinctions, the only
possible policy for the moment is to go easy and not frighten more
people than can be helped. And above all, no more of those
muscular-curate efforts at class-breaking. If you belong to the
bourgeoisie, don't be too eager to bound forward and embrace your
proletarian brothers; they may not like it, and if they show that they
don't like it you will probably find that your class-prejudices are not
so dead as you imagined. And if you belong to the proletariat, by birth
or in the sight of God, don't sneer too automatically at the Old School
Tie; it covers loyalties which can be useful to you if you know how to
handle them.

Yet I believe there is some hope that when Socialism is a living issue,
a thing that large numbers of Englishmen genuinely care about, the
class-difficulty may solve itself more rapidly than now seems thinkable.
In the next few years we shall either get that effective Socialist party
that we need, or we shall not get it. If we do not get it, then Fascism
is coming; probably a slimy Anglicized form of Fascism, with cultured
policemen instead of Nazi gorillas and the lion and the unicorn instead
of the swastika. But if we do get it there will be a struggle,
conceivably a physical one, for our plutocracy will not sit quiet under
a genuinely revolutionary government. And when the widely separate
classes who, necessarily, would form any real Socialist party have
fought side by side, they may feel differently about one another. And
then perhaps this misery of class-prejudice will fade away, and we of
the sinking middle class--the private schoolmaster, the half-starved
free-lance journalist, the colonel's spinster daughter with £75 a year,
the jobless Cambridge graduate, the ship's officer without a ship, the
clerks, the civil servants, the commercial travellers, and the
thrice-bankrupt drapers in the country towns--may sink without further
struggles into the working class where we belong, and probably when we
get there it will not be so dreadful as we feared, for, after all, we
have nothing to lose but our aitches.

THE END

Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: Homage to Catalonia (1938)
Author: George Orwell

*

Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou be like unto him.

Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit.

--Proverbs XXVI. 5-6

*

Chapter 1


In the Lenin Barracks in Barcelona, the day before I joined the militia,
I saw an Italian militiaman standing in front of the officers' table.

He was a tough-looking youth of twenty-five or six, with reddish-yellow
hair and powerful shoulders. His peaked leather cap was pulled fiercely
over one eye. He was standing in profile to me, his chin on his breast,
gazing with a puzzled frown at a map which one of the officers had open
on the table. Something in his face deeply moved me. It was the face of
a man who would commit murder and throw away his life for a friend--the
kind of face you would expect in an Anarchist, though as likely as not
he was a Communist. There were both candour and ferocity in it; also the
pathetic reverence that illiterate people have for their supposed
superiors. Obviously he could not make head or tail of the map;
obviously he regarded map-reading as a stupendous intellectual feat. I
hardly know why, but I have seldom seen anyone--any man, I mean--to whom
I have taken such an immediate liking. While they were talking round the
table some remark brought it out that I was a foreigner. The Italian
raised his head and said quickly:

'_Italiano?_'

I answered in my bad Spanish: '_No, Inglés. Y tú?_'

'_Italiano_.'

As we went out he stepped across the room and gripped my hand very hard.
Queer, the affection you can feel for a stranger! It was as though his
spirit and mine had momentarily succeeded in bridging the gulf of
language and tradition and meeting in utter intimacy. I hoped he liked
me as well as I liked him. But I also knew that to retain my first
impression of him I must not see him again; and needless to say I never
did see him again. One was always making contacts of that kind in Spain.

I mention this Italian militiaman because he has stuck vividly in my
memory. With his shabby uniform and fierce pathetic face he typifies for
me the special atmosphere of that time. He is bound up with all my
memories of that period of the war--the red flags in Barcelona, the
gaunt trains full of shabby soldiers creeping to the front, the grey
war-stricken towns farther up the line, the muddy, ice-cold trenches in
the mountains.

This was in late December 1936, less than seven months ago as I write,
and yet it is a period that has already receded into enormous distance.
Later events have obliterated it much more completely than they have
obliterated 1935, or 1905, for that matter. I had come to Spain with
some notion of writing newspaper articles, but I had joined the militia
almost immediately, because at that time and in that atmosphere it
seemed the only conceivable thing to do. The Anarchists were still in
virtual control of Catalonia and the revolution was still in full swing.
To anyone who had been there since the beginning it probably seemed even
in December or January that the revolutionary period was ending; but
when one came straight from England the aspect of Barcelona was
something startling and overwhelming. It was the first time that I had
ever been in a town where the working class was in the saddle.

Practically every building of any size had been seized by the workers
and was draped with red flags or with the red and black flag of the
Anarchists; every wall was scrawled with the hammer and sickle and with
the initials of the revolutionary parties; almost every church had been
gutted and its images burnt. Churches here and there were being
systematically demolished by gangs of workmen. Every shop and café had
an inscription saying that it had been collectivized; even the
bootblacks had been collectivized and their boxes painted red and black.
Waiters and shop-walkers looked you in the face and treated you as an
equal. Servile and even ceremonial forms of speech had temporarily
disappeared. Nobody said '_Señor_' or '_Don_' or even '_Usted_'; everyone
called everyone else '_Comrade_' and '_Thou_', and said '_Salud!_' instead
of '_Buenos días_'. Tipping was forbidden by law since the time of Primo
de Rivera; almost my first experience was receiving a lecture from a hotel
manager for trying to tip a lift-boy. There were no private motor-cars,
they had all been commandeered, and all the trams and taxis and much of
the other transport were painted red and black. The revolutionary
posters were everywhere, flaming from the walls in clean reds and blues
that made the few remaining advertisements look like daubs of mud. Down
the Ramblas, the wide central artery of the town where crowds of people
streamed constantly to and fro, the loudspeakers were bellowing
revolutionary songs all day and far into the night. And it was the
aspect of the crowds that was the queerest thing of all. In outward
appearance it was a town in which the wealthy classes had practically
ceased to exist. Except for a small number of women and foreigners there
were no 'well-dressed' people at all. Practically everyone wore rough
working-class clothes, or blue overalls, or some variant of the militia
uniform. All this was queer and moving. There was much in it that I did
not understand, in some ways I did not even like it, but I recognized it
immediately as a state of affairs worth fighting for. Also I believed
that things were as they appeared, that this was really a workers' State
and that the entire bourgeoisie had either fled, been killed, or
voluntarily come over to the workers' side; I did not realize that great
numbers of well-to-do bourgeois were simply lying low and disguising
themselves as proletarians for the time being.

Together with all this there was something of the evil atmosphere of
war. The town had a gaunt untidy look, roads and buildings were in poor
repair, the streets at night were dimly lit for fear of air-raids, the
shops were mostly shabby and half-empty. Meat was scarce and milk
practically unobtainable, there was a shortage of coal, sugar, and
petrol, and a really serious shortage of bread. Even at this period the
bread-queues were often hundreds of yards long. Yet so far as one could
judge the people were contented and hopeful. There was no unemployment,
and the price of living was still extremely low; you saw very few
conspicuously destitute people, and no beggars except the gipsies. Above
all, there was a belief in the revolution and the future, a feeling of
having suddenly emerged into an era of equality and freedom. Human
beings were trying to behave as human beings and not as cogs in the
capitalist machine. In the barbers' shops were Anarchist notices (the
barbers were mostly Anarchists) solemnly explaining that barbers were no
longer slaves. In the streets were coloured posters appealing to
prostitutes to stop being prostitutes. To anyone from the hard-boiled,
sneering civilization of the English-speaking races there was something
rather pathetic in the literalness with which these idealistic Spaniards
took the hackneyed phrases of revolution. At that time revolutionary
ballads of the naivest kind, all about proletarian brotherhood and the
wickedness of Mussolini, were being sold on the streets for a few
centimes each. I have often seen an illiterate militiaman buy one of
these ballads, laboriously spell out the words, and then, when he had
got the hang of it, begin singing it to an appropriate tune.

All this time I was at the Lenin Barracks, ostensibly in training for
the front. When I joined the militia I had been told that I should be
sent to the front the next day, but in fact I had to wait while a fresh
_centuria_ was got ready. The workers' militias, hurriedly raised by the
trade unions at the beginning of the war, had not yet been organized on
an ordinary army basis. The units of command were the 'section', of
about thirty men, the _centuria_, of about a hundred men, and the
'column', which in practice meant any large number of men. The Lenin
Barracks was a block of splendid stone buildings with a riding-school
and enormous cobbled courtyards; it had been a cavalry barracks and had
been captured during the July fighting. My _centuria_ slept in one of the
stables, under the stone mangers where the names of the cavalry chargers
were still inscribed. All the horses had been seized and sent to the
front, but the whole place still smelt of horse-piss and rotten oats. I
was at the barracks about a week. Chiefly I remember the horsy smells,
the quavering bugle-calls (all our buglers were amateurs--I first
learned the Spanish bugle-calls by listening to them outside the Fascist
lines), the tramp-tramp of hobnailed boots in the barrack yard, the long
morning parades in the wintry sunshine, the wild games of football,
fifty a side, in the gravelled riding-school. There were perhaps a
thousand men at the barracks, and a score or so of women, apart from the
militiamen's wives who did the cooking. There were still women serving
in the militias, though not very many. In the early battles they had
fought side by side with the men as a matter of course. It is a thing
that seems natural in time of revolution. Ideas were changing already,
however. The militiamen had to be kept out of the riding-school while
the women were drilling there because they laughed at the women and put
them off. A few months earlier no one would have seen anything comic in
a woman handling a gun.

The whole barracks was in the state of filth and chaos to which the
militia reduced every building they occupied and which seems to be one
of the by-products of revolution. In every corner you came upon piles of
smashed furniture, broken saddles, brass cavalry-helmets, empty
sabre-scabbards, and decaying food. There was frightful wastage of food,
especially bread. From my barrack-room alone a basketful of bread was
thrown away at every meal--a disgraceful thing when the civilian
population was short of it. We ate at long trestle-tables out of
permanently greasy tin pannikins, and drank out of a dreadful thing
called a _porrón_. A _porrón_ is a sort of glass bottle with a pointed
spout from which a thin jet of wine spurts out whenever you tip it up;
you can thus drink from a distance, without touching it with your lips,
and it can be passed from hand to hand. I went on strike and demanded a
drinking-cup as soon as I saw a _porrón_ in use. To my eye the things
were altogether too like bed-bottles, especially when they were filled
with white wine.

By degrees they were issuing the recruits with uniforms, and because
this was Spain everything was issued piecemeal, so that it was never
quite certain who had received what, and various of the things we most
needed, such as belts and cartridge-boxes, were not issued till the last
moment, when the train was actually waiting to take us to the front. I
have spoken of the militia 'uniform', which probably gives a wrong
impression. It was not exactly a uniform. Perhaps a 'multiform' would be
the proper name for it. Everyone's clothes followed the same general
plan, but they were never quite the same in any two cases. Practically
everyone in the army wore corduroy knee-breeches, but there the
uniformity ended. Some wore puttees, others corduroy gaiters, others
leather leggings or high boots. Everyone wore a zipper jacket, but some
of the jackets were of leather, others of wool and of every conceivable
colour. The kinds of cap were about as numerous as their wearers. It was
usual to adorn the front of your cap with a party badge, and in addition
nearly every man wore a red or red and black handkerchief round his
throat. A militia column at that time was an extraordinary-looking
rabble. But the clothes had to be issued as this or that factory rushed
them out, and they were not bad clothes considering the circumstances.
The shirts and socks were wretched cotton things, however, quite useless
against cold. I hate to think of what the militiamen must have gone
through in the earlier months before anything was organized. I remember
coming upon a newspaper of only about two months earlier in which one of
the P.O.U.M. leaders, after a visit to the front, said that he would try
to see to it that 'every militiaman had a blanket'. A phrase to make you
shudder if you have ever slept in a trench.

On my second day at the barracks there began what was comically called
'instruction'. At the beginning there were frightful scenes of chaos.
The recruits were mostly boys of sixteen or seventeen from the back
streets of Barcelona, full of revolutionary ardour but completely
ignorant of the meaning of war. It was impossible even to get them to
stand in line. Discipline did not exist; if a man disliked an order he
would step out of the ranks and argue fiercely with the officer. The
lieutenant who instructed us was a stout, fresh-faced, pleasant young
man who had previously been a Regular Army officer, and still looked
like one, with his smart carriage and spick-and-span uniform. Curiously
enough he was a sincere and ardent Socialist. Even more than the men
themselves he insisted upon complete social equality between all ranks.
I remember his pained surprise when an ignorant recruit addressed him as
'_Señor_'. 'What! _Señor_? Who is that calling me _Señor_? Are we not all
comrades?' I doubt whether it made his job any easier. Meanwhile the raw
recruits were getting no military training that could be of the
slightest use to them. I had been told that foreigners were not obliged
to attend 'instruction' (the Spaniards, I noticed, had a pathetic belief
that all foreigners knew more of military matters than themselves), but
naturally I turned out with the others. I was very anxious to learn how
to use a machine-gun; it was a weapon I had never had a chance to
handle. To my dismay I found that we were taught nothing about the use
of weapons. The so-called instruction was simply parade-ground drill of
the most antiquated, stupid kind; right turn, left turn, about turn,
marching at attention in column of threes and all the rest of that
useless nonsense which I had learned when I was fifteen years old. It
was an extraordinary form for the training of a guerilla army to take.
Obviously if you have only a few days in which to train a soldier, you
must teach him the things he will most need; how to take cover, how to
advance across open ground, how to mount guards and build a
parapet--above all, how to use his weapons. Yet this mob of eager
children, who were going to be thrown into the front line in a few days'
time, were not even taught how to fire a rifle or pull the pin out of a
bomb. At the time I did not grasp that this was because there were no
weapons to be had. In the P.O.U.M. militia the shortage of rifles was so
desperate that fresh troops reaching the front always had to take their
rifles from the troops they relieved in the line. In the whole of the
Lenin Barracks there were, I believe, no rifles except those used by the
sentries.

After a few days, though still a complete rabble by any ordinary
standard, we were considered fit to be seen in public, and in the
mornings we were marched out to the public gardens on the hill beyond
the Plaza de España. This was the common drill-ground of all the party
militias, besides the Carabineros and the first contingents of the newly
formed Popular Army. Up in the public gardens it was a strange and
heartening sight. Down every path and alley-way, amid the formal
flower-beds, squads and companies of men marched stiffly to and fro,
throwing out their chests and trying desperately to look like soldiers.
All of them were unarmed and none completely in uniform, though on most
of them the militia uniform was breaking out in patches here and there.
The procedure was always very much the same. For three hours we strutted
to and fro (the Spanish marching step is very short and rapid), then we
halted, broke the ranks, and flocked thirstily to a little grocer's shop
which was half-way down the hill and was doing a roaring trade in cheap
wine. Everyone was very friendly to me. As an Englishman I was something
of a curiosity, and the Carabinero officers made much of me and stood me
drinks. Meanwhile, whenever I could get our lieutenant into a corner, I
was clamouring to be instructed in the use of a machine-gun. I used to
drag my Hugo's dictionary out of my pocket and start on him in my
villainous Spanish:

'_Yo sé manejar fusil. No sé manejar ametralladora. Quiero apprender
ametralladora. Quándo vamos apprender ametralladora?_'

The answer was always a harassed smile and a promise that there should
be machine-gun instruction _mañana_. Needless to say _mañana_ never
came. Several days passed and the recruits learned to march in step and
spring to attention almost smartly, but if they knew which end of a
rifle the bullet came out of, that was all they knew. One day an armed
Carabinero strolled up to us when we were halting and allowed us to
examine his rifle. It turned out that in the whole of my section no one
except myself even knew how to load the rifle, much less how to take
aim.

All this time I was having the usual struggles with the Spanish
language. Apart from myself there was only one Englishman at the
barracks, and nobody even among the officers spoke a word of
French. Things were not made easier for me by the fact that when my
companions spoke to one another they generally spoke in Catalan. The
only way I could get along was to carry everywhere a small dictionary
which I whipped out of my pocket in moments of crisis. But I would
sooner be a foreigner in Spain than in most countries. How easy it is to
make friends in Spain! Within a day or two there was a score of
militiamen who called me by my Christian name, showed me the ropes, and
overwhelmed me with hospitality. I am not writing a book of propaganda
and I do not want to idealize the P.O.U.M. militia. The whole
militia-system had serious faults, and the men themselves were a mixed
lot, for by this time voluntary recruitment was falling off and many of
the best men were already at the front or dead. There was always among
us a certain percentage who were completely useless. Boys of fifteen
were being brought up for enlistment by their parents, quite openly for
the sake of the ten pesetas a day which was the militiaman's wage; also
for the sake of the bread which the militia received in plenty and could
smuggle home to their parents. But I defy anyone to be thrown as I was
among the Spanish working class--I ought perhaps to say the Catalan
working class, for apart from a few Aragónese and Andalusians I mixed
only with Catalans--and not be struck by their essential decency; above
all, their straightforwardness and generosity. A Spaniard's generosity,
in the ordinary sense of the word, is at times almost embarrassing. If
you ask him for a cigarette he will force the whole packet upon you. And
beyond this there is generosity in a deeper sense, a real largeness of
spirit, which I have met with again and again in the most unpromising
circumstances. Some of the journalists and other foreigners who
travelled in Spain during the war have declared that in secret the
Spaniards were bitterly jealous of foreign aid. All I can say is that I
never observed anything of the kind. I remember that a few days before I
left the barracks a group of men returned on leave from the front. They
were talking excitedly about their experiences and were full of
enthusiasm for some French troops who had been next to them at Huesca.
The French were very brave, they said; adding enthusiastically: '_Más
valientes que nosotros_'--'Braver than we are!' Of course I demurred,
whereupon they explained that the French knew more of the art of
war--were more expert with bombs, machine-guns, and so forth. Yet the
remark was significant. An Englishman would cut his hand off sooner than
say a thing like that.

Every foreigner who served in the militia spent his first few weeks in
learning to love the Spaniards and in being exasperated by certain of
their characteristics. In the front line my own exasperation sometimes
reached the pitch of fury. The Spaniards are good at many things, but
not at making war. All foreigners alike are appalled by their
inefficiency, above all their maddening unpunctuality. The one Spanish
word that no foreigner can avoid learning is _mañana_--'tomorrow'
(literally, 'the morning'). Whenever it is conceivably possible, the
business of today is put off until _mañana_. This is so notorious that
even the Spaniards themselves make jokes about it. In Spain nothing,
from a meal to a battle, ever happens at the appointed time. As a
general rule things happen too late, but just occasionally--just so that
you shan't even be able to depend on their happening late--they happen
too early. A train which is due to leave at eight will normally leave at
any time between nine and ten, but perhaps once a week, thanks to some
private whim of the engine-driver, it leaves at half past seven. Such
things can be a little trying. In theory I rather admire the Spaniards
for not sharing our Northern time-neurosis; but unfortunately I share it
myself.

After endless rumours, _mañanas_, and delays we were suddenly ordered
to the front at two hours' notice, when much of our equipment was still
unissued. There were terrible tumults in the quartermaster's store; in
the end numbers of men had to leave without their full equipment. The
barracks had promptly filled with women who seemed to have sprung up
from the ground and were helping their men-folk to roll their blankets
and pack their kit-bags. It was rather humiliating that I had to be
shown how to put on my new leather cartridge-boxes by a Spanish girl,
the wife of Williams, the other English militiaman. She was a gentle,
dark-eyed, intensely feminine creature who looked as though her
life-work was to rock a cradle, but who as a matter of fact had fought
bravely in the street-battles of July. At this time she was carrying a
baby which was born just ten months after the outbreak of war and had
perhaps been begotten behind a barricade.

The train was due to leave at eight, and it was about ten past eight
when the harassed, sweating officers managed to marshal us in the
barrack square. I remember very vividly the torchlit scene--the uproar
and excitement, the red flags flapping in the torchlight, the massed
ranks of militiamen with their knapsacks on their backs and their rolled
blankets worn bandolier-wise across the shoulder; and the shouting and
the clatter of boots and tin pannikins, and then a tremendous and
finally successful hissing for silence; and then some political
commissar standing beneath a huge rolling red banner and making us a
speech in Catalan. Finally they marched us to the station, taking the
longest route, three or four miles, so as to show us to the whole town.
In the Ramblas they halted us while a borrowed band played some
revolutionary tune or other. Once again the conquering-hero
stuff--shouting and enthusiasm, red flags and red and black flags
everywhere, friendly crowds thronging the pavement to have a look at us,
women waving from the windows. How natural it all seemed then; how
remote and improbable now! The train was packed so tight with men that
there was barely room even on the floor, let alone on the seats. At the
last moment Williams's wife came rushing down the platform and gave us a
bottle of wine and a foot of that bright red sausage which tastes of
soap and gives you diarrhoea. The train crawled out of Catalonia and on
to the plateau of Aragón at the normal wartime speed of something under
twenty kilometres an hour.



Chapter 2


Barbastro, though a long way from the front line, looked bleak and
chipped. Swarms of militiamen in shabby uniforms wandered up and down
the streets, trying to keep warm. On a ruinous wall I came upon a poster
dating from the previous year and announcing that 'six handsome bulls'
would be killed in the arena on such and such a date. How forlorn its
faded colours looked! Where were the handsome bulls and the handsome
bull-fighters now? It appeared that even in Barcelona there were hardly
any bullfights nowadays; for some reason all the best matadors were
Fascists.

They sent my company by lorry to Sietamo, then westward to Alcubierre,
which was just behind the line fronting Zaragoza. Sietamo had been
fought over three times before the Anarchists finally took it in
October, and parts of it were smashed to pieces by shell-fire and most
of the houses pockmarked by rifle-bullets. We were 1500 feet above
sea-level now. It was beastly cold, with dense mists that came swirling
up from nowhere. Between Sietamo and Alcubierre the lorry-driver lost
his way (this was one of the regular features of the war) and we were
wandering for hours in the mist. It was late at night when we reached
Alcubierre. Somebody shepherded us through morasses of mud into a
mule-stable where we dug ourselves down into the chaff and promptly fell
asleep. Chaff is not bad to sleep in when it is clean, not so good as
hay but better than straw. It was only in the morning light that I
discovered that the chaff was full of breadcrusts, torn newspapers,
bones, dead rats, and jagged milk tins.

We were near the front line now, near enough to smell the characteristic
smell of war--in my experience a smell of excrement and decaying food.
Alcubierre had never been shelled and was in a better state than most of
the villages immediately behind the line. Yet I believe that even in
peacetime you could not travel in that part of Spain without being
struck by the peculiar squalid misery of the Aragónese villages. They
are built like fortresses, a mass of mean little houses of mud and stone
huddling round the church, and even in spring you see hardly a flower
anywhere; the houses have no gardens, only back-yards where ragged fowls
skate over the beds of mule-dung. It was vile weather, with alternate
mist and rain. The narrow earth roads had been churned into a sea of
mud, in places two feet deep, through which the lorries struggled with
racing wheels and the peasants led their clumsy carts which were pulled
by strings of mules, sometimes as many as six in a string, always
pulling tandem. The constant come-and-go of troops had reduced the
village to a state of unspeakable filth. It did not possess and never
had possessed such a thing as a lavatory or a drain of any kind, and
there was not a square yard anywhere where you could tread without
watching your step. The church had long been used as a latrine; so had
all the fields for a quarter of a mile round. I never think of my first
two months at war without thinking of wintry stubble fields whose edges
are crusted with dung.

Two days passed and no rifles were issued to us. When you had been to
the Comite de Guerra and inspected the row of holes in the wall-holes
made by rifle-volleys, various Fascists having been executed there--you
had seen all the sights that Alcubierre contained. Up in the front line
things were obviously quiet; very few wounded were coming in. The chief
excitement was the arrival of Fascist deserters, who were brought under
guard from the front line. Many of the troops opposite us on this part
of the line were not Fascists at all, merely wretched conscripts who had
been doing their military service at the time when war broke out and
were only too anxious to escape. Occasionally small batches of them took
the risk of slipping across to our lines. No doubt more would have done
so if their relatives had not been in Fascist territory. These deserters
were the first 'real' Fascists I had ever seen. It struck me that they
were indistinguishable from ourselves, except that they wore khaki
overalls. They were always ravenously hungry when they arrived--natural
enough after a day or two of dodging about in no man's land, but it was
always triumphantly pointed to as a proof that the Fascist troops were
starving. I watched one of them being fed in a peasant's house. It was
somehow rather a pitiful sight. A tall boy of twenty, deeply windburnt,
with his clothes in rags, crouched over the fire shovelling a
pannikinful of stew into himself at desperate speed; and all the while
his eyes flitted nervously round the ring of militiamen who stood
watching him. I think he still half-believed that we were bloodthirsty
'Reds' and were going to shoot him as soon as he had finished his meal;
the armed man who guarded him kept stroking his shoulder and making
reassuring noises. On one memorable day fifteen deserters arrived in a
single batch. They were led through the village in triumph with a man
riding in front of them on a white horse. I managed to take a rather
blurry photograph which was stolen from me later.

On our third morning in Alcubierre the rifles arrived. A sergeant with a
coarse dark-yellow face was handing them out in the mule-stable. I got a
shock of dismay when I saw the thing they gave me. It was a German
Mauser dated 1896--more than forty years old! It was rusty, the bolt was
stiff, the wooden barrel-guard was split; one glance down the muzzle
showed that it was corroded and past praying for. Most of the rifles
were equally bad, some of them even worse, and no attempt was made to
give the best weapons to the men who knew how to use them. The best
rifle of the lot, only ten years old, was given to a half-witted little
beast of fifteen, known to everyone as the _maricón_ (Nancy-boy). The
sergeant gave us five minutes' 'instruction', which consisted in
explaining how you loaded a rifle and how you took the bolt to pieces.
Many of the militiamen had never had a gun in their hands before, and
very few, I imagine, knew what the sights were for. Cartridges were
handed out, fifty to a man, and then the ranks were formed and we
strapped our kits on our backs and set out for the front line, about
three miles away.

The _centuria_, eighty men and several dogs, wound raggedly up the road.
Every militia column had at least one dog attached to it as a mascot.
One wretched brute that marched with us had had P.O.U.M. branded on it
in huge letters and slunk along as though conscious that there was
something wrong with its appearance. At the head of the column, beside
the red flag, Georges Kopp, the stout Belgian _commandante_, was riding a
black horse; a little way ahead a youth from the brigand-like militia
cavalry pranced to and fro, galloping up every piece of rising ground
and posing himself in picturesque attitudes at the summit. The splendid
horses of the Spanish cavalry had been captured in large numbers during
the revolution and handed over to the militia, who, of course, were busy
riding them to death.

The road wound between yellow infertile fields, untouched since last
year's harvest. Ahead of us was the low sierra that lies between
Alcubierre and Zaragoza. We were getting near the front line now, near
the bombs, the machine-guns, and the mud. In secret I was frightened. I
knew the line was quiet at present, but unlike most of the men about me
I was old enough to remember the Great War, though not old enough to
have fought in it. War, to me, meant roaring projectiles and skipping
shards of steel; above all it meant mud, lice, hunger, and cold. It is
curious, but I dreaded the cold much more than I dreaded the enemy. The
thought of it had been haunting me all the time I was in Barcelona; I
had even lain awake at nights thinking of the cold in the trenches, the
stand-to's in the grisly dawns, the long hours on sentry-go with a
frosted rifle, the icy mud that would slop over my boot-tops. I admit,
too, that I felt a kind of horror as I looked at the people I was
marching among. You cannot possibly conceive what a rabble we looked. We
straggled along with far less cohesion than a flock of sheep; before we
had gone two miles the rear of the column was out of sight. And quite
half of the so-called men were children--but I mean literally children,
of sixteen years old at the very most. Yet they were all happy and
excited at the prospect of getting to the front at last. As we neared
the line the boys round the red flag in front began to utter shouts of
'_Visca P.O.U.M.!_' '_Fascistas--maricones_!' and so forth--shouts which
were meant to be war-like and menacing, but which, from those childish
throats, sounded as pathetic as the cries of kittens. It seemed dreadful
that the defenders of the Republic should be this mob of ragged children
carrying worn-out rifles which they did not know how to use. I remember
wondering what would happen if a Fascist aeroplane passed our way
whether the airman would even bother to dive down and give us a burst
from his machine-gun. Surely even from the air he could see that we were
not real soldiers?

As the road struck into the sierra we branched off to the right and
climbed a narrow mule-track that wound round the mountain-side. The
hills in that part of Spain are of a queer formation, horseshoe-shaped
with flattish tops and very steep sides running down into immense
ravines. On the higher slopes nothing grows except stunted shrubs and
heath, with the white bones of the limestone sticking out everywhere. The
front line here was not a continuous line of trenches, which would have
been impossible in such mountainous country; it was simply a chain of
fortified posts, always known as 'positions', perched on each hill-top.
In the distance you could see our 'position' at the crown of the
horseshoe; a ragged barricade of sand-bags, a red flag fluttering, the
smoke of dug-out fires. A little nearer, and you could smell a sickening
sweetish stink that lived in my nostrils for weeks afterwards. Into the
cleft immediately behind the position all the refuse of months had been
tipped--a deep festering bed of breadcrusts, excrement, and rusty tins.

The company we were relieving were getting their kits together. They had
been three months in the line; their uniforms were caked with mud, their
boots falling to pieces, their faces mostly bearded. The captain
commanding the position, Levinski by name, but known to everyone as
Benjamin, and by birth a Polish Jew, but speaking French as his native
language, crawled out of his dug-out and greeted us. He was a short
youth of about twenty-five, with stiff black hair and a pale eager face
which at this period of the war was always very dirty. A few stray
bullets were cracking high overhead. The position was a semi-circular
enclosure about fifty yards across, with a parapet that was partly
sand-bags and partly lumps of limestone. There were thirty or forty
dug-outs running into the ground like rat-holes. Williams, myself, and
Williams's Spanish brother-in-law made a swift dive for the nearest
unoccupied dug-out that looked habitable. Somewhere in front an
occasional rifle banged, making queer rolling echoes among the stony
hills. We had just dumped our kits and were crawling out of the dug-out
when there was another bang and one of the children of our company
rushed back from the parapet with his face pouring blood. He had fired
his rifle and had somehow managed to blow out the bolt; his scalp was
torn to ribbons by the splinters of the burst cartridge-case. It was our
first casualty, and, characteristically, self-inflicted.

In the afternoon we did our first guard and Benjamin showed us round the
position. In front of the parapet there ran a system of narrow trenches
hewn out of the rock, with extremely primitive loopholes made of piles
of limestone. There were twelve sentries, placed at various points in
the trench and behind the inner parapet. In front of the trench was the
barbed wire, and then the hillside slid down into a seemingly bottomless
ravine; opposite were naked hills, in places mere cliffs of rock, all
grey and wintry, with no life anywhere, not even a bird. I peered
cautiously through a loophole, trying to find the Fascist trench.

'Where are the enemy?'

Benjamin waved his hand expansively. 'Over zere.' (Benjamin spoke
English--terrible English.)

'But _where?_'

According to my ideas of trench warfare the Fascists would be fifty or a
hundred yards away. I could see nothing--seemingly their trenches were
very well concealed. Then with a shock of dismay I saw where Benjamin
was pointing; on the opposite hill-top, beyond the ravine, seven hundred
metres away at the very least, the tiny outline of a parapet and a
red-and-yellow flag--the Fascist position. I was indescribably
disappointed. We were nowhere near them! At that range our rifles were
completely useless. But at this moment there was a shout of excitement.
Two Fascists, greyish figurines in the distance, were scrambling up the
naked hill-side opposite. Benjamin grabbed the nearest man's rifle, took
aim, and pulled the trigger. Click! A dud cartridge; I thought it a bad
omen.

The new sentries were no sooner in the trench than they began firing a
terrific fusillade at nothing in particular. I could see the Fascists,
tiny as ants, dodging to and fro behind their parapet, and sometimes a
black dot which was a head would pause for a moment, impudently exposed.
It was obviously no use firing. But presently the sentry on my left,
leaving his post in the typical Spanish fashion, sidled up to me and
began urging me to fire. I tried to explain that at that range and with
these rifles you could not hit a man except by accident. But he was only
a child, and he kept motioning with his rifle towards one of the dots,
grinning as eagerly as a dog that expects a pebble to be thrown. Finally
I put my sights up to seven hundred and let fly. The dot disappeared.
I hope it went near enough to make him jump. It was the first time in
my life that I had fired a gun at a human being.

Now that I had seen the front I was profoundly disgusted. They called
this war! And we were hardly even in touch with the enemy! I made no
attempt to keep my head below the level of the trench. A little while
later, however, a bullet shot past my ear with a vicious crack and
banged into the parados behind. Alas! I ducked. All my life I had sworn
that I would not duck the first time a bullet passed over me; but the
movement appears to be instinctive, and almost everybody does it at
least once.



Chapter 3


In trench warfare five things are important: firewood, food, tobacco,
candles, and the enemy. In winter on the Zaragoza front they were
important in that order, with the enemy a bad last. Except at night,
when a surprise-attack was always conceivable, nobody bothered about the
enemy. They were simply remote black insects whom one occasionally saw
hopping to and fro. The real preoccupation of both armies was trying to
keep warm.

I ought to say in passing that all the time I was in Spain I saw very
little fighting. I was on the Aragón front from January to May, and
between January and late March little or nothing happened on that front,
except at Teruel. In March there was heavy fighting round Huesca, but I
personally played only a minor part in it. Later, in June, there was the
disastrous attack on Huesca in which several thousand men were killed in
a single day, but I had been wounded and disabled before that happened.
The things that one normally thinks of as the horrors of war seldom
happened to me. No aeroplane ever dropped a bomb anywhere near me, I do
not think a shell ever exploded within fifty yards of me, and I was only
in hand-to-hand fighting once (once is once too often, I may say). Of
course I was often under heavy machine-gun fire, but usually at longish
ranges. Even at Huesca you were generally safe enough if you took
reasonable precautions.

Up here, in the hills round Zaragoza, it was simply the mingled boredom
and discomfort of stationary warfare. A life as uneventful as a city
clerk's, and almost as regular. Sentry-go, patrols, digging; digging,
patrols, sentry-go. On every hill-top, Fascist or Loyalist, a knot of
ragged, dirty men shivering round their flag and trying to keep warm.
And all day and night the meaningless bullets wandering across the empty
valleys and only by some rare improbable chance getting home on a human
body.

Often I used to gaze round the wintry landscape and marvel at the
futility of it all. The inconclusiveness of such a kind of war! Earlier,
about October, there had been savage fighting for all these hills; then,
because the lack of men and arms, especially artillery, made any
large-scale operation impossible, each army had dug itself in and
settled down on the hill-tops it had won. Over to our right there was a
small outpost, also P.O.U.M., and on the spur to our left, at seven
o'clock of us, a P.S.U.C. position faced a taller spur with several
small Fascist posts dotted on its peaks. The so-called line zigzagged to
and fro in a pattern that would have been quite unintelligible if every
position had not flown a flag. The P.O.U.M. and P.S.U.C. flags were red,
those of the Anarchists red and black; the Fascists generally flew the
monarchist flag (red-yellow-red), but occasionally they flew the flag
of the Republic (red-yellow-purple).* The scenery was stupendous,
if you could forget that every mountain-top was occupied by troops and
was therefore littered with tin cans and crusted with dung. To the right
of us the sierra bent south-eastwards and made way for the wide, veined
valley that stretched across to Huesca. In the middle of the plain a few
tiny cubes sprawled like a throw of dice; this was the town of Robres,
which was in Loyalist possession. Often in the mornings the valley was
hidden under seas of cloud, out of which the hills rose flat and blue,
giving the landscape a strange resemblance to a photographic negative.
Beyond Huesca there were more hills of the same formation as our own,
streaked with a pattern of snow which altered day by day. In the far
distance the monstrous peaks of the Pyrenees, where the snow never
melts, seemed to float upon nothing. Even down in the plain everything
looked dead and bare. The hills opposite us were grey and wrinkled like
the skins of elephants. Almost always the sky was empty of birds. I do
not think I have ever seen a country where there were so few birds. The
only birds one saw at any time were a kind of magpie, and the coveys of
partridges that startled one at night with their sudden whirring, and,
very rarely, the flights of eagles that drifted slowly over, generally
followed by rifle-shots which they did not deign to notice.

[* Footnote: An errata note found in Orwell's papers after his death:
"Am not now completely certain that I ever saw Fascists flying the
republican flag, though I _think_ they sometimes flew it with a small
imposed swastika."]

At night and in misty weather, patrols were sent out in the valley
between ourselves and the Fascists. The job was not popular, it was too
cold and too easy to get lost, and I soon found that I could get leave
to go out on patrol as often as I wished. In the huge jagged ravines
there were no paths or tracks of any kind; you could only find your way
about by making successive journeys and noting fresh landmarks each
time. As the bullet flies the nearest Fascist post was seven hundred
metres from our own, but it was a mile and a half by the only
practicable route. It was rather fun wandering about the dark valleys
with the stray bullets flying high overhead like redshanks whistling.
Better than night-time were the heavy mists, which often lasted all day
and which had a habit of clinging round the hill-tops and leaving the
valleys clear. When you were anywhere near the Fascist lines you had to
creep at a snail's pace; it was very difficult to move quietly on those
hill-sides, among the crackling shrubs and tinkling limestones. It was
only at the third or fourth attempt that I managed to find my way to the
Fascist lines. The mist was very thick, and I crept up to the barbed
wire to listen. I could hear the Fascists talking and singing inside.
Then to my alarm I heard several of them coming down the hill towards
me. I cowered behind a bush that suddenly seemed very small, and tried
to cock my rifle without noise. However, they branched off and did not
come within sight of me. Behind the bush where I was hiding I came upon
various relics of the earlier fighting--a pile of empty cartridge-cases,
a leather cap with a bullet-hole in it, and a red flag, obviously one of
our own. I took it back to the position, where it was unsentimentally
torn up for cleaning-rags.

I had been made a corporal, or _cabo_, as it was called, as soon as we
reached the front, and was in command of a guard of twelve men. It was
no sinecure, especially at first. The _centuria_ was an untrained mob
composed mostly of boys in their teens. Here and there in the militia
you came across children as young as eleven or twelve, usually refugees
from Fascist territory who had been enlisted as militiamen as the
easiest way of providing for them. As a rule they were employed on light
work in the rear, but sometimes they managed to worm their way to the
front line, where they were a public menace. I remember one little brute
throwing a hand-grenade into the dug-out fire 'for a joke'. At Monte
Pocero I do not think there was anyone younger than fifteen, but the
average age must have been well under twenty. Boys of this age ought
never to be used in the front line, because they cannot stand the lack
of sleep which is inseparable from trench warfare. At the beginning it
was almost impossible to keep our position properly guarded at night.
The wretched children of my section could only be roused by dragging
them out of their dug-outs feet foremost, and as soon as your back was
turned they left their posts and slipped into shelter; or they would
even, in spite of the frightful cold, lean up against the wall of the
trench and fall fast asleep. Luckily the enemy were very unenterprising.
There were nights when it seemed to me that our position could be
stormed by twenty Boy Scouts armed with airguns, or twenty Girl Guides
armed with battledores, for that matter.

At this time and until much later the Catalan militias were still on the
same basis as they had been at the beginning of the war. In the early
days of Franco's revolt the militias had been hurriedly raised by the
various trade unions and political parties; each was essentially a
political organization, owing allegiance to its party as much as to the
central Government. When the Popular Army, which was a 'non-political'
army organized on more or less ordinary lines, was raised at the
beginning of 1937, the party militias were theoretically incorporated in
it. But for a long time the only changes that occurred were on paper;
the new Popular Army troops did not reach the Aragón front in any
numbers till June, and until that time the militia-system remained
unchanged. The essential point of the system was social equality between
officers and men. Everyone from general to private drew the same pay,
ate the same food, wore the same clothes, and mingled on terms of
complete equality. If you wanted to slap the general commanding the
division on the back and ask him for a cigarette, you could do so, and
no one thought it curious. In theory at any rate each militia was a
democracy and not a hierarchy. It was understood that orders had to be
obeyed, but it was also understood that when you gave an order you gave
it as comrade to comrade and not as superior to inferior. There were
officers and N.C.O.s but there was no military rank in the ordinary
sense; no titles, no badges, no heel-clicking and saluting. They had
attempted to produce within the militias a sort of temporary working
model of the classless society. Of course there was no perfect equality,
but there was a nearer approach to it than I had ever seen or than I
would have thought conceivable in time of war.

But I admit that at first sight the state of affairs at the front
horrified me. How on earth could the war be won by an army of this type?
It was what everyone was saying at the time, and though it was true it
was also unreasonable. For in the circumstances the militias could not
have been much better than they were. A modern mechanized army does not
spring up out of the ground, and if the Government had waited until it
had trained troops at its disposal, Franco would never have been
resisted. Later it became the fashion to decry the militias, and
therefore to pretend that the faults which were due to lack of training
and weapons were the result of the equalitarian system. Actually, a newly
raised draft of militia was an undisciplined mob not because the
officers called the private 'Comrade' but because raw troops are
_always_ an undisciplined mob. In practice the democratic
'revolutionary' type of discipline is more reliable than might be
expected. In a workers' army discipline is theoretically voluntary. It
is based on class-loyalty, whereas the discipline of a bourgeois
conscript army is based ultimately on fear. (The Popular Army that
replaced the militias was midway between the two types.) In the militias
the bullying and abuse that go on in an ordinary army would never have
been tolerated for a moment. The normal military punishments existed,
but they were only invoked for very serious offences. When a man refused
to obey an order you did not immediately get him punished; you first
appealed to him in the name of comradeship. Cynical people with no
experience of handling men will say instantly that this would never
'work', but as a matter of fact it does 'work' in the long run. The
discipline of even the worst drafts of militia visibly improved as time
went on. In January the job of keeping a dozen raw recruits up to the
mark almost turned my hair grey. In May for a short while I was
acting-lieutenant in command of about thirty men, English and Spanish.
We had all been under fire for months, and I never had the slightest
difficulty in getting an order obeyed or in getting men to volunteer for
a dangerous job. 'Revolutionary' discipline depends on political
consciousness--on an understanding of _why_ orders must be obeyed; it
takes time to diffuse this, but it also takes time to drill a man into
an automaton on the barrack-square. The journalists who sneered at the
militia-system seldom remembered that the militias had to hold the line
while the Popular Army was training in the rear. And it is a tribute to
the strength of 'revolutionary' discipline that the militias stayed in
the field at all. For until about June 1937 there was nothing to keep
them there, except class loyalty. Individual deserters could be
shot--were shot, occasionally--but if a thousand men had decided to walk
out of the line together there was no force to stop them. A conscript
army in the same circumstances--with its battle-police removed--would
have melted away. Yet the militias held the line, though God knows they
won very few victories, and even individual desertions were not common.
In four or five months in the P.O.U.M. militia I only heard of four men
deserting, and two of those were fairly certainly spies who had enlisted
to obtain information. At the beginning the apparent chaos, the general
lack of training, the fact that you often had to argue for five minutes
before you could get an order obeyed, appalled and infuriated me. I had
British Army ideas, and certainly the Spanish militias were very unlike
the British Army. But considering the circumstances they were better
troops than one had any right to expect.

Meanwhile, firewood--always firewood. Throughout that period there is
probably no entry in my diary that does not mention firewood, or rather
the lack of it. We were between two and three thousand feet above
sea-level, it was mid winter and the cold was unspeakable. The
temperature was not exceptionally low, on many nights it did not even
freeze, and the wintry sun often shone for an hour in the middle of the
day; but even if it was not really cold, I assure you that it seemed so.
Sometimes there were shrieking winds that tore your cap off and twisted
your hair in all directions, sometimes there were mists that poured into
the trench like a liquid and seemed to penetrate your bones; frequently
it rained, and even a quarter of an hour's rain was enough to make
conditions intolerable. The thin skin of earth over the limestone turned
promptly into a slippery grease, and as you were always walking on a
slope it was impossible to keep your footing. On dark nights I have
often fallen half a dozen times in twenty yards; and this was dangerous,
because it meant that the lock of one's rifle became jammed with mud.
For days together clothes, boots, blankets, and rifles were more or less
coated with mud. I had brought as many thick clothes as I could carry,
but many of the men were terribly underclad. For the whole garrison,
about a hundred men, there were only twelve great-coats, which had to be
handed from sentry to sentry, and most of the men had only one blanket.
One icy night I made a list in my diary of the clothes I was wearing. It
is of some interest as showing the amount of clothes the human body can
carry. I was wearing a thick vest and pants, a flannel shirt, two
pull-overs, a woollen jacket, a pigskin jacket, corduroy breeches,
puttees, thick socks, boots, a stout trench-coat, a muffler, lined
leather gloves, and a woollen cap. Nevertheless I was shivering like a
jelly. But I admit I am unusually sensitive to cold.

Firewood was the one thing that really mattered. The point about the
firewood was that there was practically no firewood to be had. Our
miserable mountain had not even at its best much vegetation, and for
months it had been ranged over by freezing militiamen, with the result
that everything thicker than one's finger had long since been burnt.
When we were not eating, sleeping, on guard, or on fatigue-duty we were
in the valley behind the position, scrounging for fuel. All my memories
of that time are memories of scrambling up and down the almost
perpendicular slopes, over the jagged limestone that knocked one's boots
to pieces, pouncing eagerly on tiny twigs of wood. Three people
searching for a couple of hours could collect enough fuel to keep the
dug-out fire alight for about an hour. The eagerness of our search for
firewood turned us all into botanists. We classified according to their
burning qualities every plant that grew on the mountainside; the various
heaths and grasses that were good to start a fire with but burnt out in
a few minutes, the wild rosemary and the tiny whin bushes that would
burn when the fire was well alight, the stunted oak tree, smaller than a
gooseberry bush, that was practically unburnable. There was a kind of
dried-up reed that was very good for starting fires with, but these grew
only on the hill-top to the left of the position, and you had to go
under fire to get them. If the Fascist machine-gunners saw you they gave
you a drum of ammunition all to yourself. Generally their aim was high
and the bullets sang overhead like birds, but sometime they crackled and
chipped the limestone uncomfortably close, whereupon you flung yourself
on your face. You went on gathering reeds, however; nothing mattered in
comparison with firewood.

Beside the cold the other discomforts seemed petty. Of course all of us
were permanently dirty. Our water, like our food, came on mule-back from
Alcubierre, and each man's share worked out at about a quart a day. It
was beastly water, hardly more transparent than milk. Theoretically it
was for drinking only, but I always stole a pannikinful for washing in
the mornings. I used to wash one day and shave the next; there was never
enough water for both. The position stank abominably, and outside the
little enclosure of the barricade there was excrement everywhere. Some
of the militiamen habitually defecated in the trench, a disgusting thing
when one had to walk round it in the darkness. But the dirt never
worried me. Dirt is a thing people make too much fuss about.
It is astonishing how quickly you get used to doing without a
handkerchief and to eating out of the tin pannikin in which you also
wash. Nor was sleeping in one's clothes any hardship after a day or two.
It was of course impossible to take one's clothes and especially one's
boots off at night; one had to be ready to turn out instantly in case of
an attack. In eighty nights I only took my clothes off three times,
though I did occasionally manage to get them off in the daytime. It was
too cold for lice as yet, but rats and mice abounded. It is often said
that you don't find rats and mice in the same place, but you do when
there is enough food for them.

In other ways we were not badly off. The food was good enough and there
was plenty of wine. Cigarettes were still being issued at the rate of a
packet a day, matches were issued every other day, and there was even an
issue of candles. They were very thin candles, like those on a Christmas
cake, and were popularly supposed to have been looted from churches.
Every dug-out was issued daily with three inches of candle, which would
bum for about twenty minutes. At that time it was still possible to buy
candles, and I had brought several pounds of them with me. Later on the
famine of matches and candles made life a misery. You do not realize the
importance of these things until you lack them. In a night-alarm, for
instance, when everyone in the dug-out is scrambling for his rifle and
treading on everybody else's face, being able to strike a light may make
the difference between life and death. Every militiaman possessed a
tinder-lighter and several yards of yellow wick. Next to his rifle it
was his most important possession. The tinder-lighters had the great
advantage that they could be struck in a wind, but they would only
smoulder, so that they were no use for lighting a fire. When the match
famine was at its worst our only way of producing a flame was to pull
the bullet out of a cartridge and touch the cordite off with a
tinder-lighter.

It was an extraordinary life that we were living--an extraordinary way
to be at war, if you could call it war. The whole militia chafed against
the inaction and clamoured constantly to know why we were not allowed to
attack. But it was perfectly obvious that there would be no battle for a
long while yet, unless the enemy started it. Georges Kopp, on his
periodical tours of inspection, was quite frank with us. 'This is not a
war,' he used to say, 'it is a comic opera with an occasional death.' As
a matter of fact the stagnation on the Aragón front had political causes
of which I knew nothing at that time; but the purely military
difficulties--quite apart from the lack of reserves of men--were obvious
to anybody.

To begin with, there was the nature of the country. The front line, ours
and the Fascists', lay in positions of immense natural strength, which
as a rule could only be approached from one side. Provided a few
trenches have been dug, such places cannot be taken by infantry, except
in overwhelming numbers. In our own position or most of those round us a
dozen men with two machine-guns could have held off a battalion. Perched
on the hill-tops as we were, we should have made lovely marks for
artillery; but there was no artillery. Sometimes I used to gaze round
the landscape and long--oh, how passionately!--for a couple of batteries
of guns. One could have destroyed the enemy positions one after another
as easily as smashing nuts with a hammer. But on our side the guns
simply did not exist. The Fascists did occasionally manage to bring a
gun or two from Zaragoza and fire a very few shells, so few that they
never even found the range and the shells plunged harmlessly into the
empty ravines. Against machine-guns and without artillery there are only
three things you can do: dig yourself in at a safe distance--four
hundred yards, say--advance across the open and be massacred, or make
small-scale night-attacks that will not alter the general situation.
Practically the alternatives are stagnation or suicide.

And beyond this there was the complete lack of war materials of every
description. It needs an effort to realize how badly the militias were
armed at this time. Any public school O.T.C. in England is far more like
a modern army than we were. The badness of our weapons was so
astonishing that it is worth recording in detail.

For this sector of the front the entire artillery consisted of four
trench-mortars with _fifteen rounds_ for each gun. Of course they were
far too precious to be fired and the mortars were kept in Alcubierre.
There were machine-guns at the rate of approximately one to fifty men;
they were oldish guns, but fairly accurate up to three or four hundred
yards. Beyond this we had only rifles, and the majority of the rifles
were scrap-iron. There were three types of rifle in use. The first was
the long Mauser. These were seldom less than twenty years old, their
sights were about as much use as a broken speedometer, and in most of
them the rifling was hopelessly corroded; about one rifle in ten was not
bad, however. Then there was the short Mauser, or mousqueton, really a
cavalry weapon. These were more popular than the others because they
were lighter to carry and less nuisance in a trench, also because they
were comparatively new and looked efficient. Actually they were almost
useless. They were made out of reassembled parts, no bolt belonged to its
rifle, and three-quarters of them could be counted on to jam after five
shots. There were also a few Winchester rifles. These were nice to shoot
with, but they were wildly inaccurate, and as their cartridges had no
clips they could only be fired one shot at a time. Ammunition was so
scarce that each man entering the line was only issued with fifty
rounds, and most of it was exceedingly bad. The Spanish-made cartridges
were all refills and would jam even the best rifles. The Mexican
cartridges were better and were therefore reserved for the machine-guns.
Best of all was the German-made ammunition, but as this came only from
prisoners and deserters there was not much of it. I always kept a clip
of German or Mexican ammunition in my pocket for use in an emergency.
But in practice when the emergency came I seldom fired my rifle; I was
too frightened of the beastly thing jamming and too anxious to reserve
at any rate one round that would go off.

We had no tin hats, no bayonets, hardly any revolvers or pistols, and
not more than one bomb between five or ten men. The bomb in use at this
time was a frightful object known as the 'F.A.I. bomb', it having been
produced by the Anarchists in the early days of the war. It was on the
principle of a Mills bomb, but the lever was held down not by a pin but
a piece of tape. You broke the tape and then got rid of the bomb with
the utmost possible speed. It was said of these bombs that they were
'impartial'; they killed the man they were thrown at and the man who
threw them. There were several other types, even more primitive but
probably a little less dangerous--to the thrower, I mean. It was not
till late March that I saw a bomb worth throwing.

And apart from weapons there was a shortage of all the minor necessities
of war. We had no maps or charts, for instance. Spain has never been
fully surveyed, and the only detailed maps of this area were the old
military ones, which were almost all in the possession of the Fascists.
We had no range-finders, no telescopes, no periscopes, no field-glasses
except for a few privately-owned pairs, no flares or Very lights, no
wire-cutters, no armourers' tools, hardly even any cleaning materials.
The Spaniards seemed never to have heard of a pull-through and looked on
in surprise when I constructed one. When you wanted your rifle cleaned
you took it to the sergeant, who possessed a long brass ramrod which was
invariably bent and therefore scratched the rifling. There was not even
any gun oil. You greased your rifle with olive oil, when you could get
hold of it; at different times I have greased mine with vaseline, with
cold cream, and even with bacon-fat. Moreover, there were no lanterns or
electric torches--at this time there was not, I believe, such a thing as
an electric torch throughout the whole of our sector of the front, and
you could not buy one nearer than Barcelona, and only with difficulty
even there.

As time went on, and the desultory rifle-fire rattled among the hills, I
began to wonder with increasing scepticism whether anything would ever
happen to bring a bit of life, or rather a bit of death, into this
cock-eyed war. It was pneumonia that we were fighting against, not
against men. When the trenches are more than five hundred yards apart no
one gets hit except by accident. Of course there were casualties, but
the majority of them were self-inflicted. If I remember rightly, the
first five men I saw wounded in Spain were all wounded by our own
weapons--I don't mean intentionally, but owing to accident or
carelessness. Our worn-out rifles were a danger in themselves. Some of
them had a nasty trick of going off if the butt was tapped on the
ground; I saw a man shoot himself through the hand owing to this. And in
the darkness the raw recruits were always firing at one another. One
evening when it was barely even dusk a sentry let fly at me from a
distance of twenty yards; but he missed me by a yard--goodness knows how
many times the Spanish standard of marksmanship has saved my life.
Another time I had gone out on patrol in the mist and had carefully
warned the guard commander beforehand. But in coming back I stumbled
against a bush, the startled sentry called out that the Fascists were
coming, and I had the pleasure of hearing the guard commander order
everyone to open rapid fire in my direction. Of course I lay down and
the bullets went harmlessly over me. Nothing will convince a Spaniard,
at least a young Spaniard, that fire-arms are dangerous. Once, rather
later than this, I was photographing some machine-gunners with their
gun, which was pointed directly towards me.

'Don't fire,' I said half-jokingly as I focused the camera.

'Oh no, we won't fire.'

The next moment there was a frightful roar and a stream of bullets tore
past my face so close that my cheek was stung by grains of cordite. It
was unintentional, but the machine-gunners considered it a great joke.
Yet only a few days earlier they had seen a mule-driver accidentally
shot by a political delegate who was playing the fool with an automatic
pistol and had put five bullets in the mule-driver's lungs.

The difficult passwords which the army was using at this time were a
minor source of danger. They were those tiresome double passwords in
which one word has to be answered by another. Usually they were of an
elevating and revolutionary nature, such as _Cultura--progreso_, or
_Seremos--invencibles_, and it was often impossible to get illiterate
sentries to remember these highfalutin' words. One night, I remember,
the password was _Cataluña--heroica_, and a moonfaced peasant lad named
Jaime Domenech approached me, greatly puzzled, and asked me to explain.

'_Heroica_--what does _hroica_ mean?'

I told him that it meant the same as _valiente_. A little while later he
was stumbling up the trench in the darkness, and the sentry challenged
him:

'_Alto! Cataluña_!'

'_Valiente!_' yelled Jaime, certain that he was saying the right thing.

Bang!

However, the sentry missed him. In this war everyone always did miss
everyone else, when it was humanly possible.



Chapter 4


When I had been about three weeks in the line a contingent of twenty or
thirty men, sent out from England by the I.L.P., arrived at Alcubierre,
and in order to keep the English on this front together Williams and I
were sent to join them. Our new position was at Monte Oscuro, several
miles farther west and within sight of Zaragoza.

The position was perched on a sort of razor-back of limestone with
dug-outs driven horizontally into the cliff like sand-martins'nests. They
went into the ground for prodigious distances, and inside they were
pitch dark and so low that you could not even kneel in them, let alone
stand. On the peaks to the left of us there were two more P.O.U.M.
positions, one of them an object of fascination to every man in the
line, because there were three militiawomen there who did the cooking.
These women were not exactly beautiful, but it was found necessary to
put the position out of bounds to men of other companies. Five hundred
yards to our right there was a P.S.U.C. post at the bend of the
Alcubierre road. It was just here that the road changed hands. At night
you could watch the lamps of our supply-lorries winding out from
Alcubierre and, simultaneously, those of the Fascists coming from
Zaragoza. You could see Zaragoza itself, a thin string of lights like
the lighted portholes of a ship, twelve miles south-westward. The
Government troops had gazed at it from that distance since August 1936,
and they are gazing at it still.

There were about thirty of ourselves, including one Spaniard (Ramon,
Williams's brother-in-law), and there were a dozen Spanish
machine-gunners. Apart from the one or two inevitable nuisances--for, as
everyone knows, war attracts riff-raff--the English were an
exceptionally good crowd, both physically and mentally. Perhaps the best
of the bunch was Bob Smillie--the grandson of the famous miners'
leader--who afterwards died such an evil and meaningless death in
Valencia. It says a lot for the Spanish character that the English and
the Spaniards always got on well together, in spite of the language
difficulty. All Spaniards, we discovered, knew two English expressions.
One was 'O.K., baby', the other was a word used by the Barcelona whores
in their dealings with English sailors, and I am afraid the compositors
would not print it.

Once again there was nothing happening all along the line: only the
random crack of bullets and, very rarely, the crash of a Fascist mortar
that sent everyone running to the top trench to see which hill the
shells were bursting on. The enemy was somewhat closer to us here,
perhaps three or four hundred yards away. Their nearest position was
exactly opposite ours, with a machine-gun nest whose loopholes
constantly tempted one to waste cartridges. The Fascists seldom bothered
with rifle-shots, but sent bursts of accurate machine-gun fire at anyone
who exposed himself. Nevertheless it was ten days or more before we had
our first casualty. The troops opposite us were Spaniards, but according
to the deserters there were a few German N.C.O.S. among them. At some
time in the past there had also been Moors there--poor devils, how they
must have felt the cold!--for out in no man's land there was a dead Moor
who was one of the sights of the locality. A mile or two to the left of
us the line ceased to be continuous and there was a tract of country,
lower-lying and thickly wooded, which belonged neither to the Fascists
nor ourselves. Both we and they used to make daylight patrols there. It
was not bad fun in a Boy Scoutish way, though I never saw a Fascist
patrol nearer than several hundred yards. By a lot of crawling on your
belly you could work your way partly through the Fascist lines and could
even see the farm-house flying the monarchist flag, which was the local
Fascist headquarters. Occasionally we gave it a rifle-volley and then
slipped into cover before the machine-guns could locate us. I hope we
broke a few windows, but it was a good eight hundred metres away, and
with our rifles you could not make sure of hitting even a house at that
range.

The weather was mostly clear and cold; sometimes sunny at midday, but
always cold. Here and there in the soil of the hill-sides you found the
green beaks of wild crocuses or irises poking through; evidently spring
was coming, but coming very slowly. The nights were colder than ever.
Coming off guard in the small hours we used to rake together what was
left of the cook-house fire and then stand in the red-hot embers. It was
bad for your boots, but it was very good for your feet. But there were
mornings when the sight of the dawn among the mountain-tops made it
almost worth while to be out of bed at godless hours. I hate mountains,
even from a spectacular point of view. But sometimes the dawn breaking
behind the hill-tops in our rear, the first narrow streaks of gold, like
swords slitting the darkness, and then the growing light and the seas of
carmine cloud stretching away into inconceivable distances, were worth
watching even when you had been up all night, when your legs were numb
from the knees down, and you were sullenly reflecting that there was no
hope of food for another three hours. I saw the dawn oftener during this
campaign than during the rest of my life put together--or during the
part that is to come, I hope.

We were short-handed here, which meant longer guards and more fatigues.
I was beginning to suffer a little from the lack of sleep which is
inevitable even in the quietest kind of war. Apart from guard-duties and
patrols there were constant night-alarms and stand-to's, and in any case
you can't sleep properly in a beastly hole in the ground with your feet
aching with the cold. In my first three or four months in the line I do
not suppose I had more than a dozen periods of twenty-four hours that
were completely without sleep; on the other hand I certainly did not
have a dozen nights of full sleep. Twenty or thirty hours' sleep in a
week was quite a normal amount. The effects of this were not so bad as
might be expected; one grew very stupid, and the job of climbing up and
down the hills grew harder instead of easier, but one felt well and one
was constantly hungry--heavens, how hungry! All food seemed good, even
the eternal haricot beans which everyone in Spain finally learned to
hate the sight of. Our water, what there was of it, came from miles
away, on the backs of mules or little persecuted donkeys. For some
reason the Aragón peasants treated their mules well but their donkeys
abominably. If a donkey refused to go it was quite usual to kick him in
the testicles. The issue of candles had ceased, and matches were running
short. The Spaniards taught us how to make olive oil lamps out of a
condensed milk tin, a cartridge-clip, and a bit of rag. When you had any
olive oil, which was not often, these things would burn with a smoky
flicker, about a quarter candle power, just enough to find your rifle
by.

There seemed no hope of any real fighting. When we left Monte Pocero I
had counted my cartridges and found that in nearly three weeks I had
fired just three shots at the enemy. They say it takes a thousand
bullets to kill a man, and at this rate it would be twenty years before
I killed my first Fascist. At Monte Oscuro the lines were closer and one
fired oftener, but I am reasonably certain that I never hit anyone. As a
matter of fact, on this front and at this period of the war the real
weapon was not the rifle but the megaphone. Being unable to kill your
enemy you shouted at him instead. This method of warfare is so
extraordinary that it needs explaining.

Wherever the lines were within hailing distance of one another there was
always a good deal of shouting from trench to trench. From ourselves:
'_Fascistas--maricones!_' From the Fascists: '_Viva España! Viva
Franco!_'--or, when they knew that there were English opposite them: 'Go
home, you English! We don't want foreigners here!' On the Government
side, in the party militias, the shouting of propaganda to undermine the
enemy morale had been developed into a regular technique. In every
suitable position men, usually machine-gunners, were told off for
shouting-duty and provided with megaphones. Generally they shouted a
set-piece, full of revolutionary sentiments which explained to the
Fascist soldiers that they were merely the hirelings of international
capitalism, that they were fighting against their own class, etc., etc.,
and urged them to come over to our side. This was repeated over and over
by relays of men; sometimes it continued almost the whole night. There
is very little doubt that it had its effect; everyone agreed that the
trickle of Fascist deserters was partly caused by it. If one comes to
think of it, when some poor devil of a sentry--very likely a Socialist
or Anarchist trade union member who has been conscripted against his
will--is freezing at his post, the slogan 'Don't fight against your own
class!' ringing again and again through the darkness is bound to make an
impression on him. It might make just the difference between deserting
and not deserting. Of course such a proceeding does not fit in with the
English conception of war. I admit I was amazed and scandalized when I
first saw it done. The idea of trying to convert your enemy instead of
shooting him! I now think that from any point of view it was a
legitimate manoeuvre. In ordinary trench warfare, when there is no
artillery, it is extremely difficult to inflict casualties on the enemy
without receiving an equal number yourself. If you can immobilize a
certain number of men by making them desert, so much the better;
deserters are actually more useful to you than corpses, because they can
give information. But at the beginning it dismayed all of us; it made us
fed that the Spaniards were not taking this war of theirs sufficiently
seriously. The man who did the shouting at the P.S.U.C. post down on our
right was an artist at the job. Sometimes, instead of shouting
revolutionary slogans he simply told the Fascists how much better we
were fed than they were. His account of the Government rations was apt
to be a little imaginative. 'Buttered toast!'--you could hear his voice
echoing across the lonely valley--'We're just sitting down to buttered
toast over here! Lovely slices of buttered toast!' I do not doubt that,
like the rest of us, he had not seen butter for weeks or months past,
but in the icy night the news of buttered toast probably set many a
Fascist mouth watering. It even made mine water, though I knew he was
lying.

One day in February we saw a Fascist aeroplane approaching. As usual, a
machine-gun was dragged into the open and its barrel cocked up, and
everyone lay on his back to get a good aim. Our isolated positions were
not worth bombing, and as a rule the few Fascist aeroplanes that passed
our way circled round to avoid machine-gun fire. This time the aeroplane
came straight over, too high up to be worth shooting at, and out of it
came tumbling not bombs but white glittering things that turned over and
over in the air. A few fluttered down into the position. They were
copies of a Fascist newspaper, the _Heraldo de Aragón_, announcing the
fall of Málaga.

That night the Fascists made a sort of abortive attack. I was just
getting down into kip, half dead with sleep, when there was a heavy
stream of bullets overhead and someone shouted into the dug-out:
'They're attacking!' I grabbed my rifle and slithered up to my post,
which was at the top of the position, beside the machine-gun. There was
utter darkness and diabolical noise. The fire of, I think five
machine-guns was pouring upon us, and there was a series of heavy
crashes caused by the Fascists flinging bombs over their own parapet in
the most idiotic manner. It was intensely dark. Down in the valley to
the left of us I could see the greenish flash of rifles where a small
party of Fascists, probably a patrol, were chipping in. The bullets were
flying round us in the darkness, crack-zip-crack. A few shells came
whistling over, but they fell nowhere near us and (as usual in this war)
most of them failed to explode. I had a bad moment when yet another
machine-gun opened fire from the hill-top in our rear--actually a gun
that had been brought up to support us, but at the time it looked as
though we were surrounded. Presently our own machine-gun jammed, as it
always did jam with those vile cartridges, and the ramrod was lost in
the impenetrable darkness. Apparently there was nothing that one could
do except stand still and be shot at. The Spanish machine-gunners
disdained to take cover, in fact exposed themselves deliberately, so I
had to do likewise. Petty though it was, the whole experience was very
interesting. It was the first time that I had been properly speaking
under fire, and to my humiliation I found that I was horribly
frightened. You always, I notice, feel the same when you are under heavy
fire--not so much afraid of being hit as afraid because you don't know
where you will be hit. You are wondering all the while just where the
bullet will nip you, and it gives your whole body a most unpleasant
sensitiveness.

After an hour or two the firing slowed down and died away. Meanwhile we
had had only one casualty. The Fascists had advanced a couple of
machine-guns into no man's land, but they had kept a safe distance and
made no attempt to storm our parapet. They were in fact not attacking,
merely wasting cartridges and making a cheerful noise to celebrate the
fall of Málaga. The chief importance of the affair was that it taught me
to read the war news in the papers with a more disbelieving eye. A day
or two later the newspapers and the radio published reports of a
tremendous attack with cavalry and tanks (up a perpendicular hill-side!)
which had been beaten off by the heroic English.

When the Fascists told us that Málaga had fallen we set it down as a
lie, but next day there were more convincing rumours, and it must have
been a day or two later that it was admitted officially. By degrees the
whole disgraceful story leaked out--how the town had been evacuated
without firing a shot, and how the fury of the Italians had fallen not
upon the troops, who were gone, but upon the wretched civilian
population, some of whom were pursued and machine-gunned for a hundred
miles. The news sent a sort of chill all along the line, for, whatever
the truth may have been, every man in the militia believed that the loss
of Málaga was due to treachery. It was the first talk I had heard of
treachery or divided aims. It set up in my mind the first vague doubts
about this war in which, hitherto, the rights and wrongs had seemed so
beautifully simple.

In mid February we left Monte Oscuro and were sent, together with all
the P.O.U.M. troops in this sector, to make a part of the army besieging
Huesca. It was a fifty-mile lorry journey across the wintry plain, where
the clipped vines were not yet budding and the blades of the winter
barley were just poking through the lumpy soil. Four kilometres from our
new trenches Huesca glittered small and clear like a city of dolls'
houses. Months earlier, when Sietamo was taken, the general commanding
the Government troops had said gaily: 'Tomorrow we'll have coffee in
Huesca.' It turned out that he was mistaken. There had been bloody
attacks, but the town did not fall, and 'Tomorrow we'll have coffee in
Huesca' had become a standing joke throughout the army. If I ever go
back to Spain I shall make a point of having a cup of coffee in Huesca.



Chapter 5


On the eastern side of Huesca, until late March, nothing
happened--almost literally nothing. We were twelve hundred metres from
the enemy. When the Fascists were driven back into Huesca the Republican
Army troops who held this part of the line had not been over-zealous in
their advance, so that the line formed a kind of pocket. Later it would
have to be advanced--a ticklish job under fire--but for the present the
enemy might as well have been nonexistent; our sole preoccupation was
keeping warm and getting enough to eat. As a matter of fact there were
things in this period that interested me greatly, and I will describe
some of them later. But I shall be keeping nearer to the order of events
if I try here to give some account of the internal political situation
on the Government side.

At the beginning I had ignored the political side of the war, and it was
only about this time that it began to force itself upon my attention. If
you are not interested in the horrors of party politics, please skip; I
am trying to keep the political parts of this narrative in separate
chapters for precisely that purpose. But at the same time it would be
quite impossible to write about the Spanish war from a purely military
angle. It was above all things a political war. No event in it, at any
rate during the first year, is intelligible unless one has some grasp of
the inter-party struggle that was going on behind the Government lines.

When I came to Spain, and for some time afterwards, I was not only
uninterested in the political situation but unaware of it. I knew there
was a war on, but I had no notion what kind of a war. If you had asked
me why I had joined the militia I should have answered: 'To fight
against Fascism,' and if you had asked me what I was fighting for, I
should have answered: 'Common decency.' I had accepted the _News
Chronicle-New Statesman_ version of the war as the defence of
civilization against a maniacal outbreak by an army of Colonel Blimps in
the pay of Hitler. The revolutionary atmosphere of Barcelona had
attracted me deeply, but I had made no attempt to understand it. As for
the kaleidoscope of political parties and trade unions, with their
tiresome names--P.S.U.C., P.O.U.M., F.A.I., C.N.T., U.G.T., J.C.I.,
J.S.U., A.I.T.--they merely exasperated me. It looked at first sight as
though Spain were suffering from a plague of initials. I knew that I was
serving in something called the P.O.U.M. (I had only joined the P.O.U.M.
militia rather than any other because I happened to arrive in Barcelona
with I.L.P. papers), but I did not realize that there were serious
differences between the political parties. At Monte Pocero, when they
pointed to the position on our left and said: 'Those are the Socialists'
(meaning the P.S.U.C.), I was puzzled and said: 'Aren't we all
Socialists?' I thought it idiotic that people fighting for their lives
should _have_ separate parties; my attitude always was, 'Why can't we
drop all this political nonsense and get on with the war?' This of
course was the correct 'anti-Fascist' attitude which had been carefully
disseminated by the English newspapers, largely in order to prevent
people from grasping the real nature of the struggle. But in Spain,
especially in Catalonia, it was an attitude that no one could or did
keep up indefinitely. Everyone, however unwillingly, took sides sooner
or later. For even if one cared nothing for the political parties and
their conflicting 'lines', it was too obvious that one's own destiny was
involved. As a militiaman one was a soldier against Franco, but one was
also a pawn in an enormous struggle that was being fought out between
two political theories. When I scrounged for firewood on the
mountainside and wondered whether this was really a war or whether the
News Chronicle had made it up, when I dodged the Communist machine-guns
in the Barcelona riots, when I finally fled from Spain with the police
one jump behind me--all these things happened to me in that particular
way because I was serving in the P.O.U.M. militia and not in the
P.S.U.C. So great is the difference between two sets of initials!

To understand the alignment on the Government side one has got to
remember how the war started. When the fighting broke out on 18 July it
is probable that every anti-Fascist in Europe felt a thrill of hope. For
here at last, apparently, was democracy standing up to Fascism. For
years past the so-called democratic countries had been surrendering to
Fascism at every step. The Japanese had been allowed to do as they liked
in Manchuria. Hitler had walked into power and proceeded to massacre
political opponents of all shades. Mussolini had bombed the Abyssinians
while fifty-three nations (I think it was fifty-three) made pious noises
'off'. But when Franco tried to overthrow a mildly Left-wing Government
the Spanish people, against all expectation, had risen against him. It
seemed--possibly it was--the turning of the tide.

But there were several points that escaped general notice. To begin
with, Franco was not strictly comparable with Hitler or Mussolini. His
rising was a military mutiny backed up by the aristocracy and the
Church, and in the main, especially at the beginning, it was an attempt
not so much to impose Fascism as to restore feudalism. This meant that
Franco had against him not only the working class but also various
sections of the liberal bourgeoisie--the very people who are the
supporters of Fascism when it appears in a more modern form. More
important than this was the fact that the Spanish working class did not,
as we might conceivably do in England, resist Franco in the name of
'democracy' and the _status quo_; their resistance was accompanied
by--one might almost say it consisted of--a definite revolutionary
outbreak. Land was seized by the peasants; many factories and most of
the transport were seized by the trade unions; churches were wrecked and
the priests driven out or killed. The _Daily Mail_, amid the cheers of
the Catholic clergy, was able to represent Franco as a patriot
delivering his country from hordes of fiendish 'Reds'.

For the first few months of the war Franco's real opponent was not so
much the Government as the trade unions. As soon as the rising broke out
the organized town workers replied by calling a general strike and then
by demanding--and, after a struggle, getting--arms from the public
arsenals. If they had not acted spontaneously and more or less
independently it is quite conceivable that Franco would never have been
resisted. There can, of course, be no certainty about this, but there is
at least reason for thinking it. The Government had made little or no
attempt to forestall the rising, which had been foreseen for a long time
past, and when the trouble started its attitude was weak and hesitant,
so much so, indeed, that Spain had three premiers in a single day.*
Moreover, the one step that could save the immediate situation, the
arming of the workers, was only taken unwillingly and in response to
violent popular clamour. However, the arms were distributed, and in the
big towns of eastern Spain the Fascists were defeated by a huge effort,
mainly of the working class, aided by some of the armed forces (Assault
Guards, etc.) who had remained loyal. It was the kind of effort that
could probably only be made by people who were fighting with a
revolutionary intention--i.e. believed that they were fighting for
something better than the status quo. In the various centres of revolt
it is thought that three thousand people died in the streets in a single
day. Men and women armed only with sticks of dynamite rushed across the
open squares and stormed stone buildings held by trained soldiers with
machine-guns. Machine-gun nests that the Fascists had placed at
strategic spots were smashed by rushing taxis at them at sixty miles an
hour. Even if one had heard nothing of the seizure of the land by the
peasants, the setting up of local Soviets, etc., it would be hard to
believe that the Anarchists and Socialists who were the backbone of the
resistance were doing this kind of thing for the preservation of
capitalist democracy, which especially in the Anarchist view was no more
than a centralized swindling machine.

[* Footnote: Quiroga, Barrios, and Giral. The first two refused to
distribute arms to the trade unions.]

Meanwhile the workers had weapons in their hands, and at this stage they
refrained from giving them up. (Even a year later it was computed that
the Anarcho-Syndicalists in Catalonia possessed 30,000 rifles.) The
estates of the big pro-Fascist landlords were in many places seized by
the peasants. Along with the collectivization of industry and transport
there was an attempt to set up the rough beginnings of a workers'
government by means of local committees, workers' patrols to replace the
old pro-capitalist police forces, workers' militias based on the trade
unions, and so forth. Of course the process was not uniform, and it went
further in Catalonia than elsewhere. There were areas where the
institutions of local government remained almost untouched, and others
where they existed side by side with revolutionary committees. In a few
places independent Anarchist communes were set up, and some of them
remained in being till about a year later, when they were forcibly
suppressed by the Government. In Catalonia, for the first few months,
most of the actual power was in the hands of the Anarcho-syndicalists,
who controlled most of the key industries. The thing that had happened
in Spain was, in fact, not merely a civil war, but the beginning of a
revolution. It is this fact that the anti-Fascist press outside Spain
has made it its special business to obscure. The issue has been narrowed
down to 'Fascism versus democracy' and the revolutionary aspect
concealed as much as possible. In England, where the Press is more
centralized and the public more easily deceived than elsewhere, only two
versions of the Spanish war have had any publicity to speak of: the
Right-wing version of Christian patriots versus Bolsheviks dripping with
blood, and the Left-wing version of gentlemanly republicans quelling a
military revolt. The central issue has been successfully covered up.

There were several reasons for this. To begin with, appalling lies about
atrocities were being circulated by the pro-Fascist press, and
well-meaning propagandists undoubtedly thought that they were aiding the
Spanish Government by denying that Spain had 'gone Red'. But the main
reason was this: that, except for the small revolutionary groups which
exist in all countries, the whole world was determined, upon preventing
revolution in Spain. In particular the Communist Party, with Soviet
Russia behind it, had thrown its whole weight against the revolution. It
was the Communist thesis that revolution at this stage would be fatal
and that what was to be aimed at in Spain was not workers' control, but
bourgeois democracy. It hardly needs pointing out why 'liberal'
capitalist opinion took the same line. Foreign capital was heavily
invested in Spain. The Barcelona Traction Company, for instance,
represented ten millions of British capital; and meanwhile the trade
unions had seized all the transport in Catalonia. If the revolution went
forward there would be no compensation, or very little; if the
capitalist republic prevailed, foreign investments would be safe. And
since the revolution had got to be crushed, it greatly simplified things
to pretend that no revolution had happened. In this way the real
significance of every event could be covered up; every shift of power
from the trade unions to the central Government could be represented as
a necessary step in military reorganization. The situation produced was
curious in the extreme. Outside Spain few people grasped that there was
a revolution; inside Spain nobody doubted it. Even the P.S.U.C.
newspapers. Communist-controlled and more or less committed to an
antirevolutionary policy, talked about 'our glorious revolution'. And
meanwhile the Communist press in foreign countries was shouting that
there was no sign of revolution anywhere; the seizure of factories,
setting up of workers' committees, etc., had not happened--or,
alternatively, had happened, but 'had no political significance'.
According to the _Daily Worker_ (6 August 1936) those who said that the
Spanish people were fighting for social revolution, or for anything
other than bourgeois democracy, were' downright lying scoundrels'. On
the other hand, Juan Lopez, a member of the Valencia Government,
declared in February 1937 that 'the Spanish people are shedding their
blood, not for the democratic Republic and its paper Constitution, but
for...a revolution'. So it would appear that the downright lying
scoundrels included members of the Government for which we were bidden
to fight. Some of the foreign anti-Fascist papers even descended to the
pitiful lie of pretending that churches were only attacked when they
were used as Fascist fortresses. Actually churches were pillaged
everywhere and as a matter of course, because it was perfectly well
understood that the Spanish Church was part of the capitalist racket. In
six months in Spain I only saw two undamaged churches, and until about
July 1937 no churches were allowed to reopen and hold services, except
for one or two Protestant churches in Madrid.

But, after all, it was only the beginning of a revolution, not the
complete thing. Even when the workers, certainly in Catalonia and
possibly elsewhere, had the power to do so, they did not overthrow or
completely replace the Government. Obviously they could not do so when
Franco was hammering at the gate and sections of the middle class were
on their side. The country was in a transitional state that was capable
either of developing in the direction of Socialism or of reverting to an
ordinary capitalist republic. The peasants had most of the land, and
they were likely to keep it, unless Franco won; all large industries had
been collectivized, but whether they remained collectivized, or whether
capitalism was reintroduced, would depend finally upon which group
gained control. At the beginning both the Central Government and the
Generalite de Cataluña (the semi-autonomous Catalan Government) could
definitely be said to represent the working class. The Government was
headed by Caballero, a Left-wing Socialist, and contained ministers
representing the U.G.T. (Socialist trade unions) and the C.N.T.
(Syndicalist unions controlled by the Anarchists). The Catalan
Generalite was for a while virtually superseded by an anti-Fascist
Defence Committee* consisting mainly of delegates from the trade unions.
Later the Defence Committee was dissolved and the Generalite was
reconstituted so as to represent the unions and the various Left-wing
parties. But every subsequent reshuffling of the Government was a move
towards the Right. First the P.O.U.M. was expelled from the Generalite;
six months later Caballero was replaced by the Right-wing Socialist
Negrin; shortly afterwards the C.N.T. was eliminated from the
Government; then the U.G.T.; then the C.N.T. was turned out of the
Generalite; finally, a year after the outbreak of war and revolution,
there remained a Government composed entirely of Right-wing Socialists,
Liberals, and Communists.

[* Footnote: Comité Central de Milicias Antifascistas. Delegates were
chosen in proportion to the membership of their organizations. Nine
delegates represented the trade unions, three the Catalan Liberal
parties, and two the various Marxist parties (P.O.U.M., Communists, and
others).]

The general swing to the Right dates from about October-November 1936,
when the U.S.S.R. began to supply arms to the Government and power began
to pass from the Anarchists to the Communists. Except Russia and Mexico
no country had had the decency to come to the rescue of the Government,
and Mexico, for obvious reasons, could not supply arms in large
quantities. Consequently the Russians were in a position to dictate
terms. There is very little doubt that these terms were, in substance,
'Prevent revolution or you get no weapons', and that the first move
against the revolutionary elements, the expulsion of the P.O.U.M. from
the Catalan Generalite, was done under orders from the U.S.S.R. It has
been denied that any direct pressure was exerted by the Russian
Government, but the point is not of great importance, for the Communist
parties of all countries can be taken as carrying out Russian policy,
and it is not denied that the Communist Party was the chief mover first
against the P.O.U.M., later against the Anarchists and against
Caballero's section of the Socialists, and, in general, against a
revolutionary policy. Once the U.S.S.R. had intervened the triumph of
the Communist Party was assured.

To begin with, gratitude to Russia for the arms and the fact that the
Communist Party, especially since the arrival of the International
Brigades, looked capable of winning the war, immensely raised the
Communist prestige. Secondly, the Russian arms were supplied via the
Communist Party and the parties allied to them, who saw to it that as
few as possible got to their political opponents.* Thirdly, by
proclaiming a non-revolutionary policy the Communists were able to
gather in all those whom the extremists had scared. It was easy, for
instance, to rally the wealthier peasants against the collectivization
policy of the Anarchists. There was an enormous growth in the membership
of the party, and the influx was largely from the middle
class-shopkeepers, officials, army officers, well-to-do peasants, etc.,
etc. The war was essentially a triangular struggle. The fight against
Franco had to continue, but the simultaneous aim of the Government was
to recover such power as remained in the hands of the trade unions. It
was done by a series of small moves--a policy of pin-pricks, as somebody
called it--and on the whole very cleverly. There was no general and
obvious counter-revolutionary move, and until May 1937 it was scarcely
necessary to use force. The workers could always be brought to heel by
an argument that is almost too obvious to need stating: 'Unless you do
this, that, and the other we shall lose the war.' In every case,
needless to say, it appeared that the thing demanded by military
necessity was the surrender of something that the workers had won for
themselves in 1936. But the argument could hardly fail, because to lose
the war was the last thing that the revolutionary parties wanted; if the
war was lost democracy and revolution. Socialism and Anarchism, became
meaningless words. The Anarchists, the only revolutionary party that was
big enough to matter, were obliged to give way on point after point. The
process of collectivization was checked, the local committees were got
rid of, the workers patrols were abolished and the pre-war police
forces, largely reinforced and very heavily armed, were restored, and
various key industries which had been under the control of the trade
unions were taken over by the Government (the seizure of the Barcelona
Telephone Exchange, which led to the May fighting, was one incident in
this process); finally, most important of all, the workers' militias,
based on the trade unions, were gradually broken up and redistributed
among the new Popular Army, a 'non-political' army on semi-bourgeois
lines, with a differential pay rate, a privileged officer-caste, etc.,
etc. In the special circumstances this was the really decisive step; it
happened later in Catalonia than elsewhere because it was there that the
revolutionary parties were strongest. Obviously the only guarantee that
the workers could have of retaining their winnings was to keep some of
the armed forces under their own control. As usual, the breaking-up of
the militias was done in the name of military efficiency; and no one
denied that a thorough military reorganization was needed. It would,
however, have been quite possible to reorganize the militias and make
them more efficient while keeping them under direct control of the trade
unions; the main purpose of the change was to make sure that the
Anarchists did not possess an army of their own. Moreover, the
democratic spirit of the militias made them breeding-grounds for
revolutionary ideas. The Communists were well aware of this, and
inveighed ceaselessly and bitterly against the P.O.U.M. and Anarchist
principle of equal pay for all ranks. A general 'bourgeoisification', a
deliberate destruction of the equalitarian spirit of the first few
months of the revolution, was taking place. All happened so swiftly that
people making successive visits to Spain at intervals of a few months
have declared that they seemed scarcely to be visiting the same country;
what had seemed on the surface and for a brief instant to be a workers'
State was changing before one's eyes into an ordinary bourgeois republic
with the normal division into rich and poor. By the autumn of 1937 the
'Socialist' Negrin was declaring in public speeches that 'we respect
private property', and members of the Cortes who at the beginning of the
war had had to fly the country because of their suspected Fascist
sympathies were returning to Spain.

[* Footnote: This is why there were so few Russian arms on the Aragón
front, where the troops were predominantly Anarchist. Until April 1937
the only Russian weapon I saw--with the exception of some aeroplanes
which may or may not have been Russian--was a solitary sub-machinegun.]

The whole process is easy to understand if one
remembers that it proceeds from the temporary alliance that Fascism, in
certain forms, forces upon the bourgeois and the worker. This alliance,
known as the Popular Front, is in essential an alliance of enemies, and
it seems probable that it must always end by one partner swallowing the
other. The only unexpected feature in the Spanish situation--and outside
Spain it has caused an immense amount of misunderstanding--is that among
the parties on the Government side the Communists stood not upon the
extreme Left, but upon the extreme Right. In reality this should cause
no surprise, because the tactics of the Communist Party elsewhere,
especially in France, have made it clear that Official Communism must be
regarded, at any rate for the time being, as an antirevolutionary force.
The whole of Comintern policy is now subordinated (excusably,
considering the world situation) to the defence of U.S.S.R., which
depends upon a system of military alliances. In particular, the U.S.S.R.
is in alliance with France, a capitalist-imperialist country. The
alliance is of little use to Russia unless French capitalism is strong,
therefore Communist policy in France has got to be anti-revolutionary.
This means not only that French Communists now march behind the
tricolour and sing the Marseillaise, but, what is more important, that
they have had to drop all effective agitation in the French colonies. It
is less than three years since Thorez, the Secretary of the French
Communist Party, was declaring that the French workers would never be
bamboozled into fighting against their German comrades;* he is now one
of the loudest-lunged patriots in France. The clue to the behaviour of
the Communist Party in any country is the military relation of that
country, actual or potential, towards the U.S.S.R. In England, for
instance, the position is still uncertain, hence the English Communist
Party is still hostile to the National Government, and, ostensibly,
opposed to rearmament. If, however, Great Britain enters into an
alliance or military understanding with the U.S.S.R., the English
Communist, like the French Communist, will have no choice but to become
a good patriot and imperialist; there are premonitory signs of this
already. In Spain the Communist 'line' was undoubtedly influenced by the
fact that France, Russia's ally, would strongly object to a
revolutionary neighbour and would raise heaven and earth to prevent the
liberation of Spanish Morocco. The Daily Mail, with its tales of red
revolution financed by Moscow, was even more wildly wrong than usual. In
reality it was the Communists above all others who prevented revolution
in Spain. Later, when the Right-wing forces were in full control, the
Communists showed themselves willing to go a great deal further than the
Liberals in hunting down the revolutionary leaders.**

[* Footnote: In the Chamber of Deputies, March 1935.]

[** Footnote: For the best account of the interplay between the parties
on the Government side, see Franz Borkenau's _The Spanish Cockpit_. This
is by a long way the ablest book that has yet appeared on the Spanish
war.]

I have tried to sketch the general course of the Spanish revolution
during its first year, because this makes it easier to understand the
situation at any given moment. But I do not want to suggest that in
February I held all of the opinions that are implied in what I have said
above. To begin with, the things that most enlightened me had not yet
happened, and in any case my sympathies were in some ways different from
what they are now. This was partly because the political side of the war
bored me and I naturally reacted against the viewpoint of which I heard
most--i.e. the P.O.U.M.-I.L.P. viewpoint. The Englishmen I was among
were mostly I.L.P. members, with a few C.P. members among them, and most
of them were much better educated politically than myself. For weeks on
end, during the dull period when nothing was happening round Huesca, I
found myself in the middle of a political discussion that practically
never ended. In the draughty evil-smelling barn of the farm-house where
we were billeted, in the stuffy blackness of dug-outs, behind the
parapet in the freezing midnight hours, the conflicting party 'lines'
were debated over and over. Among the Spaniards it was the same, and
most of the newspapers we saw made the inter-party feud their chief
feature. One would have had to be deaf or an imbecile not to pick up
some idea of what the various parties stood for.

From the point of view of political theory there were only three parties
that mattered, the P.S.U.C., the P.O.U.M., and the C.N.T.-F.A.I.,
loosely described as the Anarchists. I take the P.S.U.C. first, as being
the most important; it was the party that finally triumphed, and even at
this time it was visibly in the ascendant.

It is necessary to explain that when one speaks of the P.S.U.C. 'line'
one really means the Communist Party 'line'. The P.S.U.C. (Partido
Socialista Unificado de Cataluña) was the Socialist Party of Catalonia;
it had been formed at the beginning of the war by the fusion of various
Marxist parties, including the Catalan Communist Party, but it was now
entirely under Communist control and was affiliated to the Third
International. Elsewhere in Spain no formal unification between
Socialists and Communists had taken place, but the Communist viewpoint
and the Right-wing Socialist viewpoint could everywhere be regarded as
identical. Roughly speaking, the P.S.U.C. was the political organ of the
U.G.T. (Union General de Trabajadores), the Socialist trade unions. The
membership of these unions throughout Spain now numbered about a million
and a half. They contained many sections of the manual workers, but
since the outbreak of war they had also been swollen by a large influx
of middle-class members, for in the early 'revolutionary' days people of
all kinds had found it useful to join either the U.G.T. or the C.N.T.
The two blocks of unions overlapped, but of the two the C.N.T. was more
definitely a working-class organization. The P.S.U.C. was therefore a
party partly of the workers and partly of the small bourgeoisie--the
shopkeepers, the officials, and the wealthier peasants.

The P.S.U.C. 'line' which was preached in the Communist and
pro-Communist press throughout the world, was approximately this:

'At present nothing matters except winning the war; without victory in
the war all else is meaningless. Therefore this is not the moment to
talk of pressing forward with the revolution. We can't afford to
alienate the peasants by forcing Collectivization upon them, and we
can't afford to frighten away the middle classes who were fighting on
our side. Above all for the sake of efficiency we must do away with
revolutionary chaos. We must have a strong central government in place
of local committees, and we must have a properly trained and fully
militarized army under a unified command. Clinging on to fragments of
workers' control and parroting revolutionary phrases is worse than
useless; it is not merely obstructive, but even counterrevolutionary,
because it leads to divisions which can be used against us by the
Fascists. At this stage we are not fighting for the dictatorship of the
proletariat, we are fighting for parliamentary democracy. Whoever tries
to turn the civil war into a social revolution is playing into the hands
of the Fascists and is in effect, if not in intention, a traitor.'

The P.O.U.M. 'line' differed from this on every point except, of course,
the importance of winning the war. The P.O.U.M. (Partido Obrero de
Unificación Marxista) was one of those dissident Communist parties which
have appeared in many countries in the last few years as a result of the
opposition to 'Stalinism'; i.e. to the change, real or apparent, in
Communist policy. It was made up partly of ex-Communists and partly of
an earlier party, the Workers' and Peasants' Bloc. Numerically it was a
small party,* with not much influence outside Catalonia, and chiefly
important because it contained an unusually high proportion of
politically conscious members. In Catalonia its chief stronghold was
Lérida. It did not represent any block of trade unions. The P.O.U.M.
militiamen were mostly C.N.T. members, but the actual party-members
generally belonged to the U.G.T. It was, however, only in the C.N.T.
that the P.O.U.M. had any influence.

[* Footnote: The figures for the P.O.U.M. membership are given as: July
1936, 10,000; December 1936, 70,000; June 1937, 40,000. But these are
from P.O.U.M. sources; a hostile estimate would probably divide them by
four. The only thing one can say with any certainty about the membership
of the Spanish political parties is that every party overestimates its
own numbers.]

The P.O.U.M. 'line' was approximately this:

'It is nonsense to talk of opposing Fascism by bourgeois "democracy".
Bourgeois "democracy" is only another name for capitalism, and so is
Fascism; to fight against Fascism on behalf of "democracy" is to fight
against one form of capitalism on behalf of a second which is liable to
turn into the first at any moment. The only real alternative to Fascism
is workers' control. If you set up any less goal than this, you will
either hand the victory to Franco, or, at best, let in Fascism by the
back door. Meanwhile the workers must cling to every scrap of what they
have won; if they yield anything to the semi-bourgeois Government they
can depend upon being cheated. The workers' militias and police-forces
must be preserved in their present form and every effort to
"bourgeoisify" them must be resisted. If the workers do not control the
armed forces, the armed forces will control the workers. The war and the
revolution are inseparable.'

The Anarchist viewpoint is less easily defined. In any case the loose
term 'Anarchists' is used to cover a multitude of people of very varying
opinions. The huge block of unions making up the C.N.T. (Confederacion
Nacional de Trabajadores), with round about two million members in all,
had for its political organ the F.A.I. (Federacion Anarquista Iberica),
an actual Anarchist organization. But even the members of the F.A.I.,
though always tinged, as perhaps most Spaniards are, with the Anarchist
philosophy, were not necessarily Anarchists in the purest sense.
Especially since the beginning of the war they had moved more in the
direction of ordinary Socialism, because circumstances had forced them
to take part in centralized administration and even to break all their
principles by entering the Government. Nevertheless they differed
fundamentally from the Communists in so much that, like the P.O.U.M.,
they aimed at workers' control and not a parliamentary democracy. They
accepted the P.O.U.M. slogan: 'The war and the revolution are
inseparable', though they were less dogmatic about it. Roughly speaking,
the C.N.T.-F.A.I. stood for: (1) Direct control over industry by the
workers engaged in each industry, e.g. transport, the textile factories,
etc.; (2) Government by local committees and resistance to all forms of
centralized authoritarianism; (3) Uncompromising hostility to the
bourgeoisie and the Church. The last point, though the least precise,
was the most important. The Anarchists were the opposite of the majority
of so-called revolutionaries in so much that though their principles
were rather vague their hatred of privilege and injustice was perfectly
genuine. Philosophically, Communism and Anarchism are poles apart.
Practically--i.e. in the form of society aimed at--the difference is
mainly one of emphasis, but it is quite irreconcilable. The Communist's
emphasis is always on centralism and efficiency, the Anarchist's on
liberty and equality. Anarchism is deeply rooted in Spain and is likely
to outlive Communism when the Russian influence is withdrawn. During the
first two months of the war it was the Anarchists more than anyone else
who had saved the situation, and much later than this the Anarchist
militia, in spite of their indiscipline, were notoriously the best
fighters among the purely Spanish forces. From about February 1937
onwards the Anarchists and the P.O.U.M. could to some extent be lumped
together. If the Anarchists, the P.O.U.M., and the Left wing of the
Socialists had had the sense to combine at the start and press a
realistic policy, the history of the war might have been different. But
in the early period, when the revolutionary parties seemed to have the
game in their hands, this was impossible. Between the Anarchists and the
Socialists there were ancient jealousies, the P.O.U.M., as Marxists,
were sceptical of Anarchism, while from the pure Anarchist standpoint
the 'Trotskyism' of the P.O.U.M. was not much preferable to the
'Stalinism' of the Communists. Nevertheless the Communist tactics tended
to drive the two parties together. When the P.O.U.M. joined in the
disastrous fighting in Barcelona in May, it was mainly from an instinct
to stand by the C.N.T., and later, when the P.O.U.M. was suppressed, the
Anarchists were the only people who dared to raise a voice in its
defence.

So, roughly speaking, the alignment of forces was this. On the one side
the C.N.T.-F.A.I., the P.O.U.M., and a section of the Socialists,
standing for workers' control: on the other side the Right-wing
Socialists, Liberals, and Communists, standing for centralized
government and a militarized army.

It is easy to see why, at this time, I preferred the Communist viewpoint
to that of the P.O.U.M. The Communists had a definite practical policy,
an obviously better policy from the point of view of the common sense
which looks only a few months ahead. And certainly the day-to-day policy
of the P.O.U.M., their propaganda and so forth, was unspeakably bad; it
must have been so, or they would have been able to attract a bigger
mass-following. What clinched everything was that the Communists--so it
seemed to me--were getting on with the war while we and the Anarchists
were standing still. This was the general feeling at the time. The
Communists had gained power and a vast increase of membership partly by
appealing to the middle classes against the revolutionaries, but partly
also because they were the only people who looked capable of winning the
war. The Russian arms and the magnificent defence of Madrid by troops
mainly under Communist control had made the Communists the heroes of
Spain. As someone put it, every Russian aeroplane that flew over our
heads was Communist propaganda. The revolutionary purism of the
P.O.U.M., though I saw its logic, seemed to me rather futile. After all,
the one thing that mattered was to win the war.

Meanwhile there was the diabolical inter-party feud that was going on in
the newspapers, in pamphlets, on posters, in books--everywhere. At this
time the newspapers I saw most often were the P.O.U.M. papers _La
Batalla_ and _Adelante_, and their ceaseless carping against the
'counter-revolutionary' P.S.U.C. struck me as priggish and tiresome.
Later, when I studied the P.S.U.C. and Communist press more closely, I
realized that the P.O.U.M. were almost blameless compared with their
adversaries. Apart from anything else, they had much smaller
opportunities. Unlike the Communists, they had no footing in any press
outside their own country, and inside Spain they were at an immense
disadvantage because the press censorship was mainly under Communist
control, which meant that the P.O.U.M. papers were liable to be
suppressed or fined if they said anything damaging. It is also fair to
the P.O.U.M. to say that though they might preach endless sermons on
revolution and quote Lenin _ad nauseam_, they did not usually indulge in
personal libel. Also they kept their polemics mainly to newspaper
articles. Their large coloured posters, designed for a wider public
(posters are important in Spain, with its large illiterate population),
did not attack rival parties, but were simply anti-Fascist or
abstractedly revolutionary; so were the songs the militiamen sang. The
Communist attacks were quite a different matter. I shall have to deal
with some of these later in this book. Here I can only give a brief
indication of the Communist line of attack.

On the surface the quarrel between the Communists and the P.O.U.M. was
one of tactics. The P.O.U.M. was for immediate revolution, the
Communists not. So far so good; there was much to be said on both sides.
Further, the Communists contended that the P.O.U.M. propaganda divided
and weakened the Government forces and thus endangered the war; again,
though finally I do not agree, a good case could be made out for this.
But here the peculiarity of Communist tactics came in. Tentatively at
first, then more loudly, they began to assert that the P.O.U.M. was
splitting the Government forces not by bad judgement but by deliberate
design. The P.O.U.M. was declared to be no more than a gang of disguised
Fascists, in the pay of Franco and Hitler, who were pressing a
pseudo-revolutionary policy as a way of aiding the Fascist cause. The
P.O.U.M. was a 'Trotskyist' organization and 'Franco's Fifth Column'.
This implied that scores of thousands of working-class people, including
eight or ten thousand soldiers who were freezing in the front-line
trenches and hundreds of foreigners who had come to Spain to fight
against Fascism, often sacrificing their livelihood and their
nationality by doing so, were simply traitors in the pay of the enemy.
And this story was spread all over Spain by means of posters, etc., and
repeated over and over in the Communist and pro-Communist press of the
whole world. I could fill half a dozen books with quotations if I chose
to collect them.

This, then, was what they were saying about us: we were Trotskyists,
Fascists, traitors, murderers, cowards, spies, and so forth. I admit it
was not pleasant, especially when one thought of some of the people who
were responsible for it. It is not a nice thing to see a Spanish boy of
fifteen carried down the line on a stretcher, with a dazed white face
looking out from among the blankets, and to think of the sleek persons
in London and Paris who are writing pamphlets to prove that this boy is
a Fascist in disguise. One of the most horrible features of war is that
all the war-propaganda, all the screaming and lies and hatred, comes
invariably from people who are not fighting. The P.S.U.C. militiamen
whom I knew in the line, the Communists from the International Brigade
whom I met from time to time, never called me a Trotskyist or a traitor;
they left that kind of thing to the journalists in the rear. The people
who wrote pamphlets against us and vilified us in the newspapers all
remained safe at home, or at worst in the newspaper offices of Valencia,
hundreds of miles from the bullets and the mud. And apart from the
libels of the inter-party feud, all the usual war-stuff, the
tub-thumping, the heroics, the vilification of the enemy--all these were
done, as usual, by people who were not fighting and who in many cases
would have run a hundred miles sooner than fight. One of the dreariest
effects of this war has been to teach me that the Left-wing press is
every bit as spurious and dishonest as that of the Right.*
I do earnestly feel that on our side--the Government side--this war was
different from ordinary, imperialistic wars; but from the nature of the
war-propaganda you would never have guessed it. The fighting had barely
started when the newspapers of the Right and Left dived simultaneously
into the same cesspool of abuse. We all remember the _Daily Mail's_
poster: 'REDS CRUCIFY NUNS', while to the _Daily Worker_ Franco's
Foreign Legion was 'composed of murderers, white-slavers, dope-fiends,
and the offal of every European country'. As late as October 1937 the
_New Statesman_ was treating us to tales of Fascist barricades made of
the bodies of living children (a most unhandy thing to make barricades
with), and Mr Arthur Bryant was declaring that 'the sawing-off of a
Conservative tradesman's legs' was 'a commonplace' in Loyalist Spain.
The people who write that kind of stuff never fight; possibly they
believe that to write it is a substitute for fighting. It is the same in
all wars; the soldiers do the fighting, the journalists do the shouting,
and no true patriot ever gets near a front-line trench, except on the
briefest of propaganda-tours. Sometimes it is a comfort to me to think
that the aeroplane is altering the conditions of war. Perhaps when the
next great war comes we may see that sight unprecedented in all history,
a jingo with a bullet-hole in him.

[* Footnote: I should like to make an exception of the _Manchester
Guardian_. In connexion with this book I have had to go through the
files of a good many English papers. Of our larger papers, the
_Manchester Guardian_ is the only one that leaves me with an increased
respect for its honesty.]

As far as the journalistic part of it went, this war was a racket like
all other wars. But there was this difference, that whereas the
journalists usually reserve their most murderous invective for the
enemy, in this case, as time went on, the Communists and the P.O.U.M.
came to write more bitterly about one another than about the Fascists.
Nevertheless at the time I could not bring myself to take it very
seriously. The inter-party feud was annoying and even disgusting, but it
appeared to me as a domestic squabble. I did not believe that it would
alter anything or that there was any really irreconcilable difference of
policy. I grasped that the Communists and Liberals had set their faces
against allowing the revolution to go forward; I did not grasp that they
might be capable of swinging it _back_.

There was a good reason for this. All this time I was at the front, and
at the front the social and political atmosphere did not change. I had
left Barcelona in early January and I did not go on leave till late
April; and all this time--indeed, till later--in the strip of Aragón
controlled by Anarchist and P.O.U.M. troops, the same conditions
persisted, at least outwardly. The revolutionary atmosphere remained as
I had first known it. General and private, peasant and militiaman, still
met as equals; everyone drew the same pay, wore the same clothes, ate
the same food, and called everyone else 'thou' and 'comrade'; there was
no boss-class, no menial-class, no beggars, no prostitutes, no lawyers,
no priests, no boot-licking, no cap-touching. I was breathing the air of
equality, and I was simple enough to imagine that it existed all over
Spain. I did not realize that more or less by chance I was isolated
among the most revolutionary section of the Spanish working class.

So, when my more politically educated comrades told me that one could
not take a purely military attitude towards the war, and that the choice
lay between revolution and Fascism, I was inclined to laugh at them. On
the whole I accepted the Communist viewpoint, which boiled down to
saying: 'We can't talk of revolution till we've won the war', and not
the P.O.U.M. viewpoint, which boiled down to saying: 'We must go forward
or we shall go back.' When later on I decided that the P.O.U.M. were
right, or at any rate righter than the Communists, it was not altogether
upon a point of theory. On paper the Communist case was a good one; the
trouble was that their actual behaviour made it difficult to believe
that they were advancing it in good faith. The often-repeated slogan:
'The war first and the revolution afterwards', though devoutly believed
in by the average P.S.U.C. militiaman, who honestly thought that the
revolution could continue when the war had been won, was eyewash. The
thing for which the Communists were working was not to postpone the
Spanish revolution till a more suitable time, but to make sure that it
never happened. This became more and more obvious as time went on, as
power was twisted more and more out of working-class hands, and as more
and more revolutionaries of every shade were flung into jail. Every move
was made in the name of military necessity, because this pretext was, so
to speak, ready-made, but the effect was to drive the workers back from
an advantageous position and into a position in which, when the war was
over, they would find it impossible to resist the reintroduction of
capitalism. Please notice that I am saying nothing against the
rank-and-file Communists, least of all against the thousands of
Communists who died heroically round Madrid. But those were not the men
who were directing party policy. As for the people higher up, it is
inconceivable that they were not acting with their eyes open.

But, finally, the war was worth winning even if the revolution was
lost. And in the end I came to doubt whether, in the long run, the
Communist policy made for victory. Very few people seem to have
reflected that a different policy might be appropriate at different
periods of the war. The Anarchists probably saved the situation in the
first two months, but they were incapable of organizing resistance
beyond a certain point; the Communists probably saved the situation in
October-December, but to win the war outright was a different matter. In
England the Communist war-policy has been accepted without question,
because very few criticisms of it have been allowed to get into print
and because its general line--do away with revolutionary chaos, speed up
production, militarize the army--sounds realistic and efficient. It is
worth pointing out its inherent weakness.

In order to check every revolutionary tendency and make the war as much
like an ordinary war as possible, it became necessary to throw away the
strategic opportunities that actually existed. I have described how we
were armed, or not armed, on the Aragón front. There is very little
doubt that arms were deliberately withheld lest too many of them should
get into the hands of the Anarchists, who would afterwards use them for
a revolutionary purpose; consequently the big Aragón offensive which
would have made Franco draw back from Bilbao, and possibly from Madrid,
never happened. But this was comparatively a small matter. What was more
important was that once the war had been narrowed down to a 'war for
democracy' it became impossible to make any large-scale appeal for
working-class aid abroad. If we face facts we must admit that the
working class of the world has regarded the Spanish war with
detachment. Tens of thousands of individuals came to fight, but the tens
of millions behind them remained apathetic. During the first year of the
war the entire British public is thought to have subscribed to various
'aid Spain' funds about a quarter of a million pounds--probably less
than half of what they spend in a single week on going to the pictures.
The way in which the working class in the democratic countries could
really have helped her Spanish comrades was by industrial
action--strikes and boycotts. No such thing ever even began to happen.
The Labour and Communist leaders everywhere declared that it was
unthinkable; and no doubt they were right, so long as they were also
shouting at the tops of their voices that 'red' Spain was not 'red'.
Since 1914-18 'war for democracy' has had a sinister sound. For years
past the Communists themselves had been teaching the militant workers in
all countries that 'democracy' was a polite name for capitalism. To say
first 'Democracy is a swindle', and then 'Fight for democracy!' is not
good tactics. If, with the huge prestige of Soviet Russia behind them,
they had appealed to the workers of the world in the name not of
'democratic Spain', but of 'revolutionary Spain', it is hard to believe
that they would not have got a response.

But what was most important of all, with a non-revolutionary policy it
was difficult, if not impossible, to strike at Franco's rear. By the
summer of 1937 Franco was controlling a larger population than the
Government--much larger, if one counts in the colonies--with about the
same number of troops. As everyone knows, with a hostile population at
your back it is impossible to keep an army in the field without an
equally large army to guard your communications, suppress sabotage, etc.
Obviously, therefore, there was no real popular movement in Franco's
rear. It was inconceivable that the people in his territory, at any rate
the town-workers and the poorer peasants, liked or wanted Franco, but
with every swing to the Right the Government's superiority became less
apparent. What clinches everything is the case of Morocco. Why was there
no rising in Morocco? Franco was trying to set up an infamous
dictatorship, and the Moors actually preferred him to the Popular Front
Government! The palpable truth is that no attempt was made to foment a
rising in Morocco, because to do so would have meant putting a
revolutionary construction on the war. The first necessity, to convince
the Moors of the Government's good faith, would have been to proclaim
Morocco liberated. And we can imagine how pleased the French would have
been by that! The best strategic opportunity of the war was flung away
in the vain hope of placating French and British capitalism. The whole
tendency of the Communist policy was to reduce the war to an ordinary,
non-revolutionary war in which the Government was heavily handicapped.
For a war of that kind has got to be won by mechanical means, i.e.
ultimately, by limitless supplies of weapons; and the Government's chief
donor of weapons, the U.S.S.R., was at a great disadvantage,
geographically, compared with Italy and Germany. Perhaps the P.O.U.M.
and Anarchist slogan: 'The war and the revolution are inseparable', was
less visionary than it sounds.

I have given my reasons for thinking that the Communist
anti-revolutionary policy was mistaken, but so far as its effect upon
the war goes I do not hope that my judgement is right. A thousand times
I hope that it is wrong. I would wish to see this war won by any means
whatever. And of course we cannot tell yet what may happen. The
Government may swing to the Left again, the Moors may revolt of their
own accord, England may decide to buy Italy out, the war may be won by
straightforward military means--there is no knowing. I let the above
opinions stand, and time will show how far I am right or wrong.

But in February 1937 I did not see things quite in this light. I was
sick of the inaction on the Aragón front and chiefly conscious that I
had not done my fair share of the fighting. I used to think of the
recruiting poster in Barcelona which demanded accusingly of passers-by:
'What have _you_ done for democracy?' and feel that I could only answer:
'I have drawn my rations.' When I joined the militia I had promised
myself to kill one Fascist--after all, if each of us killed one they
would soon be extinct--and I had killed nobody yet, had hardly had the
chance to do so. And of course I wanted to go to Madrid. Everyone in the
army, whatever his political opinions, always wanted to go to Madrid.
This would probably mean exchanging into the International Column, for
the P.O.U.M. had now very few troops at Madrid and the Anarchists not so
many as formerly.

For the present, of course, one had to stay in the line, but I told
everyone that when we went on leave I should, if possible, exchange into
the International Column, which meant putting myself under Communist
control. Various people tried to dissuade me, but no one attempted to
interfere. It is fair to say that there was very little heresy-hunting
in the P.O.U.M., perhaps not enough, considering their special
circumstances; short of being a pro-Fascist no one was penalized for
holding the wrong political opinions. I spent much of my time in the
militia in bitterly criticizing the P.O.U.M. 'line', but I never got
into trouble for it. There was not even any pressure upon one to become
a political member of the party, though I think the majority of the
militiamen did so. I myself never joined the party--for which
afterwards, when the P.O.U.M. was suppressed, I was rather sorry.



Chapter 6


Meanwhile, the daily--more particularly nightly--round, the common task.
Sentry-go, patrols, digging; mud, rain, shrieking winds, and occasional
snow. It was not till well into April that the nights grew noticeably
warmer. Up here on the plateau the March days were mostly like an
English March, with bright blue skies and nagging winds. The winter
barley was a foot high, crimson buds were forming on the cherry trees
(the line here ran through deserted orchards and vegetable gardens), and
if you searched the ditches you could find violets and a kind of wild
hyacinth like a poor specimen of a bluebell. Immediately behind the line
there ran a wonderful, green, bubbling stream, the first transparent
water I had seen since coming to the front. One day I set my teeth and
crawled into the river to have my first bath in six weeks. It was what
you might call a brief bath, for the water was mainly snow-water and not
much above freezing-point.

Meanwhile nothing happened, nothing ever happened. The English had got
into the habit of saying that this wasn't a war, it was a bloody
pantomime. We were hardly under direct fire from the Fascists. The only
danger was from stray bullets, which, as the lines curved forward on
either side, came from several directions. All the casualties at this
time were from strays. Arthur Clinton got a mysterious bullet that
smashed his left shoulder and disabled his arm, permanently, I am
afraid. There was a little shell-fire, but it was extraordinarily
ineffectual. The scream and crash of the shells was actually looked upon
as a mild diversion. The Fascists ever dropped their shells on our
parapet. A few hundred yards behind us there was a country house, called
La Granja, with big farm-buildings, which was used as a store,
headquarters, and cookhouse for this sector of the line. It was this
that the Fascist gunners were trying for, but they were five or six
kilometres away and they never aimed well enough to do more than smash
the windows and chip the walls. You were only in danger if you happened
to be coming up the road when the firing started, and the shells plunged
into the fields on either side of you. One learned almost immediately
the mysterious art of knowing by the sound of a shell how close it will
fall. The shells the Fascists were firing at this period were wretchedly
bad. Although they were 150 mm. they only made a crater about six feet
wide by four deep, and at least one in four failed to explode. There
were the usual romantic tales of sabotage in the Fascist factories and
unexploded shells in which, instead of the charge, there was found a
scrap of paper saying 'Red Front', but I never saw one. The truth was
that the shells were hopelessly old; someone picked up a brass fuse-cap
stamped with the date, and it was 1917. The Fascist guns were of the
same make and calibre as our own, and the unexploded shells were often
reconditioned and fired back. There was said to be one old shell with a
nickname of its own which travelled daily to and fro, never exploding.

At night small patrols used to be sent into no man's land to lie in
ditches near the Fascist lines and listen for sounds (bugle-calls,
motor-horns, and so forth) that indicated activity in Huesca. There was
a constant come-and-go of Fascist troops, and the numbers could be
checked to some extent from listeners' reports. We always had special
orders to report the ringing of church bells. It seemed that the
Fascists always heard mass before going into action. In among the fields
and orchards there were deserted mud-walled huts which it was safe to
explore with a lighted match when you had plugged up the windows.
Sometimes you came on valuable pieces of loot such as a hatchet or a
Fascist water-bottle (better than ours and greatly sought after). You
could explore in the daytime as well, but mostly it had to be done
crawling on all fours. It was queer to creep about in those empty,
fertile fields where everything had been arrested just at the
harvest-moment. Last year's crops had never been touched. The unpruned
vines were snaking across the ground, the cobs on the standing maize had
gone as hard as stone, the mangels and sugar-beets were hyper-trophied
into huge woody lumps. How the peasants must have cursed both armies!
Sometimes parties of men went spud-gathering in no man's land. About a
mile to the right of us, where the lines were closer together, there was
a patch of potatoes that was frequented both by the Fascists and
ourselves. We went there in the daytime, they only at night, as it was
commanded by our machine-guns. One night to our annoyance they turned
out _en masse_ and cleared up the whole patch. We discovered another patch
farther on, where there was practically no cover and you had to lift the
potatoes lying on your belly--a fatiguing job. If their machine-gunners
spotted you, you had to flatten yourself out like a rat when it squirms
under a door, with the bullets cutting up the clods a few yards behind
you. It seemed worth it at the time. Potatoes were getting very scarce.
If you got a sackful you could take them down to the cook-house and swap
them for a water-bottleful of coffee.

And still nothing happened, nothing ever looked like happening. 'When
are we going to attack? Why don't we attack?' were the questions you
heard night and day from Spaniard and Englishman alike. When you think
what fighting means it is queer that soldiers want to fight, and yet
undoubtedly they do. In stationary warfare there are three things that
all soldiers long for: a battle, more cigarettes, and a week's leave. We
were somewhat better armed now than before. Each man had a hundred and
fifty rounds of ammunition instead of fifty, and by degrees we were
being issued with bayonets, steel helmets, and a few bombs. There were
constant rumours of forthcoming battles, which I have since thought were
deliberately circulated to keep up the spirits of the troops. It did not
need much military knowledge to see that there would be no major action
on this side of Huesca, at any rate for the time being. The strategic
point was the road to Jaca, over on the other side. Later, when the
Anarchists made their attacks on the Jaca road, our job was to make
'holding attacks' and force the Fascists to divert troops from the other
side.

During all this time, about six weeks, there was only one action on our
part of the front. This was when our Shock Troopers attacked the
Manicomio, a disused lunatic asylum which the Fascists had converted
into a fortress. There were several hundred refugee Germans serving with
the P.O.U.M. They were organized in a special battalion called the
Batallon de Cheque, and from a military point of view they were on quite
a different level from the rest of the militia--indeed, were more like
soldiers than anyone I saw in Spain, except the Assault Guards and some
of the International Column. The attack was mucked up, as usual. How
many operations in this war, on the Government side, were _not_ mucked
up, I wonder? The Shock Troops took the Manicomio by storm, but the
troops, of I forget which militia, who were to support them by seizing
the neighbouring hill that commanded the Manicomio, were badly let down.
The captain who led them was one of those Regular Army officers of
doubtful loyalty whom the Government persisted in employing. Either from
fright or treachery he warned the Fascists by flinging a bomb when they
were two hundred yards away. I am glad to say his men shot him dead on
the spot. But the surprise-attack was no surprise, and the militiamen
were mown down by heavy fire and driven off the hill, and at nightfall
the Shock Troops had to abandon the Manicomio. Through the night the
ambulances filed down the abominable road to Sietamo, killing the badly
wounded with their joltings.

All of us were lousy by this time; though still cold it was warm enough
for that. I have had a big experience of body vermin of various kinds,
and for sheer beastliness the louse beats everything I have encountered.
Other insects, mosquitoes for instance, make you suffer more, but at
least they aren't _resident_ vermin. The human louse somewhat resembles a
tiny lobster, and he lives chiefly in your trousers. Short of burning
all your clothes there is no known way of getting rid of him. Down the
seams of your trousers he lays his glittering white eggs, like tiny
grains of rice, which hatch out and breed families of their own at
horrible speed. I think the pacifists might find it helpful to
illustrate their pamphlets with enlarged photographs of lice. Glory of
war, indeed! In war _all_ soldiers are lousy, at least when it is warm
enough. The men who fought at Verdun, at Waterloo, at Flodden, at
Senlac, at Thermopylae--every one of them had lice crawling over his
testicles. We kept the brutes down to some extent by burning out the
eggs and by bathing as often as we could face it. Nothing short of lice
could have driven me into that ice-cold river.

Everything was running short--boots, clothes, tobacco, soap, candles,
matches, olive oil. Our uniforms were dropping to pieces, and many of
the men had no boots, only rope-soled sandals. You came on piles of
worn-out boots everywhere. Once we kept a dug-out fire burning for two
days mainly with boots, which are not bad fuel. By this time my wife was
in Barcelona and used to send me tea, chocolate, and even cigars when
such things were procurable, but even in Barcelona everything was
running short, especially tobacco. The tea was a godsend, though we had
no milk and seldom any sugar. Parcels were constantly being sent from
England to men in the contingent but they never arrived; food, clothes,
cigarettes--everything was either refused by the Post Office or seized
in France. Curiously enough, the only firm that succeeded in sending
packets of tea--even, on one memorable occasion, a tin of biscuits--to
my wife was the Army and Navy Stores. Poor old Army and Navy! They did
their duty nobly, but perhaps they might have felt happier if the stuff
had been going to Franco's side of the barricade. The shortage of
tobacco was the worst of all. At the beginning we had been issued with a
packet of cigarettes a day, then it got down to eight cigarettes a day,
then to five. Finally there were ten deadly days when there was no issue
of tobacco at all. For the first time, in Spain, I saw something that
you see every day in London--people picking up fag-ends.

Towards the end of March I got a poisoned hand that had to be lanced and
put in a sling. I had to go into hospital, but it was not worth sending
me to Sietamo for such a petty injury, so I stayed in the so-called
hospital at Monflorite, which was merely a casualty clearing station. I
was there ten days, part of the time in bed. The _practicantes_ (hospital
assistants) stole practically every valuable object I possessed,
including my camera and all my photographs. At the front everyone stole,
it was the inevitable effect of shortage, but the hospital people were
always the worst. Later, in the hospital at Barcelona, an American who
had come to join the International Column on a ship that was torpedoed
by an Italian submarine, told me how he was carried ashore wounded, and
how, even as they lifted him into the ambulance, the stretcher-bearers
pinched his wrist-watch.

While my arm was in the sling I spent several blissful days wandering
about the country-side. Monflorite was the usual huddle of mud and stone
houses, with narrow tortuous alleys that had been churned by lorries
till they looked like the craters of the moon. The church had been badly
knocked about but was used as a military store. In the whole
neighbourhood there were only two farm-houses of any size, Torre Lorenzo
and Torre Fabian, and only two really large buildings, obviously the
houses of the landowners who had once lorded it over the countryside;
you could see their wealth reflected in the miserable huts of the
peasants. Just behind the river, close to the front line, there was an
enormous flour-mill with a country-house attached to it. It seemed
shameful to see the huge costly machine rusting useless and the wooden
flour chutes torn down for firewood. Later on, to get firewood for the
troops farther back, parties of men were sent in lorries to wreck the
place systematically. They used to smash the floorboards of a room by
bursting a hand-grenade in it. La Granja, our store and cook-house, had
possibly at one time been a convent. It had huge courtyards and
out-houses, covering an acre or more, with stabling for thirty or forty
horses. The country-houses in that part of Spain are of no interest
architecturally, but their farm-buildings, of lime-washed stone with
round arches and magnificent roof-beams, are noble places, built on a
plan that has probably not altered for centuries. Sometimes it gave you
a sneaking sympathy with the Fascist ex-owners to see the way the
militia treated the buildings they had seized. In La Granja every room
that was not in use had been turned into a latrine--a frightful shambles
of smashed furniture and excrement. The little church that adjoined it,
its walls perforated by shell-holes, had its floor inches deep in dung.
In the great courtyard where the cooks ladled out the rations the litter
of rusty tins, mud, mule dung, and decaying food was revolting. It gave
point to the old army song:

There are rats, rats,
Rats as big as cats,
In the quartermaster's store!

The ones at La Granja itself really were as big as cats, or nearly;
great bloated brutes that waddled over the beds of muck, too impudent
even to run away unless you shot at them.

Spring was really here at last. The blue in the sky was softer, the air
grew suddenly balmy. The frogs were mating noisily in the ditches. Round
the drinking-pool that served for the village mules I found exquisite
green frogs the size of a penny, so brilliant that the young grass
looked dull beside them. Peasant lads went out with buckets hunting for
snails, which they roasted alive on sheets of tin. As soon as the
weather improved the peasants had turned out for the spring ploughing.
It is typical of the utter vagueness in which the Spanish agrarian
revolution is wrapped that I could not even discover for certain whether
the land here was collectivized or whether the peasants had simply
divided it up among themselves. I fancy that in theory it was
collectivized, this being P.O.U.M. and Anarchist territory. At any rate
the landowners were gone, the fields were being cultivated, and people
seemed satisfied. The friendliness of the peasants towards ourselves
never ceased to astonish me. To some of the older ones the war must have
seemed meaningless, visibly it produced a shortage of everything and a
dismal dull life for everybody, and at the best of times peasants hate
having troops quartered upon them. Yet they were invariably friendly--I
suppose reflecting that, however intolerable we might be in other ways,
we did stand between them and their one-time landlords. Civil war is a
queer thing. Huesca was not five miles away, it was these people's
market town, all of them had relatives there, every week of their lives
they had gone there to sell their poultry and vegetables. And now for
eight months an impenetrable barrier of barbed wire and machine-guns had
lain between. Occasionally it slipped their memory. Once I was talking
to an old woman who was carrying one of those tiny iron lamps in which
the Spaniards bum olive oil. 'Where can I buy a lamp like that?' I
said.' In Huesca,' she said without thinking, and then we both laughed.
The village girls were splendid vivid creatures with coal-black hair, a
swinging walk, and a straightforward, man-to-man demeanour which was
probably a by-product of the revolution.

Men in ragged blue shirts and black corduroy breeches, with
broad-brimmed straw hats, were ploughing the fields behind teams of
mules with rhythmically flopping ears. Their ploughs were wretched
things, only stirring the soil, not cutting anything we should regard as
a furrow. All the agricultural implements were pitifully antiquated,
everything being governed by the expensiveness of metal. A broken
plough-share, for instance, was patched, and then patched again, till
sometimes it was mainly patches. Rakes and pitchforks were made of wood.
Spades, among a people who seldom possessed boots, were unknown; they
did their digging with a clumsy hoe like those used in India. There was
a kind of harrow that took one straight back to the later Stone Age. It
was made of boards joined together, to about the size of a kitchen
table; in the boards hundreds of holes were morticed, and into each hole
was jammed a piece of flint which had been chipped into shape exactly as
men used to chip them ten thousand years ago. I remember my feelings
almost of horror when I first came upon one of these things in a
derelict hut in no man's land. I had to puzzle over it for a long while
before grasping that it was a harrow. It made me sick to think of the
work that must go into the making of such a thing, and the poverty that
was obliged to use flint in place of steel. I have felt more kindly
towards industrialism ever since. But in the village there were two
up-to-date farm tractors, no doubt seized from some big landowner's
estate.

Once or twice I wandered out to the little walled graveyard that stood a
mile or so from the village. The dead from the front were normally sent
to Sietamo; these were the village dead. It was queerly different from
an English graveyard. No reverence for the dead here! Everything
overgrown with bushes and coarse grass, human bones littered everywhere.
But the really surprising thing was the almost complete lack of
religious inscriptions on the gravestones, though they all dated from
before the revolution. Only once, I think, I saw the 'Pray for the Soul
of So-and-So' which is usual on Catholic graves. Most of the
inscriptions were purely secular, with ludicrous poems about the virtues
of the deceased. On perhaps one grave in four or five there was a small
cross or a perfunctory reference to Heaven; this had usually been
chipped off by some industrious atheist with a chisel.

It struck me that the people in this part of Spain must be genuinely
without religious feeling--religious feeling, I mean, in the orthodox
sense. It is curious that all the time I was in Spain I never once saw a
person cross himself; yet you would think such a movement would become
instinctive, revolution or no revolution. Obviously the Spanish Church
will come back (as the saying goes, night and the Jesuits always
return), but there is no doubt that at the outbreak of the revolution it
collapsed and was smashed up to an extent that would be unthinkable even
for the moribund C. of E. in like circumstances. To the Spanish people,
at any rate in Catalonia and Aragón, the Church was a racket pure and
simple. And possibly Christian belief was replaced to some extent by
Anarchism, whose influence is widely spread and which undoubtedly has a
religious tinge.

It was the day I came back from hospital that we advanced the line to
what was really its proper position, about a thousand yards forward,
along the little stream that lay a couple of hundred yards in front of
the Fascist line. This operation ought to have been carried out months
earlier. The point of doing it now was that the Anarchists were
attacking on the Jaca road, and to advance on this side made them divert
troops to face us.

We were sixty or seventy hours without sleep, and my memories go down
into a sort of blue, or rather a series of pictures. Listening-duty in
no man's land, a hundred yards from the Casa Francesa, a fortified
farm-house which was part of the Fascist line. Seven hours lying in a
horrible marsh, in reedy-smelling water into which one's body subsided
gradually deeper and deeper: the reedy smell, the numbing cold, the
stars immovable in the black sky, the harsh croaking of the frogs.
Though this was April it was the coldest night that I remember in Spain.
Only a hundred yards behind us the working-parties were hard at it, but
there was utter silence except for the chorus of the frogs. Just once
during the night I heard a sound--the familiar noise of a sand-bag being
flattened with a spade. It is queer how, just now and again, Spaniards
can carry out a brilliant feat of organization. The whole move was
beautifully planned. In seven hours six hundred men constructed twelve
hundred metres of trench and parapet, at distances of from a hundred and
fifty to three hundred yards from the Fascist line, and all so silently
that the Fascists heard nothing, and during the night there was only one
casualty. There were more next day, of course. Every man had his job
assigned to him, even to the cook-house orderlies who suddenly arrived
when the work was done with buckets of wine laced with brandy.

And then the dawn coming up and the Fascists suddenly discovering that
we were there. The square white block of the Casa Francesa, though it
was two hundred yards away, seemed to tower over us, and the
machine-guns in its sandbagged upper windows seemed to be pointing
straight down into the trench. We all stood gaping at it, wondering why
the Fascists didn't see us. Then a vicious swirl of bullets, and
everyone had flung himself on his knees and was frantically digging,
deepening the trench and scooping out small shelters in the side. My arm
was still in bandages, I could not dig, and I spent most of that day
reading a detective story--_The Missing Moneylender_ its name was. I
don't remember the plot of it, but I remember very clearly the feeling
of sitting there reading it; the dampish clay of the trench bottom
underneath me, the constant shifting of my legs out of the way as men
hurried stopping down the trench, the crack-crack-crack of bullets a
foot or two overhead. Thomas Parker got a bullet through the top of his
thigh, which, as he said, was nearer to being a D.S.O. than he cared
about. Casualties were happening all along the line, but nothing to what
there would have been if they had caught us on the move during the
night. A deserter told us afterwards that five Fascist sentries were
shot for negligence. Even now they could have massacred us if they had
had the initiative to bring up a few mortars. It was an awkward job
getting the wounded down the narrow, crowded trench. I saw one poor
devil, his breeches dark with blood, flung out of his stretcher and
gasping in agony. One had to carry wounded men a long distance, a mile
or more, for even when a road existed the ambulances never came very
near the front line. If they came too near the Fascists had a habit of
shelling them--justifiably, for in modern war no one scruples to use an
ambulance for carrying ammunition.

And then, next night, waiting at Torre Fabian for an attack that was
called off at the last moment by wireless. In the barn where we waited
the floor was a thin layer of chaff over deep beds of bones, human bones
and cows' bones mixed up, and the place was alive with rats. The filthy
brutes came swarming out of the ground on every side. If there is one
thing I hate more than another it is a rat running over me in the
darkness. However, I had the satisfaction of catching one of them a good
punch that sent him flying.

And then waiting fifty or sixty yards from the Fascist parapet for the
order to attack. A long line of men crouching in an irrigation ditch
with their bayonets peeping over the edge and the whites of their eyes
shining through the darkness. Kopp and Benjamin squatting behind us with
a man who had a wireless receiving-box strapped to his shoulders. On the
western horizon rosy gun-flashes followed at intervals of several
seconds by enormous explosions. And then a pip-pip-pip noise from the
wireless and the whispered order that we were to get out of it while the
going was good. We did so, but not quickly enough. Twelve wretched
children of the J.C.I. (the Youth League of the P.O.U.M., corresponding
to the J.S.U. of the P.S.U.C.) who had been posted only about forty
yards from the Fascist parapet, were caught by the dawn and unable to
escape. All day they had to lie there, with only tufts of grass for
cover, the Fascists shooting at them every time they moved. By nightfall
seven were dead, then the other five managed to creep away in the
darkness.

And then, for many mornings to follow, the sound of the Anarchist
attacks on the other side of Huesca. Always the same sound. Suddenly, at
some time in the small hours, the opening crash of several score bombs
bursting simultaneously--even from miles away a diabolical, rending
crash--and then the unbroken roar of massed rifles and machine-guns, a
heavy rolling sound curiously similar to the roll of drums. By degrees
the firing would spread all round the lines that encircled Huesca, and
we would stumble out into the trench to lean sleepily against the
parapet while a ragged meaningless fire swept overhead.

In the daytime the guns thundered fitfully. Torre Fabian, now our
cookhouse, was shelled and partially destroyed. It is curious that when
you are watching artillery-fire from a safe distance you always want the
gunner to hit his mark, even though the mark contains your dinner and
some of your comrades. The Fascists were shooting well that morning;
perhaps there were German gunners on the job. They bracketed neatly on
Torre Fabian. One shell beyond it, one shell short of it, then
whizz-BOOM' Burst rafters leaping upwards and a sheet of uralite
skimming down the air like a nicked playing-card. The next shell took
off a corner of a building as neatly as a giant might do it with a
knife. But the cooks produced dinner on time--a memorable feat.

As the days went on the unseen but audible guns began each to assume a
distinct personality. There were the two batteries of Russian 75-mm.
guns which fired from close in our rear and which somehow evoked in my
mind the picture of a fat man hitting a golf-ball. These were the first
Russian guns I had seen--or heard, rather. They had a low trajectory and
a very high velocity, so that you heard the cartridge explosion, the
whizz, and the shell-burst almost simultaneously. Behind Monflorite were
two very heavy guns which fired a few times a day, with a deep, muffled
roar that was like the baying of distant chained-up monsters. Up at
Mount Aragón, the medieval fortress which the Government troops had
stormed last year (the first time in its history, it was said), and
which guarded one of the approaches to Huesca, there was a heavy gun
which must have dated well back into the nineteenth century. Its great
shells whistled over so slowly that you felt certain you could run
beside them and keep up with them. A shell from this gun sounded like
nothing so much as a man riding along on a bicycle and whistling. The
trench-mortars, small though they were, made the most evil sound of all.
Their shells are really a kind of winged torpedo, shaped like the darts
thrown in public-houses and about the size of a quart bottle; they go
off with a devilish metallic crash, as of some monstrous globe of
brittle steel being shattered on an anvil. Sometimes our aeroplanes flew
over and let loose the aerial torpedoes whose tremendous echoing roar
makes the earth tremble even at two miles' distance. The shell-bursts
from the Fascist anti-aircraft guns dotted the sky like cloudlets in a
bad water-colour, but I never saw them get within a thousand yards of an
aeroplane. When an aeroplane swoops down and uses its machine-gun the
sound, from below, is like the fluttering of wings.

On our part of the line not much was happening. Two hundred yards to the
right of us, where the Fascists were on higher ground, their snipers
picked off a few of our comrades. Two hundred yards to the left, at the
bridge over the stream, a sort of duel was going on between the Fascist
mortars and the men who were building a concrete barricade across the
bridge. The evil little shells whizzed over, zwing-crash! zwing-crash!,
making a doubly diabolical noise when they landed on the asphalt road. A
hundred yards away you could stand in perfect safety and watch the
columns of earth and black smoke leaping into the air like magic trees.
The poor devils round the bridge spent much of the daytime cowering in
the little man-holes they had scooped in the side of the trench. But
there were less casualties than might have been expected, and the
barricade rose steadily, a wall of concrete two feet thick, with
embrasures for two machine-guns and a small field gun. The concrete was
being reinforced with old bedsteads, which apparently was the only iron
that could be found for the purpose.



Chapter 7


One afternoon Benjamin told us that he wanted fifteen volunteers. The
attack on the Fascist redoubt which had been called off on the previous
occasion was to be carried out tonight. I oiled my ten Mexican
cartridges, dirtied my bayonet (the things give your position away if
they flash too much), and packed up a hunk of bread, three inches of red
sausage, and a cigar which my wife had sent from Barcelona and which I
had been hoarding for a long time. Bombs were served out, three to a
man. The Spanish Government had at last succeeded in producing a decent
bomb. It was on the principle of a Mills bomb, but with two pins instead
of one. After you had pulled the pins out there was an interval of seven
seconds before the bomb exploded. Its chief disadvantage was that one
pin was very stiff and the other very loose, so that you had the choice
of leaving both pins in place and being unable to pull the stiff one out
in a moment of emergency, or pulling out the stiff one beforehand and
being in a constant stew lest the thing should explode in your pocket.
But it was a handy little bomb to throw.

A little before midnight Benjamin led the fifteen of us down to Torre
Fabian. Ever since evening the rain had been pelting down. The
irrigation ditches were brimming over, and every time you stumbled into
one you were in water up to your waist. In the pitch darkness and
sheeting rain in the farm-yard a dim mass of men was waiting. Kopp
addressed us, first in Spanish, then in English, and explained the plan
of attack. The Fascist line here made an L-bend and the parapet we were
to attack lay on rising ground at the corner of the L. About thirty of
us, half English, and half Spanish, under the command of Jorge Roca, our
battalion commander (a battalion in the militia was about four hundred
men), and Benjamin, were to creep up and cut the Fascist wire. Jorge
would fling the first bomb as a signal, then the rest of us were to send
in a rain of bombs, drive the Fascists out of the parapet, and seize it
before they could rally. Simultaneously seventy Shock Troopers were to
assault the next Fascist 'position', which lay two hundred yards to the
right of the other, joined to it by a communication-trench. To prevent
us from shooting each other in the darkness white armlets would be worn.
At this moment a messenger arrived to say that there were no white
armlets. Out of the darkness a plaintive voice suggested: 'Couldn't we
arrange for the Fascists to wear white armlets instead?'

There was an hour or two to put in. The barn over the mule stable was so
wrecked by shell-fire that you could not move about in it without a
light. Half the floor had been torn away by a plunging shell and there
was a twenty-foot drop on to the stones beneath. Someone found a pick
and levered a burst plank out of the floor, and in a few minutes we had
got a fire alight and our drenched clothes were steaming. Someone else
produced a pack of cards. A rumour--one of those mysterious rumours that
are endemic in war--flew round that hot coffee with brandy in it was
about to be served out. We filed eagerly down the almost-collapsing
staircase and wandered round the dark yard, inquiring where the coffee
was to be found. Alas! there was no coffee. Instead, they called us
together, ranged us into single file, and then Jorge and Benjamin set
off rapidly into the darkness, the rest of us following.

It was still raining and intensely dark, but the wind had dropped. The
mud was unspeakable. The paths through the beet-fields were simply a
succession of lumps, as slippery as a greasy pole, with huge pools
everywhere. Long before we got to the place where we were to leave our
own parapet everyone had fallen several times and our rifles were coated
with mud. At the parapet a small knot of men, our reserves, were
waiting, and the doctor and a row of stretchers. We filed through the
gap in the parapet and waded through another irrigation ditch.
Splash-gurgle! Once again in water up to your waist, with the filthy,
slimy mud oozing over your boot-tops. On the grass outside Jorge waited
till we were all through. Then, bent almost double, he began creeping
slowly forward. The Fascist parapet was about a hundred and fifty yards
away. Our one chance of getting there was to move without noise.

I was in front with Jorge and Benjamin. Bent double, but with faces
raised, we crept into the almost utter darkness at a pace that grew
slower at every step. The rain beat lightly in our faces. When I glanced
back I could see the men who were nearest to me, a bunch of humped
shapes like huge black mushrooms gliding slowly forward. But every time
I raised my head Benjamin, close beside me, whispered fiercely in my
ear: 'To keep ze head down! To keep ze head down!' I could have told him
that he needn't worry. I knew by experiment that on a dark night you can
never see a man at twenty paces. It was far more important to go
quietly. If they once heard us we were done for. They had only to spray
the darkness with their machine-gun and there was nothing for it but to
run or be massacred.

But on the sodden ground it was almost impossible to move quietly. Do
what you would your feet stuck to the mud, and every step you took was
slop-slop, slop-slop. And the devil of it was that the wind had dropped,
and in spite of the rain it was a very quiet night. Sounds would carry a
long way. There was a dreadful moment when I kicked against a tin and
thought every Fascist within miles must have heard it. But no, not a
sound, no answering shot, no movement in the Fascist lines. We crept
onwards, always more slowly. I cannot convey to you the depth of my
desire to get there. Just to get within bombing distance before they
heard us! At such a time you have not even any fear, only a tremendous
hopeless longing to get over the intervening ground. I have felt exactly
the same thing when stalking a wild animal; the same agonized desire to
get within range, the same dreamlike certainty that it is impossible.
And how the distance stretched out! I knew the ground well, it was
barely a hundred and fifty yards, and yet it seemed more like a mile.
When you are creeping at that pace you are aware as an ant might be of
the enormous variations in the ground; the splendid patch of smooth
grass here, the evil patch of sticky mud there, the tall rustling reeds
that have got to be avoided, the heap of stones that almost makes you
give up hope because it seems impossible to get over it without noise.

We had been creeping forward for such an age that I began to think we
had gone the wrong way. Then in the darkness thin parallel lines of
something blacker were faintly visible. It was the outer wire (the
Fascists had two lines of wire). Jorge knelt down, fumbled in his
pocket. He had our only pair of wire-cutters. Snip, snip. The trailing
stuff was lifted delicately aside. We waited for the men at the back to
close up. They seemed to be making a frightful noise. It might be fifty
yards to the Fascist parapet now. Still onwards, bent double. A stealthy
step, lowering your foot as gently as a cat approaching a mousehole;
then a pause to listen; then another step. Once I raised my head; in
silence Benjamin put his hand behind my neck and pulled it violently
down. I knew that the inner wire was barely twenty yards from the
parapet. It seemed to me inconceivable that thirty men could get there
unheard. Our breathing was enough to give us away. Yet somehow we did
get there. The Fascist parapet was visible now, a dim black mound,
looming high above us. Once again Jorge knelt and fumbled. Snip, snip.
There was no way of cutting the stuff silently.

So that was the inner wire. We crawled through it on all fours and
rather more rapidly. If we had time to deploy now all was well. Jorge
and Benjamin crawled across to the right. But the men behind, who were
spread out, had to form into single file to get through the narrow gap
in the wire, and just as this moment there was a flash and a bang from
the Fascist parapet. The sentry had heard us at last. Jorge poised
himself on one knee and swung his arm like a bowler. Crash! His bomb
burst somewhere over the parapet. At once, far more promptly than one
would have thought possible, a roar of fire, ten or twenty rifles, burst
out from the Fascist parapet. They had been waiting for us after all.
Momentarily you could see every sand-bag in the lurid light. Men too far
back were flinging their bombs and some of them were falling short of
the parapet. Every loophole seemed to be spouting jets of flame. It is
always hateful to be shot at in the dark--every rifle-flash seems to be
pointed straight at yourself--but it was the bombs that were the worst.
You cannot conceive the horror of these things till you have seen one
burst close to you in darkness; in the daytime there is only the crash
of the explosion, in the darkness there is the blinding red glare as
well. I had flung myself down at the first volley. All this while I was
lying on my side in the greasy mud, wrestling savagely with the pin of a
bomb. The damned thing would not come out. Finally I realized that I was
twisting it in the wrong direction. I got the pin out, rose to my knees,
hurled the bomb, and threw myself down again. The bomb burst over to the
right, outside the parapet; fright had spoiled my aim. Just at this
moment another bomb burst right in front of me, so close that I could
feel the heat of the explosion. I flattened myself out and dug my face
into the mud so hard that I hurt my neck and thought that I was wounded.
Through the din I heard an English voice behind me say quietly: 'I'm
hit.' The bomb had, in fact, wounded several people round about me
without touching myself. I rose to my knees and flung my second bomb. I
forget where that one went.

The Fascists were firing, our people behind were firing, and I was very
conscious of being in the middle. I felt the blast of a shot and
realized that a man was firing from immediately behind me. I stood up
and shouted at him: 'Don't shoot at me, you bloody fool!' At this moment
I saw that Benjamin, ten or fifteen yards to my right, was motioning to
me with his arm. I ran across to him. It meant crossing the line of
spouting loop-holes, and as I went I clapped my left hand over my cheek;
an idiotic gesture--as though one's hand could stop a bullet!--but I had
a horror of being hit in the face. Benjamin was kneeling on one knee
with a pleased, devilish sort of expression on his face and firing
carefully at the rifle-flashes with his automatic pistol. Jorge had
dropped wounded at the first volley and was somewhere out of sight. I
knelt beside Benjamin, pulled the pin out of my third bomb and flung it.
Ah! No doubt about it that time. The bomb crashed inside the parapet, at
the corner, just by the machine-gun nest.

The Fascist fire seemed to have slackened very suddenly. Benjamin leapt
to his feet and shouted: 'Forward! Charge!' We dashed up the short steep
slope on which the parapet stood. I say 'dashed'; 'lumbered' would be a
better word; the fact is that you can't move fast when you are sodden
and mudded from head to foot and weighted down with a heavy rifle and
bayonet and a hundred and fifty cartridges. I took it for granted that
there would be a Fascist waiting for me at the top. If he fired at that
range he could not miss me, and yet somehow I never expected him to
fire, only to try for me with his bayonet. I seemed to feel in advance
the sensation of our bayonets crossing, and I wondered whether his arm
would be stronger than mine. However, there was no Fascist waiting. With
a vague feeling of relief I found that it was a low parapet and the
sand-bags gave a good foothold. As a rule they are difficult to get
over. Everything inside was smashed to pieces, beams flung all over the
place, and great shards of uralite littered everywhere. Our bombs had
wrecked all the huts and dug-outs. And still there was not a soul
visible. I thought they would be lurking somewhere underground, and
shouted in English (I could not think of any Spanish at the moment):
'Come on out of it! Surrender!' No answer. Then a man, a shadowy figure
in the half-light, skipped over the roof of one of the ruined huts and
dashed away to the left. I started after him, prodding my bayonet
ineffectually into the darkness. As I rounded the comer of the hut I saw
a man--I don't know whether or not it was the same man as I had seen
before--fleeing up the communication-trench that led to the other
Fascist position. I must have been very close to him, for I could see
him clearly. He was bareheaded and seemed to have nothing on except a
blanket which he was clutching round his shoulders. If I had fired I
could have blown him to pieces. But for fear of shooting one another we
had been ordered to use only bayonets once we were inside the parapet,
and in any case I never even thought of firing. Instead, my mind leapt
backwards twenty years, to our boxing instructor at school, showing me
in vivid pantomime how he had bayoneted a Turk at the Dardanelles. I
gripped my rifle by the small of the butt and lunged at the man's back.
He was just out of my reach. Another lunge: still out of reach. And for
a little distance we proceeded like this, he rushing up the trench and I
after him on the ground above, prodding at his shoulder-blades and never
quite getting there--a comic memory for me to look back upon, though I
suppose it seemed less comic to him.

Of course, he knew the ground better than I and had soon slipped away
from me. When I came back the position was full of shouting men. The
noise of firing had lessened somewhat. The Fascists were still pouring a
heavy fire at us from three sides, but it was coming from a greater
distance.

We had driven them back for the time being. I remember saying in an
oracular manner: 'We can hold this place for half an hour, not more.' I
don't know why I picked on half an hour. Looking over the right-hand
parapet you could see innumerable greenish rifle-flashes stabbing the
darkness; but they were a long way back, a hundred or two hundred yards.
Our job now was to search the position and loot anything that was worth
looting. Benjamin and some others were already scrabbling among the
ruins of a big hut or dug-out in the middle of the position. Benjamin
staggered excitedly through the ruined roof, tugging at the rope handle
of an ammunition box.

'Comrades! Ammunition! Plenty ammunition here!'

'We don't want ammunition,' said a voice, 'we want rifles.'

This was true. Half our rifles were jammed with mud and unusable. They
could be cleaned, but it is dangerous to take the bolt out of a rifle in
the darkness; you put it down somewhere and then you lose it. I had a
tiny electric torch which my wife had managed to buy in Barcelona,
otherwise we had no light of any description between us. A few men with
good rifles began a desultory fire at the flashes in the distance. No
one dared fire too rapidly; even the best of the rifles were liable to
jam if they got too hot. There were about sixteen of us inside the
parapet, including one or two who were wounded. A number of wounded,
English and Spanish, were lying outside. Patrick O'Hara, a Belfast
Irishman who had had some training in first-aid, went to and fro with
packets of bandages, binding up the wounded men and, of course, being
shot at every time he returned to the parapet, in spite of his indignant
shouts of 'POUM!'

We began searching the position. There were several dead men lying
about, but I did not stop to examine them. The thing I was after was the
machine-gun. All the while when we were lying outside I had been
wondering vaguely why the gun did not fire. I flashed my torch inside
the machine-gun nest. A bitter disappointment! The gun was not there.
Its tripod was there, and various boxes of ammunition and spare parts,
but the gun was gone. They must have unscrewed it and carried it off at
the first alarm. No doubt they were acting under orders, but it was a
stupid and cowardly thing to do, for if they had kept the gun in place
they could have slaughtered the whole lot of us. We were furious. We had
set our hearts on capturing a machine-gun.

We poked here and there but did not find anything of much value. There
were quantities of Fascist bombs lying about--a rather inferior type of
bomb, which you touched off by pulling a string--and I put a couple of
them in my pocket as souvenirs. It was impossible not to be struck by
the bare misery of the Fascist dug-outs. The litter of spare clothes,
books, food, petty personal belongings that you saw in our own dug-outs
was completely absent; these poor unpaid conscripts seemed to own
nothing except blankets and a few soggy hunks of bread. Up at the far
end there was a small dug-out which was partly above ground and had a
tiny window. We flashed the torch through the window and instantly
raised a cheer. A cylindrical object in a leather case, four feet high
and six inches in diameter, was leaning against the wall. Obviously the
machine-gun barrel. We dashed round and got in at the doorway, to find
that the thing in the leather case was not a machine-gun but something
which, in our weapon-starved army, was even more precious. It was an
enormous telescope, probably of at least sixty or seventy
magnifications, with a folding tripod. Such telescopes simply did not
exist on our side of the line and they were desperately needed. We
brought it out in triumph and leaned it against the parapet, to be
carried off after.

At this moment someone shouted that the Fascists were closing in.
Certainly the din of firing had grown very much louder. But it was
obvious that the Fascists would not counterattack from the right, which
meant crossing no man's land and assaulting their own parapet. If they
had any sense at all they would come at us from inside the line. I went
round to the other side of the dug-outs. The position was roughly
horseshoe-shaped, with the dug-outs in the middle, so that we had
another parapet covering us on the left. A heavy fire was coming from
that direction, but it did not matter greatly. The danger-spot was
straight in front, where there was no protection at all. A stream of
bullets was passing just overhead. They must be coming from the other
Fascist position farther up the line; evidently the Shock Troopers had
not captured it after all. But this time the noise was deafening. It was
the unbroken, drum-like roar of massed rifles which I was used to
hearing from a little distance; this was the first time I had been in
the middle of it. And by now, of course, the firing had spread along the
line for miles around. Douglas Thompson, with a wounded arm dangling
useless at his side, was leaning against the parapet and firing
one-handed at the flashes. Someone whose rifle had jammed was loading
for him.

There were four or five of us round this side. It was obvious what we
must do. We must drag the sand-bags from the front parapet and make a
barricade across the unprotected side. And we had got to be quick. The
fire was high at present, but they might lower it at any moment; by the
flashes all round I could see that we had a hundred or two hundred men
against us. We began wrenching the sand-bags loose, carrying them twenty
yards forward and dumping them into a rough heap. It was a vile job.
They were big sand-bags, weighing a hundredweight each and it took every
ounce of your strength to prise them loose; and then the rotten sacking
split and the damp earth cascaded all over you, down your neck and up
your sleeves. I remember feeling a deep horror at everything: the chaos,
the darkness, the frightful din, the slithering to and fro in the mud,
the struggles with the bursting sand-bags--all the time encumbered with
my rifle, which I dared not put down for fear of losing it. I even
shouted to someone as we staggered along with a bag between us: 'This is
war! Isn't it bloody?' Suddenly a succession of tall figures came
leaping over the front parapet. As they came nearer we saw that they
wore the uniform of the Shock Troopers, and we cheered, thinking they
were reinforcements. However, there were only four of them, three
Germans and a Spaniard. We heard afterwards what had happened to the
Shock Troopers. They did not know the ground and in the darkness had
been led to the wrong place, where they were caught on the Fascist wire
and numbers of them were shot down. These were four who had got lost,
luckily for themselves. The Germans did not speak a word of English,
French, or Spanish. With difficulty and much gesticulation we explained
what we were doing and got them to help us in building the barricade.

The Fascists had brought up a machine-gun now. You could see it spitting
like a squib a hundred or two hundred yards away; the bullets came over
us with a steady, frosty crackle. Before long we had flung enough
sand-bags into place to make a low breastwork behind which the few men
who were on this side of the position could lie down and fire. I was
kneeling behind them. A mortar-shell whizzed over and crashed somewhere
in no man's land. That was another danger, but it would take them some
minutes to find our range. Now that we had finished wrestling with those
beastly sand-bags it was not bad fun in a way; the noise, the darkness,
the flashes approaching, our own men blazing back at the flashes. One
even had time to think a little. I remember wondering whether I was
frightened, and deciding that I was not. Outside, where I was probably
in less danger, I had been half sick with fright. Suddenly there was
another shout that the Fascists were closing in. There was no doubt
about it this time, the rifle-flashes were much nearer. I saw a flash
hardly twenty yards away. Obviously they were working their way up the
communication-trench. At twenty yards they were within easy bombing
range; there were eight or nine of us bunched together and a single
well-placed bomb would blow us all to fragments. Bob Smillie, the blood
running down his face from a small wound, sprang to his knee and flung a
bomb. We cowered, waiting for the crash. The fuse fizzled red as it
sailed through the air, but the bomb failed to explode. (At least a
quarter of these bombs were duds). I had no bombs left except the
Fascist ones and I was not certain how these worked. I shouted to the
others to know if anyone had a bomb to spare. Douglas Moyle felt in his
pocket and passed one across. I flung it and threw myself on my face. By
one of those strokes of luck that happen about once in a year I had
managed to drop the bomb almost exactly where the rifle had flashed.
There was the roar of the explosion and then, instantly, a diabolical
outcry of screams and groans. We had got one of them, anyway; I don't
know whether he was killed, but certainly he was badly hurt. Poor
wretch, poor wretch! I felt a vague sorrow as I heard him screaming. But
at the same instant, in the dim light of the rifle-flashes, I saw or
thought I saw a figure standing near the place where the rifle had
flashed. I threw up my rifle and let fly. Another scream, but I think it
was still the effect of the bomb. Several more bombs were thrown. The
next rifle-flashes we saw were a long way off, a hundred yards or more.
So we had driven them back, temporarily at least.

Everyone began cursing and saying why the hell didn't they send us some
supports. With a sub-machine-gun or twenty men with clean rifles we
could hold this place against a battalion. At this moment Paddy
Donovan, who was second-in-command to Benjamin and had been sent back for
orders, climbed over the front parapet.

'Hi! Come on out of it! All men to retire at once!'

'What?'

'Retire! Get out of it!'

'Why?'

'Orders. Back to our own lines double-quick.'

People were already climbing over the front parapet. Several of them
were struggling with a heavy ammunition box. My mind flew to the
telescope which I had left leaning against the parapet on the other side
of the position. But at this moment I saw that the four Shock Troopers,
acting I suppose on some mysterious orders they had received beforehand,
had begun running up the communication-trench. It led to the other
Fascist position and--if they got there--to certain death. They were
disappearing into the darkness. I ran after them, trying to think of the
Spanish for 'retire'; finally I shouted, '_Atrás! Atrás!_' which perhaps
conveyed the right meaning. The Spaniard understood it and brought the
others back. Paddy was waiting at the parapet.

'Come on, hurry up.'

'But the telescope!'

'Bugger the telescope! Benjamin's waiting outside.'

We climbed out. Paddy held the wire aside for me. As soon as we got away
from the shelter of the Fascist parapet we were under a devilish fire
that seemed to be coming at us from every direction. Part of it, I do
not doubt, came from our own side, for everyone was firing all along the
line. Whichever way we turned a fresh stream of bullets swept past; we
were driven this way and that in the darkness like a flock of sheep. It
did not make it any easier that we were dragging a captured box of
ammunition--one of those boxes that hold 1750 rounds and weigh about a
hundredweight--besides a box of bombs and several Fascist rifles. In a
few minutes, although the distance from parapet to parapet was not two
hundred yards and most of us knew the ground, we were completely lost.
We found ourselves slithering about in a muddy field, knowing nothing
except that bullets were coming from both sides. There was no moon to go
by, but the sky was growing a little lighter. Our lines lay east of
Huesca; I wanted to stay where we were till the first crack of dawn
showed us which was east and which was west; but the others were against
it. We slithered onwards, changing our direction several times and
taking it in turns to haul at the ammunition-box. At last we saw the low
flat line of a parapet looming in front of us. It might be ours or it
might be the Fascists'; nobody had the dimmest idea which way we were
going. Benjamin crawled on his belly through some tall whitish weed till
he was about twenty yards from the parapet and tried a challenge. A
shout of 'POUM!' answered him. We jumped to our feet, found our way
along the parapet, slopped once more through the irrigation
ditch--splash-gurgle!--and were in safety.

Kopp was waiting inside the parapet with a few Spaniards. The doctor and
the stretchers were gone. It appeared that all the wounded had been got
in except Jorge and one of our own men, Hiddlestone by name, who were
missing. Kopp was pacing up and down, very pale. Even the fat folds at
the back of his neck were pale; he was paying no attention to the
bullets that streamed over the low parapet and cracked close to his
head. Most of us were squatting behind the parapet for cover. Kopp was
muttering. '_Jorge! Coño! Jorge!_' And then in English. 'If Jorge is gone
it is terreeble, terreeble!' Jorge was his personal friend and one of
his best officers. Suddenly he turned to us and asked for five
volunteers, two English and three Spanish, to go and look for the
missing men. Moyle and I volunteered with three Spaniards.

As we got outside the Spaniards murmured that it was getting dangerously
light. This was true enough; the sky was dimly blue. There was a
tremendous noise of excited voices coming from the Fascist redoubt.
Evidently they had re-occupied the place in much greater force than
before. We were sixty or seventy yards from the parapet when they must
have seen or heard us, for they sent over a heavy burst of fire which
made us drop on our faces. One of them flung a bomb over the parapet--a
sure sign of panic. We were lying in the grass, waiting for an
opportunity to move on, when we heard or thought we heard--I have no
doubt it was pure imagination, but it seemed real enough at the
time--that the Fascist voices were much closer. They had left the
parapet and were coming after us. 'Run!' I yelled to Moyle, and jumped
to my feet. And heavens, how I ran! I had thought earlier in the night
that you can't run when you are sodden from head to foot and weighted
down with a rifle and cartridges; I learned now you can _always_ run when
you think you have fifty or a hundred armed men after you. But if I
could run fast, others could run faster. In my flight something that
might have been a shower of meteors sped past me. It was the three
Spaniards, who had been in front. They were back to our own parapet
before they stopped and I could catch up with them. The truth was that
our nerves were all to pieces. I knew, however, that in a half light one
man is invisible where five are clearly visible, so I went back alone. I
managed to get to the outer wire and searched the ground as well as I
could, which was not very well, for I had to lie on my belly. There was
no sign of Jorge or Hiddlestone, so I crept back. We learned afterwards
that both Jorge and Hiddlestone had been taken to the dressing-station
earlier. Jorge was lightly wounded through the shoulder. Hiddlestone had
received a dreadful wound--a bullet which travelled right up his left
arm, breaking the bone in several places; as he lay helpless on the
ground a bomb had burst near him and torn various other parts of his
body. He recovered, I am glad to say. Later he told me that he had
worked his way some distance lying on his back, then had clutched hold
of a wounded Spaniard and they had helped one another in.

It was getting light now. Along the line for miles around a ragged
meaningless fire was thundering, like the rain that goes on raining
after a storm. I remember the desolate look of everything, the morasses
of mud, the weeping poplar trees, the yellow water in the
trench-bottoms; and men's exhausted faces, unshaven, streaked with mud,
and blackened to the eyes with smoke. When I got back to my dug-out the
three men I shared it with were already fast sleep. They had flung
themselves down with all their equipment on and their muddy rifles
clutched against them. Everything was sodden, inside the dug-out as well
as outside. By long searching I managed to collect enough chips of dry
wood to make a tiny fire. Then I smoked the cigar which I had been
hoarding and which, surprisingly enough, had not got broken during the
night.

Afterwards we learned that the action had been a success, as such things
go. It was merely a raid to make the Fascists divert troops from the
other side of Huesca, where the Anarchists were attacking again. I had
judged that the Fascists had thrown a hundred or two hundred men into
the counterattack, but a deserter told us later on that it was six
hundred. I dare say he was lying--deserters, for obvious reasons, often
try to curry favour. It was a great pity about the telescope. The
thought of losing that beautiful bit of loot worries me even now.



Chapter 8


The days grew hotter and even the nights grew tolerably warm. On a
bullet-chipped tree in front of our parapet thick clusters of cherries
were forming. Bathing in the river ceased to be an agony and became
almost a pleasure. Wild roses with pink blooms the size of saucers
straggled over the shell-holes round Torre Fabian. Behind the line you
met peasants wearing wild roses over their ears. In the evenings they
used to go out with green nets, hunting quails. You spread the net over
the tops of the grasses and then lay down and made a noise like a female
quail. Any male quail that was within hearing then came running towards
you, and when he was underneath the net you threw a stone to scare him,
whereupon he sprang into the air and was entangled in the net.
Apparently only male quails were caught, which struck me as unfair.

There was a section of Andalusians next to us in the line now. I do not
know quite how they got to this front. The current explanation was that
they had run away from Málaga so fast that they had forgotten to stop at
Valencia; but this, of course, came from the Catalans, who professed to
look down on the Andalusians as a race of semi-savages. Certainly the
Andalusians were very ignorant. Few if any of them could read, and they
seemed not even to know the one thing that everybody knows in
Spain--which political party they belonged to. They thought they were
Anarchists, but were not quite certain; perhaps they were Communists.
They were gnarled, rustic-looking men, shepherds or labourers from the
olive groves, perhaps, with faces deeply stained by the ferocious suns
of farther south. They were very useful to us, for they had an
extraordinary dexterity at rolling the dried-up Spanish tobacco into
cigarettes. The issue of cigarettes had ceased, but in Monflorite it was
occasionally possible to buy packets of the cheapest kind of tobacco,
which in appearance and texture was very like chopped chaff. Its flavour
was not bad, but it was so dry that even when you had succeeded in
making a cigarette the tobacco promptly fell out and left an empty
cylinder. The Andalusians, however, could roll admirable cigarettes and
had a special technique for tucking the ends in.

Two Englishmen were laid low by sunstroke. My salient memories of that
time are the heat of the midday sun, and working half-naked with
sand-bags punishing one's shoulders which were already flayed by the
sun; and the lousiness of our clothes and boots, which were literally
dropping to pieces; and the struggles with the mule which brought our
rations and which did not mind rifle-fire but took to flight when
shrapnel burst in the air; and the mosquitoes (just beginning to be
active) and the rats, which were a public nuisance and would even devour
leather belts and cartridge-pouches. Nothing was happening except an
occasional casualty from a sniper's bullet and the sporadic
artillery-fire and air-raids on Huesca. Now that the trees were in full
leaf we had constructed snipers' platforms, like machans, in the poplar
trees that fringed the line. On the other side of Huesca the attacks
were petering out. The Anarchists had had heavy losses and had not
succeeded in completely cutting the Jaca road. They had managed to
establish themselves close enough on either side to bring the road
itself under machine-gun fire and make it impassable for traffic; but
the gap was a kilometre wide and the Fascists had constructed a sunken
road, a sort of enormous trench, along which a certain number of lorries
could come and go. Deserters reported that in Huesca there were plenty
of munitions and very little food. But the town was evidently not going
to fall. Probably it would have been impossible to take it with the
fifteen thousand ill-armed men who were available. Later, in June, the
Government brought troops from the Madrid front and concentrated thirty
thousand men on Huesca, with an enormous quantity of aeroplanes, but
still the town did not fall.

When we went on leave I had been a hundred and fifteen days in the line,
and at the time this period seemed to me to have been one of the most
futile of my whole life. I had joined the militia in order to fight
against Fascism, and as yet I had scarcely fought at all, had merely
existed as a sort of passive object, doing nothing in return for my
rations except to suffer from cold and lack of sleep. Perhaps that is
the fate of most soldiers in most wars. But now that I can see this
period in perspective I do not altogether regret it. I wish, indeed,
that I could have served the Spanish Government a little more
effectively; but from a personal point of view--from the point of view
of my own development--those first three or four months that I spent in
the line were less futile than I then thought. They formed a kind of
interregnum in my life, quite different from anything that had gone
before and perhaps from anything that is to come, and they taught me
things that I could not have learned in any other way.

The essential point is that all this time I had been isolated--for at
the front one was almost completely isolated from the outside world:
even of what was happening in Barcelona one had only a dim
conception--among people who could roughly but not too inaccurately be
described as revolutionaries. This was the result of the militia-system,
which on the Aragón front was not radically altered till about June
1937. The workers' militias, based on the trade unions and each composed
of people of approximately the same political opinions, had the effect
of canalizing into one place all the most revolutionary sentiment in the
country. I had dropped more or less by chance into the only community of
any size in Western Europe where political consciousness and disbelief
in capitalism were more normal than their opposites. Up here in Aragón
one was among tens of thousands of people, mainly though not entirely of
working-class origin, all living at the same level and mingling on terms
of equality. In theory it was perfect equality, and even in practice it
was not far from it. There is a sense in which it would be true to say
that one was experiencing a foretaste of Socialism, by which I mean that
the prevailing mental atmosphere was that of Socialism.
Many of the normal motives of civilized life--snobbishness,
money-grubbing, fear of the boss, etc.--had simply ceased to exist. The
ordinary class-division of society had disappeared to an extent that is
almost unthinkable in the money-tainted air of England; there was no one
there except the peasants and ourselves, and no one owned anyone else as
his master. Of course such a state of affairs could not last. It was
simply a temporary and local phase in an enormous game that is being
played over the whole surface of the earth. But it lasted long enough to
have its effect upon anyone who experienced it. However much one cursed
at the time, one realized afterwards that one had been in contact with
something strange and valuable. One had been in a community where hope
was more normal than apathy or cynicism, where the word 'comrade' stood
for comradeship and not, as in most countries, for humbug. One had
breathed the air of equality. I am well aware that it is now the fashion
to deny that Socialism has anything to do with equality. In every
country in the world a huge tribe of party-hacks and sleek little
professors are busy 'proving' that Socialism means no more than a
planned state-capitalism with the grab-motive left intact. But
fortunately there also exists a vision of Socialism quite different from
this. The thing that attracts ordinary men to Socialism and makes them
willing to risk their skins for it, the 'mystique' of Socialism, is the
idea of equality; to the vast majority of people Socialism means a
classless society, or it means nothing at all. And it was here that
those few months in the militia were valuable to me. For the Spanish
militias, while they lasted, were a sort of microcosm of a classless
society. In that community where no one was on the make, where there was
a shortage of everything but no privilege and no boot-licking, one got,
perhaps, a crude forecast of what the opening stages of Socialism might
be like. And, after all, instead of disillusioning me it deeply
attracted me. The effect was to make my desire to see Socialism
established much more actual than it had been before. Partly, perhaps,
this was due to the good luck of being among Spaniards, who, with their
innate decency and their ever-present Anarchist tinge, would make even
the opening stages of Socialism tolerable if they had the chance.

Of course at the time I was hardly conscious of the changes that were
occurring in my own mind. Like everyone about me I was chiefly conscious
of boredom, heat, cold, dirt, lice, privation, and occasional danger. It
is quite different now. This period which then seemed so futile and
eventless is now of great importance to me. It is so different from the
rest of my life that already it has taken on the magic quality which, as
a rule, belongs only to memories that are years old. It was beastly
while it was happening, but it is a good patch for my mind to browse
upon. I wish I could convey to you the atmosphere of that time. I hope I
have done so, a little, in the earlier chapters of this book. It is all
bound up in my mind with the winter cold, the ragged uniforms of
militiamen, the oval Spanish faces, the morse-like tapping of
machine-guns, the smells of urine and rotting bread, the tinny taste of
bean-stews wolfed hurriedly out of unclean pannikins.

The whole period stays by me with curious vividness. In my memory I live
over incidents that might seem too petty to be worth recalling. I am in
the dug-out at Monte Pocero again, on the ledge of limestone that serves
as a bed, and young Ramon is snoring with his nose flattened between my
shoulder-blades. I am stumbling up the mucky trench, through the mist
that swirls round me like cold steam. I am half-way up a crack in the
mountain-side, struggling to keep my balance and to tug a root of wild
rosemary out of the ground. High overhead some meaningless bullets are
singing.

I am lying hidden among small fir-trees on the low ground west of Monte
Oscuro, with Kopp and Bob Edwards and three Spaniards. Up the naked grey
hill to the right of us a string of Fascists are climbing like ants.
Close in front a bugle-call rings out from the Fascist lines. Kopp
catches my eye and, with a schoolboy gesture, thumbs his nose at the
sound.

I am in the mucky yard at La Granja, among the mob of men who are
struggling with their tin pannikins round the cauldron of stew. The fat
and harassed cook is warding them off with the ladle. At a table nearby
a bearded man with a huge automatic pistol strapped to his belt is
hewing loaves of bread into five pieces. Behind me a Cockney voice (Bill
Chambers, with whom I quarrelled bitterly and who was afterwards killed
outside Huesca) is singing:

There are rats, rats,
Rats as big as cats,
In the...

A shell comes screaming over. Children of fifteen fling themselves on
their faces. The cook dodges behind the cauldron. Everyone rises with a
sheepish expression as the shell plunges and booms a hundred yards away.

I am walking up and down the line of sentries, under the dark boughs of
the poplars. In the flooded ditch outside the rats are paddling about,
making as much noise as otters. As the yellow dawn comes up behind us,
the Andalusian sentry, muffled in his cloak, begins singing. Across no
man's land, a hundred or two hundred yards away, you can hear the
Fascist sentry also singing.

On 25 April, after the usual _mañanas_, another section relieved us and
we handed over our rifles, packed our kits, and marched back to
Monflorite. I was not sorry to leave the line. The lice were multiplying
in my trousers far faster than I could massacre them, and for a month
past I had had no socks and my boots had very little sole left, so that
I was walking more or less barefoot. I wanted a hot bath, clean clothes,
and a night between sheets more passionately than it is possible to want
anything when one has been living a normal civilized life. We slept a
few hours in a barn in Monflorite, jumped a lorry in the small hours,
caught the five o'clock train at Barbastro, and--having the luck to
connect with a fast train at Lérida--were in Barcelona by three o'clock
in the afternoon of the 26th. And after that the trouble began.



Chapter 9


From Mandalay, in Upper Burma, you can travel by train to Maymyo, the
principal hill-station of the province, on the edge of the Shan plateau.
It is rather a queer experience. You start off in the typical atmosphere
of an eastern city--the scorching sunlight, the dusty palms, the smells
of fish and spices and garlic, the squashy tropical fruits, the swarming
dark-faced human beings--and because you are so used to it you carry
this atmosphere intact, so to speak, in your railway carriage. Mentally
you are still in Mandalay when the train stops at Maymyo, four thousand
feet above sea-level. But in stepping out of the carriage you step into
a different hemisphere. Suddenly you are breathing cool sweet air that
might be that of England, and all round you are green grass, bracken,
fir-trees, and hill-women with pink cheeks selling baskets of
strawberries.

Getting back to Barcelona, after three and a half months at the front,
reminded me of this. There was the same abrupt and startling change of
atmosphere. In the train, all the way to Barcelona, the atmosphere of
the front persisted; the dirt, the noise, the discomfort, the ragged
clothes, the feeling of privation, comradeship, and equality. The train,
already full of militiamen when it left Barbastro, was invaded by more
and more peasants at every station on the line; peasants with bundles of
vegetables, with terrified fowls which they carried head-downwards, with
sacks which looped and writhed all over the floor and were discovered to
be full of live rabbits--finally with a quite considerable flock of
sheep which were driven into the compartments and wedged into every
empty space. The militiamen shouted revolutionary songs which drowned
the rattle of the train and kissed their hands or waved red and black
handkerchiefs to every pretty girl along the line. Bottles of wine and
of anis, the filthy Aragónese liqueur, travelled from hand to hand. With
the Spanish goat-skin water-bottles you can squirt a jet of wine right
across a railway carriage into your friend's mouth, which saves a lot of
trouble. Next to me a black-eyed boy of fifteen was recounting
sensational and, I do not doubt, completely untrue stories of his own
exploits at the front to two old leather-faced peasants who listened
open-mouthed. Presently the peasants undid their bundles and gave us
some sticky dark-red wine. Everyone was profoundly happy, more happy
than I can convey. But when the train had rolled through Sabadell and
into Barcelona, we stepped into an atmosphere that was scarcely less
alien and hostile to us and our kind than if this had been Paris or
London.

Everyone who has made two visits, at intervals of months, to Barcelona
during the war has remarked upon the extraordinary changes that took
place in it. And curiously enough, whether they went there first in
August and again in January, or, like myself, first in December and
again in April, the thing they said was always the same: that the
revolutionary atmosphere had vanished. No doubt to anyone who had been
there in August, when the blood was scarcely dry in the streets and
militia were quartered in the smart hotels, Barcelona in December would
have seemed bourgeois; to me, fresh from England, it was liker to a
workers' city than anything I had conceived possible. Now the tide had
rolled back. Once again it was an ordinary city, a little pinched and
chipped by war, but with no outward sign of working-class predominance.

The change in the aspect of the crowds was startling. The militia
uniform and the blue overalls had almost disappeared; everyone seemed to
be wearing the smart summer suits in which Spanish tailors specialize.
Fat prosperous men, elegant women, and sleek cars were everywhere. (It
appeared that there were still no private cars; nevertheless, anyone who
'was anyone' seemed able to command a car.) The officers of the new
Popular Army, a type that had scarcely existed when I left Barcelona,
swarmed in surprising numbers. The Popular Army was officered at the
rate of one officer to ten men. A certain number of these officers had
served in the militia and been brought back from the front for technical
instruction, but the majority were young men who had gone to the School
of War in preference to joining the militia. Their relation to their men
was not quite the same as in a bourgeois army, but there was a definite
social difference, expressed by the difference of pay and uniform. The
men wore a kind of coarse brown overalls, the officers wore an elegant
khaki uniform with a tight waist, like a British Army officer's uniform,
only a little more so. I do not suppose that more than one in twenty of
them had yet been to the front, but all of them had automatic pistols
strapped to their belts; we, at the front, could not get pistols for
love or money. As we made our way up the street I noticed that people
were staring at our dirty exteriors. Of course, like all men who have
been several months in the line, we were a dreadful sight. I was
conscious of looking like a scarecrow. My leather jacket was in tatters,
my woollen cap had lost its shape and slid perpetually over one eye, my
boots consisted of very little beyond splayed-out uppers. All of us were
in more or less the same state, and in addition we were dirty and
unshaven, so it was no wonder that the people stared. But it dismayed me
a little, and brought it home to me that some queer things had been
happening in the last three months.

During the next few days I discovered by innumerable signs that my first
impression had not been wrong. A deep change had come over the town.
There were two facts that were the keynote of all else. One was that the
people--the civil population--had lost much of their interest in the
war; the other was that the normal division of society into rich and
poor, upper class and lower class, was reasserting itself.

The general indifference to the war was surprising and rather
disgusting. It horrified people who came to Barcelona from Madrid or
even from Valencia. Partly it was due to the remoteness of Barcelona
from the actual fighting; I noticed the same thing a month later in
Tarragona, where the ordinary life of a smart seaside town was
continuing almost undisturbed. But it was significant that all over
Spain voluntary enlistment had dwindled from about January onwards. In
Catalonia, in February, there had been a wave of enthusiasm over the
first big drive for the Popular Army, but it had not led to any great
increase in recruiting. The war was only six months old or thereabouts
when the Spanish Government had to resort to conscription, which would
be natural in a foreign war, but seems anomalous in a civil war.
Undoubtedly it was bound up with the disappointment of the revolutionary
hopes with which the war had started. The trade union members who formed
themselves into militias and chased the Fascists back to Zaragoza in the
first few weeks of war had done so largely because they believed
themselves to be fighting for working-class control; but it was becoming
more and more obvious that working-class control was a lost cause, and
the common people, especially the town proletariat, who have to fill the
ranks in any war, civil or foreign, could not be blamed for a certain
apathy. Nobody wanted to lose the war, but the majority were chiefly
anxious for it to be over. You noticed this wherever you went.
Everywhere you met with the same perfunctory remark: 'This
war--terrible, isn't it? When is it going to end?' Politically conscious
people were far more aware of the internecine struggle between Anarchist
and Communist than of the fight against Franco. To the mass of the
people the food shortage was the most important thing. 'The front' had
come to be thought of as a mythical far-off place to which young men
disappeared and either did not return or returned after three or four
months with vast sums of money in their pockets. (A militiaman usually
received his back pay when he went on leave.) Wounded men, even when
they were hopping about on crutches, did not receive any special
consideration. To be in the militia was no longer fashionable. The
shops, always the barometers of public taste, showed this clearly. When
I first reached Barcelona the shops, poor and shabby though they were,
had specialized in militiamen's equipment. Forage-caps, zipper jackets,
Sam Browne belts, hunting-knives, water-bottles, revolver-holsters were
displayed in every window. Now the shops were markedly smarter, but the
war had been thrust into the background. As I discovered later, when
buying my kit before going back to the front, certain things that one
badly needed at the front were very difficult to procure.

Meanwhile there was going on a systematic propaganda against the party
militias and in favour of the Popular Army. The position here was rather
curious. Since February the entire armed forces had theoretically been
incorporated in the Popular Army, and the militias were, on paper,
reconstructed along Popular Army lines, with differential pay-rates,
gazetted rank, etc., etc. The divisions were made up of 'mixed
brigades', which were supposed to consist partly of Popular Army troops
and partly of militia. But the only changes that had actually taken
place were changes of name. The P.O.U.M. troops, for instance,
previously called the Lenin Division, were now known as the 29th
Division. Until June very few Popular Army troops reached the Aragón
front, and in consequence the militias were able to retain their
separate structure and their special character. But on every wall the
Government agents had stencilled: 'We need a Popular Army', and over the
radio and in the Communist Press there was a ceaseless and sometimes
very malignant jibing against the militias, who were described as
ill-trained, undisciplined, etc., etc.; the Popular Army was always
described as 'heroic'. From much of this propaganda you would have
derived the impression that there was something disgraceful in having
gone to the front voluntarily and something praiseworthy in waiting to
be conscripted. For the time being, however, the militias were holding
the line while the Popular Army was training in the rear, and this fact
had to be advertised as little as possible. Drafts of militia returning
to the front were no longer marched through the streets with drums
beating and flags flying. They were smuggled away by train or lorry at
five o'clock in the morning. A few drafts of the Popular Army were now
beginning to leave for the front, and these, as before, were marched
ceremoniously through the streets; but even they, owing to the general
waning of interest in the war, met with comparatively little enthusiasm.
The fact that the militia troops were also, on paper. Popular Army
troops, was skilfully used in the Press propaganda. Any credit that
happened to be going was automatically handed to the Popular Army, while
all blame was reserved for the militias. It sometimes happened that the
same troops were praised in one capacity and blamed in the other.

But besides all this there was the startling change in the social
atmosphere--a thing difficult to conceive unless you have actually
experienced it. When I first reached Barcelona I had thought it a town
where class distinctions and great differences of wealth hardly existed.
Certainly that was what it looked like. 'Smart' clothes were an
abnormality, nobody cringed or took tips, waiters and flower-women and
bootblacks looked you in the eye and called you 'comrade'. I had not
grasped that this was mainly a mixture of hope and camouflage. The
working class believed in a revolution that had been begun but never
consolidated, and the bourgeoisie were scared and temporarily disguising
themselves as workers. In the first months of revolution there must have
been many thousands of people who deliberately put on overalls and
shouted revolutionary slogans as a way of saving their skins. Now things
were returning to normal. The smart restaurants and hotels were full of
rich people wolfing expensive meals, while for the working-class
population food-prices had jumped enormously without any corresponding
rise in wages. Apart from the expensiveness of everything, there were
recurrent shortages of this and that, which, of course, always hit the
poor rather than the rich. The restaurants and hotels seemed to have
little difficulty in getting whatever they wanted, but in the
working-class quarters the queues for bread, olive oil, and other
necessaries were hundreds of yards long. Previously in Barcelona I had
been struck by the absence of beggars; now there were quantities of
them. Outside the delicatessen shop at the top of the Ramblas gangs of
barefooted children were always waiting to swarm round anyone who came
out and clamour for scraps of food. The 'revolutionary' forms of speech
were dropping out of use. Strangers seldom addressed you as _tú_ and
_camarada_ nowadays; it was usually _señor_ and _usted_. _Buenos días_
was beginning to replace _salud_. The waiters were back in their boiled
shirts and the shop-walkers were cringing in the familiar manner. My
wife and I went into a hosiery shop on the Ramblas to buy some
stockings. The shopman bowed and rubbed his hands as they do not do even
in England nowadays, though they used to do it twenty or thirty years
ago. In a furtive indirect way the practice of tipping was coming back.
The workers' patrols had been ordered to dissolve and the pre-war police
forces were back on the streets. One result of this was that the cabaret
show and high-class brothels, many of which had been closed by the
workers' patrols, had promptly reopened.*

[* Footnote: Orwell's footnote to the original edition read: "The
workers' patrols are said to have closed 75 per cent of the brothels."
An errata note found after his death says: "Remark should be modified. I
have no good evidence that prostitution decreased 75 per cent in the
early days of the war, and I believe the Anarchists went on the
principle of 'collectivizing' the brothels, not suppressing them. But
there was a drive against prostitution (posters, etc.) and it is a fact
that the smart brothel and naked cabaret shows were shut in the early
months of the war and open again when the war was about a year old."]

A small but significant instance of the way in which everything was now
orientated in favour of the wealthier classes could be seen in the
tobacco shortage. For the mass of the people the shortage of tobacco was
so desperate that cigarettes filled with sliced liquorice-root were
being sold in the streets. I tried some of these once. (A lot of people
tried them once.) Franco held the Canaries, where all the Spanish
tobacco is grown; consequently the only stocks of tobacco left on the
Government side were those that had been in existence before the war.
These were running so low that the tobacconists' shops only opened once
a week; after waiting for a couple of hours in a queue you might, if you
were lucky, get a three-quarter-ounce packet of tobacco. Theoretically
the Government would not allow tobacco to be purchased from abroad,
because this meant reducing the gold-reserves, which had got to be kept
for arms and other necessities. Actually there was a steady supply of
smuggled foreign cigarettes of the more expensive kinds, Lucky Strikes
and so forth, which gave a grand opportunity for profiteering. You could
buy the smuggled cigarettes openly in the smart hotels and hardly less
openly in the streets, provided that you could pay ten pesetas (a
militiaman's daily wage) for a packet. The smuggling was for the benefit
of wealthy people, and was therefore connived at. If you had enough
money there was nothing that you could not get in any quantity, with the
possible exception of bread, which was rationed fairly strictly. This
open contrast of wealth and poverty would have been impossible a few
months earlier, when the working class still were or seemed to be in
control. But it would not be fair to attribute it solely to the shift of
political power. Partly it was a result of the safety of life in
Barcelona, where there was little to remind one of the war except an
occasional air-raid. Everyone who had been in Madrid said that it was
completely different there. In Madrid the common danger forced people of
almost all kinds into some sense of comradeship. A fat man eating quails
while children are begging for bread is a disgusting sight, but you are
less likely to see it when you are within sound of the guns.

A day or two after the street-fighting I remember passing through one of
the fashionable streets and coming upon a confectioner's shop with a
window full of pastries and bonbons of the most elegant kinds, at
staggering prices. It was the kind of shop you see in Bond Street or the
Rue de la Paix. And I remember feeling a vague horror and amazement that
money could still be wasted upon such things in a hungry war-stricken
country. But God forbid that I should pretend to any personal
superiority. After several months of discomfort I had a ravenous desire
for decent food and wine, cocktails, American cigarettes, and so forth,
and I admit to having wallowed in every luxury that I had money to buy.
During that first week, before the street-fighting began, I had several
preoccupations which interacted upon one another in a curious way. In
the first place, as I have said, I was busy making myself as comfortable
as I could. Secondly, thanks to over-eating and over-drinking, I was
slightly out of health all that week. I would feel a little unwell, go
to bed for half a day, get up and eat another excessive meal, and then
feel ill again. At the same time I was making secret negotiations to buy
a revolver. I badly wanted a revolver--in trench-fighting much more
useful than a rifle--and they were very difficult to get hold of. The
Government issued them to policemen and Popular Army officers, but
refused to issue them to the militia; you had to buy them, illegally,
from the secret stores of the Anarchists. After a lot of fuss and
nuisance an Anarchist friend managed to procure me a tiny 26-mm.
automatic pistol, a wretched weapon, useless at more than five yards but
better than nothing. And besides all this I was making preliminary
arrangements to leave the P.O.U.M. militia and enter some other unit
that would ensure my being sent to the Madrid front.

I had told everyone for a long time past that I was going to leave the
P.O.U.M. As far as my purely personal preferences went I would have
liked to join the Anarchists. If one became a member of the C.N.T. it
was possible to enter the F.A.I. militia, but I was told that the F.A.I.
were likelier to send me to Teruel than to Madrid. If I wanted to go to
Madrid I must join the International Column, which meant getting a
recommendation from a member of the Communist Party. I sought out a
Communist friend, attached to the Spanish Medical Aid, and explained my
case to him. He seemed very anxious to recruit me and asked me, if
possible, to persuade some of the other I.L.P. Englishmen to come with
me. If I had been in better health I should probably have agreed there
and then. It is hard to say now what difference this would have made.
Quite possibly I should have been sent to Albacete before the Barcelona
fighting started; in which case, not having seen the fighting at close
quarters, I might have accepted the official version of it as truthful.
On the other hand, if I had been in Barcelona during the fighting, under
Communist orders but still with a sense of personal loyalty to my
comrades in the P.O.U.M., my position would have been impossible. But I
had another week's leave due to me and I was very anxious to get my
health back before returning to the line. Also--the kind of detail that
is always deciding one's destiny--I had to wait while the boot-makers
made me a new pair of marching boots. (The entire Spanish army had
failed to produce a pair of boots big enough to fit me.) I told my
Communist friend that I would make definite arrangements later.
Meanwhile I wanted a rest. I even had a notion that we--my wife and
I--might go to the seaside for two or three days. What an idea! The
political atmosphere ought to have warned me that that was not the kind
of thing one could do nowadays.

For under the surface-aspect of the town, under the luxury and growing
poverty, under the seeming gaiety of the streets, with their
flower-stalls, their many-coloured flags, their propaganda-posters, and
thronging crowds, there was an unmistakable and horrible feeling of
political rivalry and hatred. People of all shades of opinion were
saying forebodingly: 'There's going to be trouble before long.' The
danger was quite simple and intelligible. It was the antagonism between
those who wished the revolution to go forward and those who wished to
check or prevent it--ultimately, between Anarchists and Communists.
Politically there was now no power in Catalonia except the P.S.U.C. and
their Liberal allies. But over against this there was the uncertain
strength of the C.N.T., less well-armed and less sure of what they
wanted than their adversaries, but powerful because of their numbers and
their predominance in various key industries. Given this alignment of
forces there was bound to be trouble. From the point of view of the
P.S.U.C.-controlled Generalite, the first necessity, to make their
position secure, was to get the weapons out of the C.N.T. workers'
hands. As I have pointed out earlier, the move to break up the party
militias was at bottom a manoeuvre towards this end. At the same time
the pre-war armed police forces, Civil Guards, and so forth, had been
brought back into use and were being heavily reinforced and armed. This
could mean only one thing. The Civil Guards, in particular, were a
gendarmerie of the ordinary continental type, who for nearly a century
past had acted as the bodyguards of the possessing class. Meanwhile a
decree had been issued that all arms held by private persons were to be
surrendered. Naturally this order had not been obeyed; it was clear that
the Anarchists' weapons could only be taken from them by force.
Throughout this time there were rumours, always vague and contradictory
owing to newspaper censorship, of minor clashes that were occurring all
over Catalonia. In various places the armed police forces had made
attacks on Anarchist strongholds. At Puigcerda, on the French frontier,
a band of Carabineros were sent to seize the Customs Office, previously
controlled by Anarchists and Antonio Martin, a well-known Anarchist, was
killed.*

[* Footnote: Errata note found after Orwell's death: "I am told my
reference to this incident is incorrect and misleading."]

Similar incidents had occurred at Figueras and, I think, at Tarragona.
In Barcelona there had been a series of more or less unofficial brawls
in the working-class suburbs. C.N.T. and U.G.T. members had been
murdering one another for some time past; on several occasions the
murders were followed by huge, provocative funerals which were quite
deliberately intended to stir up political hatred. A short time earlier
a C.N.T. member had been murdered, and the C.N.T. had turned out in
hundreds of thousands to follow the cortege. At the end of April, just
after I got to Barcelona, Roldan, a prominent member of the U.G.T., was
murdered, presumably by someone in the C.N.T. The Government ordered all
shops to close and staged an enormous funeral procession, largely of
Popular Army troops, which took two hours to pass a given point. From
the hotel window I watched it without enthusiasm. It was obvious that
the so-called funeral was merely a display of strength; a little more of
this kind of thing and there might be bloodshed. The same night my wife
and I were woken by a fusillade of shots from the Plaza de Cataluña, a
hundred or two hundred yards away. We learned next day that it was a man
being bumped off, presumably by someone in the U.G.T. It was of course
distinctly possible that all these murders were committed by _agents
provocateurs_. One can gauge the attitude of the foreign capitalist Press
towards the Communist-Anarchist feud by the fact that Roldan's murder
was given wide publicity, while the answering murder was carefully
unmentioned.

The 1st of May was approaching, and there was talk of a monster
demonstration in which both the C.N.T. and the U.G.T. were to take part.
The C.N.T. leaders, more moderate than many of their followers, had long
been working for a reconciliation with the U.G.T.; indeed the keynote of
their policy was to try and form the two blocks of unions into one huge
coalition. The idea was that the C.N.T.and U.G.T. should march together
and display their solidarity. But at the last moment the demonstration
was called off. It was perfectly clear that it would only lead to
rioting. So nothing happened on 1 May. It was a queer state of affairs.
Barcelona, the so-called revolutionary city, was probably the only city
in non-Fascist Europe that had no celebrations that day. But I admit I
was rather relieved. The I.L.P. contingent was expected to march in the
P.O.U.M. section of the procession, and everyone expected trouble. The
last thing I wished for was to be mixed up in some meaningless
street-fight. To be marching up the street behind red flags inscribed
with elevating slogans, and then to be bumped off from an upper window
by some total stranger with a sub-machine-gun--that is not my idea of a
useful way to die.



Chapter 10


About midday on 3 May a friend crossing the lounge of the hotel said
casually: 'There's been some kind of trouble at the Telephone Exchange,
I hear.' For some reason I paid no attention to it at the time.

That afternoon, between three and four, I was half-way down the Ramblas
when I heard several rifle-shots behind me. I turned round and saw some
youths, with rifles in their hands and the red and black handkerchiefs
of the Anarchists round their throats, edging up a side-street that ran
off the Ramblas northward. They were evidently exchanging shots with
someone in a tall octagonal tower--a church, I think--that commanded the
side-street. I thought instantly: 'It's started!' But I thought it
without any very great feeling of surprise--for days past everyone had
been expecting 'it' to start at any moment. I realized that I must get
back to the hotel at once and see if my wife was all right. But the knot
of Anarchists round the opening of the side-street were motioning the
people back and shouting to them not to cross the line of fire. More
shots rang out. The bullets from the tower were flying across the street
and a crowd of panic-stricken people was rushing down the Ramblas, away
from the firing; up and down the street you could hear snap-snap-snap as
the shopkeepers slammed the steel shutters over their windows. I saw two
Popular Army officers retreating cautiously from tree to tree with their
hands on their revolvers. In front of me the crowd was surging into the
Metro station in the middle of the Ramblas to take cover. I immediately
decided not to follow them. It might mean being trapped underground for
hours.

At this moment an American doctor who had been with us at the front ran
up to me and grabbed me by the arm. He was greatly excited.

'Come on, we must get down to the Hotel Falcon.' (The Hotel Falcon was a
sort of boarding-house maintained by the P.O.U.M. and used chiefly by
militiamen on leave.) 'The P.O.U.M. chaps will be meeting there. The
trouble's starting. We must hang together.'

'But what the devil is it all about?' I said.

The doctor was hauling me along by the arm. He was too excited to give a
very clear statement. It appeared that he had been in the Plaza de
Cataluña when several lorry-loads of armed Civil Guards* had driven up
to the Telephone Exchange, which was operated mainly by C.N.T. workers,
and made a sudden assault upon it. Then some Anarchists had arrived and
there had been a general affray. I gathered that the 'trouble' earlier
in the day had been a demand by the Government to hand over the
Telephone Exchange, which, of course, was refused.

[* Footnote: Errata note found after Orwell's death: 'All through these
chapters are constant references to 'Civil Guards.' Should be 'Assault
Guards' all the way through. I was misled because the Assault Guards in
Catalonia wore a different uniform from those afterwards sent from
Valenica, and by the Spaniards' referring to all these formations as
'_la guardia.'_ The undoubted fact that civil guards often joined Franco
when able to do so makes no reflection on the Assault Guards who were a
formation raised since the Second Republic. But the general reference to
popular hostility to '_la guardia_' and this having played its part in
the Barcelona business should stand.]

As we moved down the street a lorry raced past us from the opposite
direction. It was full of Anarchists with rifles in their hands. In
front a ragged youth was lying on a pile of mattresses behind a light
machine-gun. When we got to the Hotel Falcon, which was at the bottom of
the Ramblas, a crowd of people was seething in the entrance-hall; there
was a great confusion, nobody seemed to know what we were expected to
do, and nobody was armed except the handful of Shock Troopers who
usually acted as guards for the building. I went across to the Comite
Local of the P.O.U.M., which was almost opposite. Upstairs, in the room
where militiamen normally went to draw their pay, another crowd was
seething. A tall, pale, rather handsome man of about thirty, in civilian
clothes, was trying to restore order and handing out belts and
cartridge-boxes from a pile in the corner. There seemed to be no rifles
as yet. The doctor had disappeared--I believe there had already been
casualties and a call for doctors--but another Englishman had arrived.
Presently, from an inner office, the tall man and some others began
bringing out armfuls of rifles and handing them round. The other
Englishman and myself, as foreigners, were slightly under suspicion and
at first nobody would give us a rifle. Then a militiaman whom I had
known at the front arrived and recognized me, after which we were given
rifles and a few clips of cartridges, somewhat grudgingly.

There was a sound of firing in the distance and the streets were
completely empty of people. Everyone said that it was impossible to go
up the Ramblas. The Civil Guards had seized buildings in commanding
positions and were letting fly at everyone who passed. I would have
risked it and gone back to the hotel, but there was a vague idea
floating round that the Comite Local was likely to be attacked at any
moment and we had better stand by. All over the building, on the stairs,
and on the pavement outside, small knots of people were standing and
talking excitedly. No one seemed to have a very clear idea of what was
happening. All I could gather was that the Civil Guards had attacked the
Telephone Exchange and seized various strategic spots that commanded
other buildings belonging to the workers. There was a general impression
that the Civil Guards were 'after' the C.N.T. and the working class
generally. It was noticeable that, at this stage, no one seemed to put
the blame on the Government. The poorer classes in Barcelona looked upon
the Civil Guards as something rather resembling the Black and Tans, and
it seemed to be taken for granted that they had started this attack on
their own initiative. Once I heard how things stood I felt easier in my
mind. The issue was clear enough. On one side the C.N.T., on the other
side the police. I have no particular love for the idealized 'worker' as
he appears in the bourgeois Communist's mind, but when I see an actual
flesh-and-blood worker in conflict with his natural enemy, the
policeman, I do not have to ask myself which side I am on.

A long time passed and nothing seemed to be happening at our end of the
town. It did not occur to me that I could ring up the hotel and find out
whether my wife was all right; I took it for granted that the Telephone
Exchange would have stopped working--though, as a matter of fact, it was
only out of action for a couple of hours. There seemed to be about three
hundred people in the two buildings. Predominantly they were people of
the poorest class, from the back-streets down by the quays; there was a
number of women among them, some of them carrying babies, and a crowd of
little ragged boys. I fancy that many of them had no notion what was
happening and had simply fled into the P.O.U.M. buildings for
protection. There was also a number of militiamen on leave, and a
sprinkling of foreigners. As far as I could estimate, there were only
about sixty rifles between the lot of us. The office upstairs was
ceaselessly besieged by a crowd of people who were demanding rifles and
being told that there were none left. The younger militia boys, who
seemed to regard the whole affair as a kind of picnic, were prowling
round and trying to wheedle or steal rifles from anyone who had them. It
was not long before one of them got my rifle away from me by a clever
dodge and immediately made himself scarce. So I was unarmed again,
except for my tiny automatic pistol, for which I had only one clip of
cartridges.

It grew dark, I was getting hungry, and seemingly there was no food in
the Falcon. My friend and I slipped out to his hotel, which was not far
away, to get some dinner. The streets were utterly dark and silent, not
a soul stirring, steel shutters drawn over all the shop windows, but no
barricades built yet. There was a great fuss before they would let us
into the hotel, which was locked and barred. When we got back I learned
that the Telephone Exchange was working and went to the telephone in the
office upstairs to ring up my wife. Characteristically, there was no
telephone directory in the building, and I did not know the number of
the Hotel Continental; after a searching from room to room for about an
hour I came upon a guide-book which gave me the number. I could not make
contact with my wife, but I managed to get hold of John McNair, the
I.L.P. representative in Barcelona. He told me that all was well, nobody
had been shot, and asked me if we were all right at the Comite Local. I
said that we should be all right if we had some cigarettes. I only meant
this as a joke; nevertheless half an hour later McNair appeared with two
packets of Lucky Strikes. He had braved the pitch-dark streets, roamed
by Anarchist patrols who had twice stopped him at the pistol's point and
examined his papers. I shall not forget this small act of heroism. We
were very glad of the cigarettes.

They had placed armed guards at most of the windows, and in the street
below a little group of Shock Troopers were stopping and questioning the
few passers-by. An Anarchist patrol car drove up, bristling with
weapons. Beside the driver a beautiful dark-haired girl of about
eighteen was nursing a sub-machine-gun across her knees. I spent a long
time wandering about the building, a great rambling place of which it
was impossible to learn the geography. Everywhere was the usual litter,
the broken furniture and torn paper that seem to be the inevitable
products of revolution. All over the place people were sleeping; on a
broken sofa in a passage two poor women from the quayside were
peacefully snoring. The place had been a cabaret-theatre before the
P.O.U.M. took it over. There were raised stages in several of the rooms;
on one of them was a desolate grand piano. Finally I discovered what I
was looking for--the armoury. I did not know how this affair was going
to turn out, and I badly wanted a weapon. I had heard it said so often
that all the rival parties, P.S.U.C., P.O.U.M., and C.N.T.-F.A.I. alike,
were hoarding arms in Barcelona, that I could not believe that two of
the principal P.O.U.M. buildings contained only the fifty or sixty
rifles that I had seen. The room which acted as an armoury was unguarded
and had a flimsy door; another Englishman and myself had no difficulty
in prizing it open. When we got inside we found that what they had told
us was true--there _were_ no more weapons. All we found there were about
two dozen small-bore rifles of an obsolete pattern and a few shot-guns,
with no cartridges for any of them. I went up to the office and asked if
they had any spare pistol ammunition; they had none. There were a few
boxes of bombs, however, which one of the Anarchist patrol cars had
brought us. I put a couple in one of my cartridge-boxes. They were a
crude type of bomb, ignited by rubbing a sort of match at the top and
very liable to go off of their own accord.

People were sprawling asleep all over the floor. In one room a baby was
crying, crying ceaselessly. Though this was May the night was getting
cold. On one of the cabaret-stages the curtains were still up, so I
ripped a curtain down with my knife, rolled myself up in it, and had a
few hours' sleep. My sleep was disturbed, I remember, by the thought of
those beastly bombs, which might blow me into the air if I rolled on
them too vigorously. At three in the morning the tall handsome man who
seemed to be in command woke me up, gave me a rifle, and put me on guard
at one of the windows. He told me that Salas, the Chief of Police
responsible for the attack on the Telephone Exchange, had been placed
under arrest. (Actually, as we learned later, he had only been deprived
of his post. Nevertheless the news confirmed the general impression that
the Civil Guards had acted without orders.) As soon as it was dawn the
people downstairs began building two barricades, one outside the Comite
Local and the other outside the Hotel Falcon. The Barcelona streets are
paved with square cobbles, easily built up into a wall, and under the
cobbles is a kind of shingle that is good for filling sand-bags. The
building of those barricades was a strange and wonderful sight; I would
have given something to be able to photograph it. With the kind of
passionate energy that Spaniards display when they have definitely
decided to begin upon any job of work, long lines of men, women, and
quite small children were tearing up the cobblestones, hauling them
along in a hand-cart that had been found somewhere, and staggering to
and fro under heavy sacks of sand. In the doorway of the Comite Local a
German-Jewish girl, in a pair of militiaman's trousers whose
knee-buttons just reached her ankles, was watching with a smile. In a
couple of hours the barricades were head-high, with riflemen posted at
the loopholes, and behind one barricade a fire was burning and men were
frying eggs.

They had taken my rifle away again, and there seemed to be nothing that
one could usefully do. Another Englishman and myself decided to go back
to the Hotel Continental. There was a lot of firing in the distance, but
seemingly none in the Ramblas. On the way up we looked in at the
food-market. A very few stalls had opened; they were besieged by a crowd
of people from the working-class quarters south of the Ramblas. Just as
we got there, there was a heavy crash of rifle-fire outside, some panes
of glass in the roof were shivered, and the crowd went flying for the
back exits. A few stalls remained open, however; we managed to get a cup
of coffee each and buy a wedge of goat's-milk cheese which I tucked in
beside my bombs. A few days later I was very glad of that cheese.

At the street-corner where I had seen the Anarchists begin firing the
day before a barricade was now standing. The man behind it (I was on the
other side of the street) shouted to me to be careful. The Civil Guards
in the church tower were firing indiscriminately at everyone who passed.
I paused and then crossed the opening at a run; sure enough, a bullet
cracked past me, uncomfortably close. When I neared the P.O.U.M.
Executive Building, still on the other side of the road, there were
fresh shouts of warning from some Shock Troopers standing in the
doorway--shouts which, at the moment, I did not understand. There were
trees and a newspaper kiosk between myself and the building (streets of
this type in Spain have a broad walk running down the middle), and I
could not see what they were pointing at. I went up to the Continental,
made sure that all was well, washed my face, and then went back to the
P.O.U.M. Executive Building (it was about a hundred yards down the
street) to ask for orders. By this time the roar of rifle and
machine-gun fire from various directions was almost comparable to the
din of a battle. I had just found Kopp and was asking him what we were
supposed to do when there was a series of appalling crashes down below.
The din was so loud that I made sure someone must be firing at us with a
field-gun. Actually it was only hand-grenades, which make double their
usual noise when they burst among stone buildings.

Kopp glanced out of the window, cocked his stick behind his back, said:
'Let us investigate,' and strolled down the stairs in his usual
unconcerned manner, I following. Just inside the doorway a group of
Shock Troopers were bowling bombs down the pavement as though playing
skittles. The bombs were bursting twenty yards away with a frightful,
ear-splitting crash which was mixed up with the banging of rifles. Half
across the street, from behind the newspaper kiosk, a head--it was the
head of an American militiaman whom I knew well--was sticking up, for
all the world like a coconut at a fair. It was only afterwards that I
grasped what was really happening. Next door to the P.O.U.M. building
there was a café with a hotel above it, called the Café Moka. The day
before twenty or thirty armed Civil Guards had entered the café and
then, when the fighting started, had suddenly seized the building and
barricaded themselves in. Presumably they had been ordered to seize the
café as a preliminary to attacking the P.O.U.M. offices later. Early in
the morning they had attempted to come out, shots had been exchanged,
and one Shock Trooper was badly wounded and a Civil Guard killed. The
Civil Guards had fled back into the café, but when the American came
down the street they had opened fire on him, though he was not armed.
The American had flung himself behind the kiosk for cover, and the Shock
Troopers were flinging bombs at the Civil Guards to drive them indoors
again.

Kopp took in the scene at a glance, pushed his way forward and hauled
back a red-haired German Shock Trooper who was just drawing the pin out
of a bomb with his teeth. He shouted to everyone to stand back from the
doorway, and told us in several languages that we had got to avoid
bloodshed. Then he stepped out on to the pavement and, in sight of the
Civil Guards, ostentatiously took off his pistol and laid it on the
ground. Two Spanish militia officers did the same, and the three of them
walked slowly up to the doorway where the Civil Guards were huddling. It
was a thing I would not have done for twenty pounds. They were walking,
unarmed, up to men who were frightened out of their wits and had loaded
guns in their hands. A Civil Guard, in shirt-sleeves and livid with
fright, came out of the door to parley with Kopp. He kept pointing in an
agitated manner at two unexploded bombs that were lying on the pavement.
Kopp came back and told us we had better touch the bombs off. Lying
there, they were a danger to anyone who passed. A Shock Trooper fired
his rifle at one of the bombs and burst it, then fired at the other and
missed. I asked him to give me his rifle, knelt down and let fly at the
second bomb. I also missed it, I am sorry to say. This was the only shot
I fired during the disturbances. The pavement was covered with broken
glass from the sign over the Café Moka, and two cars that were parked
outside, one of them Kopp's official car, had been riddled with bullets
and their windscreens smashed by bursting bombs.

Kopp took me upstairs again and explained the situation. We had got to
defend the P.O.U.M. buildings if they were attacked, but the P.O.U.M.
leaders had sent instructions that we were to stand on the defensive and
not open fire if we could possibly avoid it. Immediately opposite there
was a cinematograph, called the Poliorama, with a museum above it, and
at the top, high above the general level of the roofs, a small
observatory with twin domes. The domes commanded the street, and a few
men posted up there with rifles could prevent any attack on the P.O.U.M.
buildings. The caretakers at the cinema were C.N.T. members and would
let us come and go. As for the Civil Guards in the Café Moka, there would
be no trouble with them; they did not want to fight and would be only
too glad to live and let live. Kopp repeated that our orders were not to
fire unless we were fired on ourselves or our buildings attacked. I
gathered, though he did not say so, that the P.O.U.M. leaders were
furious at being dragged into this affair, but felt that they had got to
stand by the C.N.T.

They had already placed guards in the observatory. The next three days
and nights I spent continuously on the roof of the Poliorama, except for
brief intervals when I slipped across to the hotel for meals. I was in
no danger, I suffered from nothing worse than hunger and boredom, yet it
was one of the most unbearable periods of my whole life. I think few
experiences could be more sickening, more disillusioning, or, finally,
more nerve-racking than those evil days of street warfare.

I used to sit on the roof marvelling at the folly of it all. From the
little windows in the observatory you could see for miles around--vista
after vista of tall slender buildings, glass domes, and fantastic curly
roofs with brilliant green and copper tiles; over to eastward the
glittering pale blue sea--the first glimpse of the sea that I had had
since coming to Spain. And the whole huge town of a million people was
locked in a sort of violent inertia, a nightmare of noise without
movement. The sunlit streets were quite empty. Nothing was happening
except the streaming of bullets from barricades and sand-bagged windows.
Not a vehicle was stirring in the streets; here and there along the
Ramblas the trams stood motionless where their drivers had jumped out of
them when the fighting started. And all the while the devilish noise,
echoing from thousands of stone buildings, went on and on and on, like a
tropical rainstorm. Crack-crack, rattle-rattle, roar--sometimes it died
away to a few shots, sometimes it quickened to a deafening fusillade,
but it never stopped while daylight lasted, and punctually next dawn it
started again.

What the devil was happening, who was fighting whom, and who was
winning, was at first very difficult to discover. The people of
Barcelona are so used to street-fighting and so familiar with the local
geography that they knew by a kind of instinct which political party
will hold which streets and which buildings. A foreigner is at a
hopeless disadvantage. Looking out from the observatory, I could grasp
that the Ramblas, which is one of the principal streets of the town,
formed a dividing line. To the right of the Ramblas the working-class
quarters were solidly Anarchist; to the left a confused fight was going
on among the tortuous by-streets, but on that side the P.S.U.C. and the
Civil Guards were more or less in control. Up at our end of the Ramblas,
round the Plaza de Cataluña, the position was so complicated that it
would have been quite unintelligible if every building had not flown a
party flag. The principal landmark here was the Hotel Colon, the
headquarters of the P.S.U.C., dominating the Plaza de Cataluña. In a
window near the last O but one in the huge 'Hotel Colon' that sprawled
across its face they had a machine-gun that could sweep the square with
deadly effect. A hundred yards to the right of us, down the Ramblas, the
J.S.U., the youth league of the P.S.U.C. (corresponding to the Young
Communist League in England), were holding a big department store whose
sandbagged side-windows fronted our observatory. They had hauled down
their red flag and hoisted the Catalan national flag. On the Telephone
Exchange, the starting-point of all the trouble, the Catalan national
flag and the Anarchist flag were flying side by side. Some kind of
temporary compromise had been arrived at there, the exchange was working
uninterruptedly and there was no firing from the building.

In our position it was strangely peaceful. The Civil Guards in the Café
Moka had drawn down the steel curtains and piled up the café furniture
to make a barricade. Later half a dozen of them came on to the roof,
opposite to ourselves, and built another barricade of mattresses, over
which they hung a Catalan national flag. But it was obvious that they
had no wish to start a fight. Kopp had made a definite agreement with
them: if they did not fire at us we would not fire at them. He had grown
quite friendly with the Civil Guards by this time, and had been to visit
them several times in the Café Moka. Naturally they had looted
everything drinkable the café possessed, and they made Kopp a present of
fifteen bottles of beer. In return Kopp had actually given them one of
our rifles to make up for one they had somehow lost on the previous day.
Nevertheless, it was a queer feeling sitting on that roof. Sometimes I
was merely bored with the whole affair, paid no attention to the hellish
noise, and spent hours reading a succession of Penguin Library books
which, luckily, I had bought a few days earlier; sometimes I was very
conscious of the armed men watching me fifty yards away. It was a little
like being in the trenches again; several times I caught myself, from
force of habit, speaking of the Civil Guards as 'the Fascists'. There
were generally about six of us up there. We placed a man on guard in
each of the observatory towers, and the rest of us sat on the lead roof
below, where there was no cover except a stone palisade. I was well
aware that at any moment the Civil Guards might receive telephone orders
to open fire. They had agreed to give us warning before doing so, but
there was no certainty that they would keep to their agreement. Only
once, however, did trouble look like starting. One of the Civil Guards
opposite knelt down and began firing across the barricade. I was on
guard in the observatory at the time. I trained my rifle on him and
shouted across:

'Hi! Don't you shoot at us!'

'What?'

'Don't you fire at us or we'll fire back!'

'No, no! I wasn't firing at you. Look--down there!'

He motioned with his rifle towards the side-street that ran past the
bottom of our building. Sure enough, a youth in blue overalls, with a
rifle in his hand, was dodging round the corner. Evidently he had just
taken a shot at the Civil Guards on the roof.

'I was firing at him. He fired first.' (I believe this was true.) 'We
don't want to shoot you. We're only workers, the same as you are.'

He made the anti-Fascist salute, which I returned. I shouted across:

'Have you got any more beer left?'

'No, it's all gone.'

The same day, for no apparent reason, a man in the J.S.U. building
farther down the street suddenly raised his rifle and let fly at me when
I was leaning out of the window. Perhaps I made a tempting mark. I did
not fire back. Though he was only a hundred yards away the bullet went
so wide that it did not even hit the roof of the observatory. As usual,
Spanish standards of marksmanship had saved me. I was fired at several
times from this building.

The devilish racket of firing went on and on. But so far as I could see,
and from all I heard, the fighting was defensive on both sides. People
simply remained in their buildings or behind their barricades and blazed
away at the people opposite. About half a mile away from us there was a
street where some of the main offices of the C.N.T. and the U.G.T. were
almost exactly facing one another; from that direction the volume of
noise was terrific. I passed down that street the day after the fighting
was over and the panes of the shop-windows were like sieves. (Most of
the shopkeepers in Barcelona had their windows criss-crossed with strips
of paper, so that when a bullet hit a pane it did not shiver to pieces.)
Sometimes the rattle of rifle and machine-gun fire was punctuated by the
crash of hand-grenades. And at long intervals, perhaps a dozen times in
all, there were tremendously heavy explosions which at the time I could
not account for; they sounded like aerial bombs, but that was
impossible, for there were no aeroplanes about. I was told
afterwards--quite possibly it was true--that _agents provocateurs_ were
touching off masses of explosive in order to increase the general noise
and panic. There was, however, no artillery-fire. I was listening for
this, for if the guns began to fire it would mean that the affair was
becoming serious (artillery is the determining factor in street
warfare). Afterwards there were wild tales in the newspapers about
batteries of guns firing in the streets, but no one was able to point to
a building that had been hit by a shell. In any case the sound of
gunfire is unmistakable if one is used to it.

Almost from the start food was running short. With difficulty and under
cover of darkness (for the Civil Guards were constantly sniping into the
Ramblas) food was brought from the Hotel Falcon for the fifteen or
twenty militiamen who were in the P.O.U.M. Executive Building, but there
was barely enough to go round, and as many of us as possible went to the
Hotel Continental for our meals. The Continental had been
'collectivized' by the Generalite and not, like most of the hotels, by
the C.N.T. or U.G.T., and it was regarded as neutral ground. No sooner
had the fighting started than the hotel filled to the brim with a most
extraordinary collection of people. There were foreign journalists,
political suspects of every shade, an American airman in the service of
the Government, various Communist agents, including a fat,
sinister-looking Russian, said to be an agent of the Ogpu, who was
nicknamed Charlie Chan and wore attached to his waist-band a revolver
and a neat little bomb, some families of well-to-do Spaniards who looked
like Fascist sympathizers, two or three wounded men from the
International Column, a gang of lorry drivers from some huge French
lorries which had been carrying a load of oranges back to France and had
been held up by the fighting, and a number of Popular Army officers. The
Popular Army, as a body, remained neutral throughout the fighting,
though a few soldiers slipped away from the barracks and took part as
individuals; on the Tuesday morning I had seen a couple of them at the
P.O.U.M. barricades. At the beginning, before the food-shortage became
acute and the newspapers began stirring up hatred, there was a tendency
to regard the whole affair as a joke. This was the kind of thing that
happened every year in Barcelona, people were saying. George Tioli, an
Italian journalist, a great friend of ours, came in with his trousers
drenched with blood. He had gone out to see what was happening and had
been binding up a wounded man on the pavement when someone playfully
tossed a hand-grenade at him, fortunately not wounding him seriously. I
remember his remarking that the Barcelona paving-stones ought to be
numbered; it would save such a lot of trouble in building and
demolishing barricades. And I remember a couple of men from the
International Column sitting in my room at the hotel when I came in
tired, hungry, and dirty after a night on guard. Their attitude was
completely neutral. If they had been good party-men they would, I
suppose, have urged me to change sides, or even have pinioned me and
taken away the bombs of which my pockets were full; instead they merely
commiserated with me for having to spend my leave in doing guard-duty on
a roof. The general attitude was: 'This is only a dust-up between the
Anarchists and the police--it doesn't mean anything.' In spite of the
extent of the fighting and the number of casualties I believe this was
nearer the truth than the official version which represented the affair
as a planned rising.

It was about Wednesday (5 May) that a change seemed to come over things.
The shuttered streets looked ghastly. A very few pedestrians, forced
abroad for one reason or another, crept to and fro, flourishing white
handkerchiefs, and at a spot in the middle of the Ramblas that was safe
from bullets some men were crying newspapers to the empty street. On
Tuesday _Solidaridad Obrera_, the Anarchist paper, had described the
attack on the Telephone Exchange as a 'monstrous provocation' (or words
to that effect), but on Wednesday it changed its tune and began
imploring everyone to go back to work. The Anarchist leaders were
broadcasting the same message. The office of _La Batalla_, the P.O.U.M.
paper, which was not defended, had been raided and seized by the Civil
Guards at about the same time as the Telephone Exchange, but the paper
was being printed, and a few copies distributed, from another address. I
urged everyone to remain at the barricades. People were divided in their
minds and wondering uneasily how the devil this was going to end. I
doubt whether anyone left the barricades as yet, but everyone was sick
of the meaningless fighting, which could obviously lead to no real
decision, because no one wanted this to develop into a full-sized civil
war which might mean losing the war against Franco. I heard this fear
expressed on all sides. So far as one could gather from what people were
saying at the time the C.N.T. rank and file wanted, and had wanted from
the beginning, only two things: the handing back of the Telephone
Exchange and the disarming of the hated Civil Guards. If the Generalite
had promised to do these two things, and also promised to put an end to
the food profiteering, there is little doubt that the barricades would
have been down in two hours. But it was obvious that the Generalite was
not going to give in. Ugly rumours were flying round. It was said that
the Valencia Government was sending six thousand men to occupy
Barcelona, and that five thousand Anarchist and P.O.U.M. troops had left
the Aragón front to oppose them. Only the first of these rumours was
true. Watching from the observatory tower we saw the low grey shapes of
warships closing in upon the harbour. Douglas Moyle, who had been a
sailor, said that they looked like British destroyers. As a matter of
fact they _were_ British destroyers, though we did not learn this till
afterwards.

That evening we heard that on the Plaza de España four hundred Civil
Guards had surrendered and handed their arms to the Anarchists; also the
news was vaguely filtering through that in the suburbs (mainly
working-class quarters) the C.N.T. were in control. It looked as though
we were winning. But the same evening Kopp sent for me and, with a grave
face, told me that according to information he had just received the
Government was about to outlaw the P.O.U.M. and declare a state of war
upon it. The news gave me a shock. It was the first glimpse I had had of
the interpretation that was likely to be put upon this affair later on.
I dimly foresaw that when the fighting ended the entire blame would be
laid upon the P.O.U.M., which was the weakest party and therefore the
most suitable scapegoat. And meanwhile our local neutrality was at an
end. If the Government declared war upon us we had no choice but to
defend ourselves, and here at the Executive building we could be certain
that the Civil Guards next door would get orders to attack us. Our only
chance was to attack them first. Kopp was waiting for orders on the
telephone; if we heard definitely that the P.O.U.M. was outlawed we must
make preparations at once to seize the Café Moka.

I remember the long, nightmarish evening that we spent in fortifying the
building. We locked the steel curtains across the front entrance and
behind them built a barricade of slabs of stone left behind by the
workmen who had been making some alterations. We went over our stock of
weapons. Counting the six rifles that were on the roof of the Poliorama
opposite, we had twenty-one rifles, one of them defective, about fifty
rounds of ammunition for each rifle, and a few dozen bombs; otherwise
nothing except a few pistols and revolvers. About a dozen men, mostly
Germans, had volunteered for the attack on the Café Moka, if it came
off. We should attack from the roof, of course, some time in the small
hours, and take them by surprise; they were more numerous, but our
morale was better, and no doubt we could storm the place, though people
were bound to be killed in doing so. We had no food in the building
except a few slabs of chocolate, and the rumour had gone round that
'they' were going to cut off the water supply. (Nobody knew who 'they'
were. It might be the Government that controlled the waterworks, or it
might be the C.N.T.--nobody knew.) We spent a long time filling up every
basin in the lavatories, every bucket we could lay hands on, and,
finally, the fifteen beer bottles, now empty, which the Civil Guards had
given to Kopp.

I was in a ghastly frame of mind and dog-tired after about sixty hours
without much sleep. It was now late into the night. People were sleeping
all over the floor behind the barricade downstairs. Upstairs there was a
small room, with a sofa in it, which we intended to use as a
dressing-station, though, needless to say, we discovered that there was
neither iodine nor bandages in the building. My wife had come down from
the hotel in case a nurse should be needed. I lay down on the sofa,
feeling that I would like half an hour's rest before the attack on the
Moka, in which I should presumably be killed. I remember the intolerable
discomfort caused by my pistol, which was strapped to my belt and
sticking into the small of my back. And the next thing I remember is
waking up with a jerk to find my wife standing beside me. It was broad
daylight, nothing had happened, the Government had not declared war on
the P.O.U.M., the water had not been cut off, and except for the
sporadic firing in the streets everything was normal. My wife said that
she had not had the heart to wake me and had slept in an arm-chair in
one of the front rooms.

That afternoon there was a kind of armistice. The firing died away and
with surprising suddenness the streets filled with people. A few shops
began to pull up their shutters, and the market was packed with a huge
crowd clamouring for food, though the stalls were almost empty. It was
noticeable, however, that the trams did not start running. The Civil
Guards were still behind their barricades in the Moka; on neither side
were the fortified buildings evacuated. Everyone was rushing round and
trying to buy food. And on every side you heard the same anxious
questions: 'Do you think it's stopped? Do you think it's going to start
again?' 'It'--the fighting--was now thought of as some kind of natural
calamity, like a hurricane or an earthquake, which was happening to us
all alike and which we had no power of stopping. And sure enough, almost
immediately--I suppose there must really have been several hours' truce,
but they seemed more like minutes than hours--a sudden crash of
rifle-fire, like a June cloud-burst, sent everyone scurrying; the steel
shutters snapped into place, the streets emptied like magic, the
barricades were manned, and 'it' had started again.

I went back to my post on the roof with a feeling of concentrated
disgust and fury. When you are taking part in events like these you are,
I suppose, in a small way, making history, and you ought by rights to
feel like a historical character. But you never do, because at such
times the physical details always outweigh everything else. Throughout
the fighting I never made the correct 'analysis' of the situation that
was so glibly made by journalists hundreds of miles away. What I was
chiefly thinking about was not the rights and wrongs of this miserable
internecine scrap, but simply the discomfort and boredom of sitting day
and night on that intolerable roof, and the hunger which was growing
worse and worse--for none of us had had a proper meal since Monday. It
was in my mind all the while that I should have to go back to the front
as soon as this business was over. It was infuriating. I had been a
hundred and fifteen days in the line and had come back to Barcelona
ravenous for a bit of rest and comfort; and instead I had to spend my
time sitting on a roof opposite Civil Guards as bored as myself, who
periodically waved to me and assured me that they were 'workers'
(meaning that they hoped I would not shoot them), but who would
certainly open fire if they got the order to do so. If this was history
it did not feel like it. It was more like a bad period at the front,
when men were short and we had to do abnormal hours of guard-duty;
instead of being heroic one just had to stay at one's post, bored,
dropping with sleep, and completely uninterested as to what it was all
about.

Inside the hotel, among the heterogeneous mob who for the most part had
not dared to put their noses out of doors, a horrible atmosphere of
suspicion had grown up. Various people were infected with spy mania and
were creeping round whispering that everyone else was a spy of the
Communists, or the Trotskyists, or the Anarchists, or what-not. The fat
Russian agent was cornering all the foreign refugees in turn and
explaining plausibly that this whole affair was an Anarchist plot. I
watched him with some interest, for it was the first time that I had
seen a person whose profession was telling lies--unless one counts
journalists. There was something repulsive in the parody of smart hotel
life that was still going on behind shuttered windows amid the rattle of
rifle-fire. The front dining-room had been abandoned after a bullet came
through the window and chipped a pillar, and the guests were crowded
into a darkish room at the back, where there were never quite enough
tables to go round. The waiters were reduced in numbers--some of them
were C.N.T. members and had joined in the general strike--and had
dropped their boiled shirts for the time being, but meals were still
being served with a pretence of ceremony. There was, however,
practically nothing to eat. On that Thursday night the principal dish at
dinner was one sardine each. The hotel had had no bread for days, and
even the wine was running so low that we were drinking older and older
wines at higher and higher prices. This shortage of food went on for
several days after the fighting was over. Three days running, I
remember, my wife and I breakfasted off a little piece of goat's-milk
cheese with no bread and nothing to drink. The only thing that was
plentiful was oranges. The French lorry drivers brought quantities of
their oranges into the hotel. They were a tough-looking bunch; they had
with them some flashy Spanish girls and a huge porter in a black blouse.
At any other time the little snob of a hotel manager would have done his
best to make them uncomfortable, in fact would have refused to have them
on the premises, but at present they were popular because, unlike the
rest of us, they had a private store of bread which everyone was trying
to cadge from them.

I spent that final night on the roof, and the next day it did really
look as though the fighting was coming to an end. I do not think there
was much firing that day--the Friday. No one seemed to know for certain
whether the troops from Valencia were really coming; they arrived that
evening, as a matter of fact. The Government was broadcasting
half-soothing, half-threatening messages, asking everyone to go home and
saying that after a certain hour anyone found carrying arms would be
arrested. Not much attention was paid to the Government's broadcasts,
but everywhere the people were fading away from the barricades. I have
no doubt that it was mainly the food shortage that was responsible. From
every side you heard the same remark: 'We have no more food, we must go
back to work.' On the other hand the Civil Guards, who could count on
getting their rations so long as there was any food in the town, were
able to stay at their posts. By the afternoon the streets were almost
normal, though the deserted barricades were still standing; the Ramblas
were thronged with people, the shops nearly all open, and--most
reassuring of all--the trams that had stood so long in frozen blocks
jerked into motion and began running. The Civil Guards were still
holding the Café Moka and had not taken down their barricades, but some
of them brought chairs out and sat on the pavement with their rifles
across their knees. I winked at one of them as I went past and got a not
unfriendly grin; he recognized me, of course. Over the Telephone
Exchange the Anarchist flag had been hauled down and only the Catalan
flag was flying. That meant that the workers were definitely beaten; I
realized--though, owing to my political ignorance, not so clearly as I
ought to have done--that when the Government felt more sure of itself
there would be reprisals. But at the time I was not interested in that
aspect of things. All I felt was a profound relief that the devilish din
of firing was over, and that one could buy some food and have a bit of
rest and peace before going back to the front.

It must have been late that evening that the troops from Valencia first
appeared in the streets. They were the Assault Guards, another formation
similar to the Civil Guards and the Carabineros (i.e. a formation
intended primarily for police work), and the picked troops of the
Republic. Quite suddenly they seemed to spring up out of the ground; you
saw them everywhere patrolling the streets in groups of ten--tall men in
grey or blue uniforms, with long rifles slung over their shoulders, and
a sub-machine-gun to each group. Meanwhile there was a delicate job to
be done. The six rifles which we had used for the guard in the
observatory towers were still lying there, and by hook or by crook we
had got to get them back to the P.O.U.M. building. It was only a
question of getting them across the street. They were part of the
regular armoury of the building, but to bring them into the street was
to contravene the Government's order, and if we were caught with them in
our hands we should certainly be arrested--worse, the rifles would be
confiscated. With only twenty-one rifles in the building we could not
afford to lose six of them. After a lot of discussion as to the best
method, a red-haired Spanish boy and myself began to smuggle them out.
It was easy enough to dodge the Assault Guard patrols; the danger was
the Civil Guards in the Moka, who were well aware that we had rifles in
the observatory and might give the show away if they saw us carrying
them across. Each of us partially undressed and slung a rifle over the
left shoulder, the butt under the armpit, the barrel down the
trouser-leg. It was unfortunate that they were long Mausers. Even a man
as tall as I am cannot wear a long Mauser down his trouser-leg without
discomfort. It was an intolerable job getting down the corkscrew
staircase of the observatory with a completely rigid left leg. Once in
the street, we found that the only way to move was with extreme
slowness, so slowly that you did not have to bend your knees. Outside
the picture-house I saw a group of people staring at me with great
interest as I crept along at tortoise-speed. I have often wondered what
they thought was the matter with me. Wounded in the war, perhaps.
However, all the rifles were smuggled across without incident.

Next day the Assault Guards were everywhere, walking the streets like
conquerors. There was no doubt that the Government was simply making a
display of force in order to overawe a population which it already knew
would not resist; if there had been any real fear of further outbreaks
the Assault Guards would have been kept in barracks and not scattered
through the streets in small bands. They were splendid troops, much the
best I had seen in Spain, and, though I suppose they were in a sense
'the enemy', I could not help liking the look of them. But it was with a
sort of amazement that I watched them strolling to and fro. I was used
to the ragged, scarcely-armed militia on the Aragón front, and I had not
known that the Republic possessed troops like these. It was not only
that they were picked men physically, it was their weapons that most
astonished me. All of them were armed with brand-new rifles of the type
known as 'the Russian rifle' (these rifles were sent to Spain by the
U.S.S.R., but were, I believe, manufactured in America). I examined one
of them. It was a far from perfect rifle, but vastly better than the
dreadful old blunderbusses we had at the front. The Assault Guards had
one submachine-gun between ten men and an automatic pistol each; we at
the front had approximately one machine-gun between fifty men, and as
for pistols and revolvers, you could only procure them illegally. As a
matter of fact, though I had not noticed it till now, it was the same
everywhere. The Civil Guards and Carabineros, who were not intended for
the front at all, were better armed and far better clad than ourselves.
I suspect it is the same in all wars--always the same contrast between
the sleek police in the rear and the ragged soldiers in the line. On the
whole the Assault Guards got on very well with the population after the
first day or two. On the first day there was a certain amount of trouble
because some of the Assault Guards--acting on instructions, I
suppose--began behaving in a provocative manner. Bands of them boarded
trams, searched the passengers, and, if they had C.N.T. membership cards
in their pockets, tore them up and stamped on them. This led to scuffles
with armed Anarchists, and one or two people were killed. Very soon,
however, the Assault Guards dropped their conquering air and relations
became more friendly. It was noticeable that most of them had picked up
a girl after a day or two.

The Barcelona fighting had given the Valencia Government the long-wanted
excuse to assume fuller control of Catalonia. The workers' militias were
to be broken up and redistributed among the Popular Army. The Spanish
Republican flag was flying all over Barcelona--the first time I had seen
it, I think, except over a Fascist trench. In the working-class quarters
the barricades were being pulled down, rather fragmentarily, for it is a
lot easier to build a barricade than to put the stones back. Outside the
P.S.U.C. buildings the barricades were allowed to remain standing, and
indeed many were standing as late as June. The Civil Guards were still
occupying strategic points. Huge seizures of arms were being made from
C.N.T. strongholds, though I have no doubt a good many escaped seizure.
_La Batalla_ was still appearing, but it was censored until the front
page was almost completely blank. The P.S.U.C. papers were uncensored
and were publishing inflammatory articles demanding the suppression of
the P.O.U.M. The P.O.U.M. was declared to be a disguised Fascist
organization, and a cartoon representing the P.O.U.M. as a figure
slipping off a mask marked with the hammer and sickle and revealing a
hideous, maniacal face marked with the swastika, was being circulated
all over the town by P.S.U.C. agents. Evidently the official version of
the Barcelona fighting was already fixed upon: it was to be represented
as a 'fifth column' Fascist rising engineered solely by the P.O.U.M.

In the hotel the horrible atmosphere of suspicion and hostility had
grown worse now that the fighting was over. In the face of the
accusations that were being flung about it was impossible to remain
neutral. The posts were working again, the foreign Communist papers were
beginning to arrive, and their accounts of the fighting were not only
violently partisan but, of course, wildly inaccurate as to facts. I
think some of the Communists on the spot, who had seen what was actually
happening, were dismayed by the interpretation that was being put upon
events, but naturally they had to stick to their own side. Our Communist
friend approached me once again and asked me whether I would not
transfer into the International Column.

I was rather surprised. 'Your papers are saying I'm a Fascist,' I said.
'Surely I should be politically suspect, coming from the P.O.U.M.'

'Oh, that doesn't matter. After all, you were only acting under orders.'

I had to tell him that after this affair I could not join any
Communist-controlled unit. Sooner or later it might mean being used
against the Spanish working class. One could not tell when this kind of
thing would break out again, and if I had to use my rifle at all in such
an affair I would use it on the side of the working class and not
against them. He was very decent about it. But from now on the whole
atmosphere was changed. You could not, as before, 'agree to differ' and
have drinks with a man who was supposedly your political opponent. There
were some ugly wrangles in the hotel lounge. Meanwhile the jails were
already full and overflowing. After the fighting was over the Anarchists
had, of course, released their prisoners, but the Civil Guards had not
released theirs, and most of them were thrown into prison and kept there
without trial, in many cases for months on end. As usual, completely
innocent people were being arrested owing to police bungling. I
mentioned earlier that Douglas Thompson was wounded about the beginning
of April. Afterwards we had lost touch with him, as usually happened
when a man was wounded, for wounded men were frequently moved from one
hospital to another. Actually he was at Tarragona hospital and was sent
back to Barcelona about the time when the fighting started. On the
Tuesday morning I met him in the street, considerably bewildered by the
firing that was going on all round. He asked the question everyone was
asking:

'What the devil is this all about?'

I explained as well as I could. Thompson said promptly:

'I'm going to keep out of this. My arm's still bad. I shall go back to
my hotel and stay there.'

He went back to his hotel, but unfortunately (how important it is in
street-fighting to understand the local geography!) it was a hotel in a
part of the town controlled by the Civil Guards. The place was raided
and Thompson was arrested, flung into jail, and kept for eight days in a
cell so full of people that nobody had room to lie down. There were many
similar cases. Numerous foreigners with doubtful political records were
on the run, with the police on their track and in constant fear of
denunciation. It was worst for the Italians and Germans, who had no
passports and were generally wanted by the secret police in their own
countries. If they were arrested they were liable to be deported to
France, which might mean being sent back to Italy or Germany, where God
knew what horrors were awaiting them. One or two foreign women hurriedly
regularized their position by 'marrying' Spaniards. A German girl who
had no papers at all dodged the police by posing for several days as a
man's mistress. I remember the look of shame and misery on the poor
girl's face when I accidentally bumped into her coming out of the man's
bedroom. Of course she was not his mistress, but no doubt she thought I
thought she was. You had all the while a hateful feeling that someone
hitherto your friend might be denouncing you to the secret police. The
long nightmare of the fighting, the noise, the lack of food and sleep,
the mingled strain and boredom of sitting on the roof and wondering
whether in another minute I should be shot myself or be obliged to shoot
somebody else had put my nerves on edge. I had got to the point when
every time a door banged I grabbed for my pistol. On the Saturday
morning there was an uproar of shots outside and everyone cried out:
'It's starting again!' I ran into the street to find that it was only
some Assault Guards shooting a mad dog. No one who was in Barcelona
then, or for months later, will forget the horrible atmosphere produced
by fear, suspicion, hatred, censored newspapers, crammed jails, enormous
food queues, and prowling gangs of armed men.

I have tried to give some idea of what it felt like to be in the middle
of the Barcelona fighting; yet I do not suppose I have succeeded in
conveying much of the strangeness of that time. One of the things that
stick in my mind when I look back is the casual contacts one made at the
time, the sudden glimpses of non-combatants to whom the whole thing was
simply a meaningless uproar. I remember the fashionably-dressed woman I
saw strolling down the Ramblas, with a shopping-basket over her arm and
leading a white poodle, while the rifles cracked and roared a street or
two away. It is conceivable that she was deaf. And the man I saw rushing
across the completely empty Plaza de Cataluña, brandishing a white
handkerchief in each hand. And the large party of people all dressed in
black who kept trying for about an hour to cross the Plaza de Cataluña
and always failing. Every time they emerged from the side-street at the
corner the P.S.U.C. machine-gunners in the Hotel Colon opened fire and
drove them back--I don't know why, for they were obviously unarmed. I
have since thought that they may have been a funeral party. And the
little man who acted as caretaker at the museum over the Poliorama and
who seemed to regard the whole affair as a social occasion. He was so
pleased to have the English visiting him--the English were so _simpático_,
he said. He hoped we would all come and see him again when the trouble
was over; as a matter of fact I did go and see him. And the other little
man, sheltering in a doorway, who jerked his head in a pleased manner
towards the hell of firing on the Plaza de Cataluña and said (as though
remarking that it was a fine morning): 'So we've got the nineteenth of
July back again!' And the people in the shoe-shop who were making my
marching-boots. I went there before the fighting, after it was over,
and, for a very few minutes, during the brief armistice on 5 May. It was
an expensive shop, and the shop-people were U.G.T. and may have been
P.S.U.C. members--at any rate they were politically on the other side
and they knew that I was serving with the P.O.U.M. Yet their attitude
was completely indifferent. 'Such a pity, this kind of thing, isn't it?
And so bad for business. What a pity it doesn't stop! As though there
wasn't enough of that kind of thing at the front!' etc., etc. There must
have been quantities of people, perhaps a majority of the inhabitants of
Barcelona, who regarded the whole affair without a flicker of interest,
or with no more interest than they would have felt in an air-raid.

In this chapter I have described only my personal experiences. In the
next chapter I must discuss as best I can the larger issues--what
actually happened and with what results, what were the rights and wrongs
of the affair, and who if anyone was responsible. So much political
capital has been made out of the Barcelona fighting that it is important
to try and get a balanced view of it. An immense amount, enough to fill
many books, has already been written on the subject, and I do not
suppose I should exaggerate if I said that nine-tenths of it is
untruthful. Nearly all the newspaper accounts published at the time were
manufactured by journalists at a distance, and were not only inaccurate
in their facts but intentionally misleading. As usual, only one side of
the question has been allowed to get to the wider public. Like everyone
who was in Barcelona at the time. I saw only what was happening in my
immediate neighbourhood, but I saw and heard quite enough to be able to
contradict many of the lies that have been circulated. As before, if you
are not interested in political controversy and the mob of parties and
sub-parties with their confusing names (rather like the names of the
generals in a Chinese war), please skip. It is a horrible thing to have
to enter into the details of inter-party polemics; it is like diving
into a cesspool. But it is necessary to try and establish the truth, so
far as it is possible. This squalid brawl in a distant city is more
important than might appear at first sight.



Chapter 11


It will never be possible to get a completely accurate and unbiased
account of the Barcelona fighting, because the necessary records do not
exist. Future historians will have nothing to go upon except a mass of
accusations and party propaganda. I myself have little data beyond what
I saw with my own eyes and what I have learned from other eyewitnesses
whom I believe to be reliable. I can, however, contradict some of the
more flagrant lies and help to get the affair into some kind of
perspective.

First of all, what actually happened?

For some time past there had been tension throughout Catalonia. In
earlier chapters of this book I have given some account of the struggle
between Communists and Anarchists. By May 1937 things had reached a
point at which some kind of violent outbreak could be regarded as
inevitable. The immediate cause of friction was the Government's order
to surrender all private weapons, coinciding with the decision to build
up a heavily-armed 'non-political' police-force from which trade union
members were to be excluded. The meaning of this was obvious to
everyone; and it was also obvious that the next move would be the taking
over of some of the key industries controlled by the C.N.T. In addition
there was a certain amount of resentment among the working classes
because of the growing contrast of wealth and poverty and a general
vague feeling that the revolution had been sabotaged. Many people were
agreeably surprised when there was no rioting on 1 May. On 3 May the
Government decided to take over the Telephone Exchange, which had been
operated since the beginning of the war mainly by C.N.T. workers; it was
alleged that it was badly run and that official calls were being tapped.
Salas, the Chief of Police (who may or may not have been exceeding his
orders), sent three lorry-loads of armed Civil Guards to seize the
building, while the streets outside were cleared by armed police in
civilian clothes. At about the same time bands of Civil Guards seized
various other buildings in strategic spots. Whatever the real intention
may have been, there was a widespread belief that this was the signal
for a general attack on the C.N.T. by the Civil Guards and the P.S.U.C.
(Communists and Socialists). The word flew round the town that the
workers' buildings were being attacked, armed Anarchists appeared on the
streets, work ceased, and fighting broke out immediately. That night and
the next morning barricades were built all over the town, and there was
no break in the fighting until the morning of 6 May. The fighting was,
however, mainly defensive on both sides. Buildings were besieged, but,
so far as I know, none were stormed, and there was no use of artillery.
Roughly speaking, the C.N.T.-F.A.I.-P.O.U.M. forces held the
working-class suburbs, and the armed police-forces and the P.S.U.C. held
the central and official portion of the town. On 6 May there was an
armistice, but fighting soon broke out again, probably because of
premature attempts by Civil Guards to disarm C.N.T. workers. Next
morning, however, the people began to leave the barricades of their own
accord. Up till, roughly, the night of 5 May the C.N.T. had had the
better of it, and large numbers of Civil Guards had surrendered. But
there was no generally accepted leadership and no fixed plan--indeed, so
far as one could judge, no plan at all except a vague determination to
resist the Civil Guards. The official leaders of the C.N.T. had joined
with those of the U.G.T. in imploring everyone to go back to work; above
all, food was running short. In such circumstances nobody was sure
enough of the issue to go on fighting. By the afternoon of 7 May
conditions were almost normal. That evening six thousand Assault Guards,
sent by sea from Valencia, arrived and took control of the town. The
Government issued an order for the surrender of all arms except those
held by the regular forces, and during the next few days large numbers
of arms were seized. The casualties during the fighting were officially
given out as four hundred killed and about a thousand wounded. Four
hundred killed is possibly an exaggeration, but as there is no way of
verifying this we must accept it as accurate.

Secondly, as to the after-effects of the fighting. Obviously it is
impossible to say with any certainty what these were. There is no
evidence that the outbreak had any direct effect upon the course of the
war, though obviously it must have had if it continued even a few days
longer. It was made the excuse for bringing Catalonia under the direct
control of Valencia, for hastening the break-up of the militias, and for
the suppression of the P.O.U.M., and no doubt it also had its share in
bringing down the Caballero Government. But we may take it as certain
that these things would have happened in any case. The real question is
whether the C.N.T. workers who came into the street gained or lost by
showing fight on this occasion. It is pure guesswork, but my own opinion
is that they gained more than they lost. The seizure of the Barcelona
Telephone Exchange was simply one incident in a long process. Since the
previous year direct power had been gradually manoeuvred out of the
hands of the syndicates, and the general movement was away from
working-class control and towards centralized control, leading on to
State capitalism or, possibly, towards the reintroduction of private
capitalism. The fact that at this point there was resistance probably
slowed the process down. A year after the outbreak of war the Catalan
workers had lost much of their power, but their position was still
comparatively favourable. It might have been much less so if they had
made it clear that they would lie down under no matter what provocation.
There are occasions when it pays better to fight and be beaten than not
to fight at all.

Thirdly, what purpose, if any, lay behind the outbreak? Was it any kind
of _coup d'état_ or revolutionary attempt? Did it definitely aim at
overthrowing the Government? Was it preconcerted at all?

My own opinion is that the fighting was only preconcerted in the sense
that everyone expected it. There were no signs of any very definite plan
on either side. On the Anarchist side the action was almost certainly
spontaneous, for it was an affair mainly of the rank and file. The
people came into the streets and their political leaders followed
reluctantly, or did not follow at all. The only people who even talked
in a revolutionary strain were the Friends of Durruti, a small extremist
group within the F.A.I., and the P.O.U.M. But once again they were
following and not leading. The Friends of Durruti distributed some kind
of revolutionary leaflet, but this did not appear until 5 May and cannot
be said to have started the fighting, which had started of its own
accord two days earlier. The official leaders of the C.N.T. disowned the
whole affair from the start. There were a number of reasons for this. To
begin with, the fact that the C.N.T. was still represented in the
Government and the Generalite ensured that its leaders would be more
conservative than their followers. Secondly, the main object of the
C.N.T. leaders was to form an alliance with the U.G.T., and the fighting
was bound to widen the split between C.N.T. and U.G.T., at any rate for
the time being. Thirdly--though this was not generally known at the
time--the Anarchist leaders feared that if things went beyond a certain
point and the workers took possession of the town, as they were perhaps
in a position to do on 5 May, there would be foreign intervention. A
British cruiser and two British destroyers had closed in upon the
harbour, and no doubt there were other warships not far away. The
English newspapers gave it out that these ships were proceeding to
Barcelona 'to protect British interests', but in fact they made no move
to do so; that is, they did not land any men or take off any refugees.
There can be no certainty about this, but it was at least inherently
likely that the British Government, which had not raised a finger to
save the Spanish Government from Franco, would intervene quickly enough
to save it from its own working class.

The P.O.U.M. leaders did not disown the affair, in fact they encouraged
their followers to remain at the barricades and even gave their approval
(in _La Batalla_, 6 May) to the extremist leaflet issued by the Friends
of Durruti. (There is great uncertainty about this leaflet, of which no
one now seems able to produce a copy.) In some of the foreign papers it
was described as an 'inflammatory poster' which was 'plastered' all over
the town. There was certainly no such poster. From comparison of various
reports I should say that the leaflet called for (i) The formation of a
revolutionary council (junta), (ii) The shooting of those responsible
for the attack on the Telephone Exchange, (iii) The disarming of the
Civil Guards. There is also some uncertainty as to how far _La Batalla_
expressed agreement with the leaflet. I myself did not see the leaflet
or _La Batalla_ of that date. The only handbill I saw during the
fighting was one issued by the tiny group of Trotskyists
('Bolshevik-Leninists') on 4 May. This merely said: 'Everyone to the
barricades--general strike of all industries except war industries.' (In
other words, it merely demanded what was happening already.) But in
reality the attitude of the P.O.U.M. leaders was hesitating. They had
never been in favour of insurrection until the war against Franco was
won; on the other hand the workers had come into the streets, and the
P.O.U.M. leaders took the rather pedantic Marxist line that when the
workers are on the streets it is the duty of the revolutionary parties
to be with them. Hence, in spite of uttering revolutionary slogans about
the 'reawakening of the spirit of 19 July', and so forth, they did their
best to limit the workers' action to the defensive. They never, for
instance, ordered an attack on any building; they merely ordered their
followers to remain on guard and, as I mentioned in the last chapter,
not to fire when it could be avoided. _La Batalla_ also issued
instructions that no troops were to leave the front.*

[* Footnote: A recent number of _Inprecor_ states the exact
opposite--that _La Batalla_ ordered the P.O.U.M. troops to leave the
front! The point can easily be settled by referring to _La Batalla_ of
the date named.]

As far as one can estimate it, I should say that the responsibility of
the P.O.U.M. amounts to having urged everyone to remain at the
barricades, and probably to having persuaded a certain number to remain
there longer than they would otherwise have done. Those who were in
personal touch with the P.O.U.M. leaders at the time (I myself was not)
have told me that they were in reality dismayed by the whole business,
but felt that they had got to associate themselves with it. Afterwards,
of course, political capital was made out of it in the usual manner.
Gorkin, one of the P.O.U.M. leaders, even spoke later of 'the glorious
days of May'.From the propaganda point of view this may have been the
right line; certainly the P.O.U.M. rose somewhat in numbers during the
brief period before its suppression. Tactically it was probably a
mistake to give countenance to the leaflet of the Friends of Durruti,
which was a very small organization and normally hostile to the P.O.U.M.
Considering the general excitement and the things that were being said
on both sides, the leaflet did not in effect mean much more than 'Stay
at the barricades', but by seeming to approve of it while _Solidaridad
Obrera_, the Anarchist paper, repudiated it, the P.O.U.M. leaders made
it easy for the Communist press to say afterwards that the fighting was
a kind of insurrection engineered solely by the P.O.U.M. However, we may
be certain that the Communist press would have said this in any case. It
was nothing compared with the accusations that were made both before and
afterwards on less evidence. The C.N.T. leaders did not gain much by
their more cautious attitude; they were praised for their loyalty but
were levered out of both the Government and the Generalite as soon as
the opportunity arose.

So far as one could judge from what people were saying at the time,
there was no real revolutionary intention anywhere. The people behind the
barricades were ordinary C.N.T. workers, probably with a sprinkling of
U.G.T. workers among them, and what they were attempting was not to
overthrow the Government but to resist what they regarded, rightly or
wrongly, as an attack by the police. Their action was essentially
defensive, and I doubt whether it should be described, as it was in
nearly all the foreign newspapers, as a 'rising'. A rising implies
aggressive action and a definite plan. More exactly it was a riot--a
very bloody riot, because both sides had fire-arms in their hands and
were willing to use them.

But what about the intentions on the other side? If it was not an
Anarchist _coup d'état_, was it perhaps a Communist _coup d'état_--a
planned effort to smash the power of the C.N.T. at one blow?

I do not believe it was, though certain things might lead one to suspect
it. It is significant that something very similar (seizure of the
Telephone Exchange by armed police acting under orders from Barcelona)
happened in Tarragona two days later. And in Barcelona the raid on the
Telephone Exchange was not an isolated act. In various parts of the town
bands of Civil Guards and P.S.U.C. adherents seized buildings in
strategic spots, if not actually before the fighting started, at any
rate with surprising promptitude. But what one has got to remember is
that these things were happening in Spain and not in England. Barcelona
is a town with a long history of street-fighting. In such places things
happen quickly, the factions are ready-made, everyone knows the local
geography, and when the guns begin to shoot people take their places
almost as in a fire-drill. Presumably those responsible for the seizure
of the Telephone Exchange expected trouble--though not on the scale that
actually happened--and had made ready to meet it. But it does not follow
that they were planning a general attack on the C.N.T. There are two
reasons why I do not believe that either side had made preparations for
large-scale fighting:

(i) Neither side had brought troops to Barcelona beforehand. The
fighting was only between those who were in Barcelona already, mainly
civilians and police.

(ii) The food ran short almost immediately. Anyone who has served in
Spain knows that the one operation of war that Spaniards really perform
really well is that of feeding their troops. It is most unlikely that if
either side had contemplated a week or two of street-fighting and a
general strike they would not have stored food beforehand.

Finally, as to the rights and wrongs of the affair.

A tremendous dust was kicked up in the foreign anti-Fascist press, but,
as usual, only one side of the case has had anything like a hearing. As
a result the Barcelona fighting has been represented as an insurrection
by disloyal Anarchists and Trotskyists who were 'stabbing the Spanish
Government in the back', and so forth. The issue was not quite so simple
as that. Undoubtedly when you are at war with a deadly enemy it is
better not to begin fighting among yourselves; but it is worth
remembering that it takes two to make a quarrel and that people do not
begin building barricades unless they have received something that they
regard as a provocation.

The trouble sprang naturally out of the Government's order to the
Anarchists to surrender their arms. In the English press this was
translated into English terms and took this form: that arms were
desperately needed on the Aragón front and could not be sent there
because the unpatriotic Anarchists were holding them back. To put it
like this is to ignore the conditions actually existing in Spain.
Everyone knew that both the Anarchists and the P.S.U.C. were hoarding
arms, and when the fighting broke out in Barcelona this was made clearer
still; both sides produced arms in abundance. The Anarchists were well
aware that even if they surrendered their arms, the P.S.U.C.,
politically the main power in Catalonia, would still retain theirs; and
this in fact was what happened after the fighting was over. Meanwhile
actually visible on the streets, there were quantities of arms which
would have been very welcome at the front, but which were being retained
for the 'non-political' police forces in the rear. And underneath this
there was the irreconcilable difference between Communists and
Anarchists, which was bound to lead to some kind of struggle sooner or
later. Since the beginning of the war the Spanish Communist Party had
grown enormously in numbers and captured most of the political power,
and there had come into Spain thousands of foreign Communists, many of
whom were openly expressing their intention of 'liquidating' Anarchism
as soon as the war against Franco was won. In the circumstances one
could hardly expect the Anarchists to hand over the weapons which they
had got possession of in the summer of 1936.

The seizure of the Telephone Exchange was simply the match that fired an
already existing bomb. It is perhaps just conceivable that those
responsible imagined that it would not lead to trouble. Companys, the
Catalan President, is said to have declared laughingly a few days
earlier that the Anarchists would put up with anything.*
But certainly it was not a wise action. For months past there had been a
long series of armed clashes between Communists and Anarchists in
various parts of Spain. Catalonia and especially Barcelona was in a
state of tension that had already led to street affrays, assassinations,
and so forth. Suddenly the news ran round the city that armed men were
attacking the buildings that the workers had captured in the July
fighting and to which they attached great sentimental importance. One
must remember that the Civil Guards were not loved by the working-class
population. For generations past _la guardia_ had been simply an appendage
of the landlord and the boss, and the Civil Guards were doubly hated
because they were suspected, quite justly, of being of very doubtful
loyalty against the Fascists.**

[* Footnote: _New Statesman_ (14 May).]

[** Footnote: At the outbreak of war the Civil Guards had everywhere
sided with the stronger party. On several occasions later in the war,
e.g. at Santander, the local Civil Guards went over to the Fascists in a
body.]

It is probable that the emotion that brought people into the streets in
the first few hours was much the same emotion as had led them to resist
the rebel generals at the beginning of the war. Of course it is arguable
that the C.N.T. workers ought to have handed over the Telephone Exchange
without protest. One's opinion here will be governed by one's attitude
on the question of centralized government and working-class control.
More relevantly it may be said: 'Yes, very likely the C.N.T. had a case.
But, after all, there was a war on, and they had no business to start a
fight behind the lines.' Here I agree entirely. Any internal disorder
was likely to aid Franco. But what actually precipitated the fighting?
The Government may or may not have had the right to seize the Telephone
Exchange; the point is that in the actual circumstances it was bound to
lead to a fight. It was a provocative action, a gesture which said in
effect, and presumably was meant to say: 'Your power is at an end--we
are taking over.' It was not common sense to expect anything but
resistance. If one keeps a sense of proportion one must realize that the
fault was not--could not be, in a matter of this kind--entirely on one
side. The reason why a one-sided version has been accepted is simply
that the Spanish revolutionary parties have no footing in the foreign
press. In the English press, in particular, you would have to search for
a long time before finding any favourable reference, at any period of
the war, to the Spanish Anarchists. They have been systematically
denigrated, and, as I know by my own experience, it is almost impossible
to get anyone to print anything in their defence.

I have tried to write objectively about the Barcelona fighting, though,
obviously, no one can be completely objective on a question of this
kind. One is practically obliged to take sides, and it must be clear
enough which side I am on. Again, I must inevitably have made mistakes
of fact, not only here but in other parts of this narrative. It is very
difficult to write accurately about the Spanish war, because of the lack
of non-propagandist documents. I warn everyone against my bias, and I
warn everyone against my mistakes. Still, I have done my best to be
honest. But it will be seen that the account I have given is completely
different from that which appeared in the foreign and especially the
Communist press. It is necessary to examine the Communist version,
because it was published all over the world, has been supplemented at
short intervals ever since, and is probably the most widely accepted
one.

In the Communist and pro-Communist press the entire blame for the
Barcelona fighting was laid upon the P.O.U.M. The affair was represented
not as a spontaneous outbreak, but as a deliberate, planned insurrection
against the Government, engineered solely by the P.O.U.M. with the aid
of a few misguided 'uncontrollables'. More than this, it was definitely
a Fascist plot, carried out under Fascist orders with the idea of
starting civil war in the rear and thus paralysing the Government. The
P.O.U.M. was 'Franco's Fifth Column'--a 'Trotskyist' organization
working in league with the Fascists. According to the _Daily Worker_ (11
May):


The German and Italian agents, who poured into Barcelona ostensibly to
'prepare' the notorious 'Congress of the Fourth International', had one
big task. It was this:

They were--in cooperation with the local Trotskyists--to prepare a
situation of disorder and bloodshed, in which it would be possible for
the Germans and Italians to declare that they were 'unable to exercise
naval control of the Catalan coasts effectively because of the disorder
prevailing in Barcelona' and were, therefore, 'unable to do otherwise
than land forces in Barcelona'.

In other words, what was being prepared was a situation in which the
German and Italian Governments could land troops or marines quite openly
on the Catalan coasts, declaring that they were doing so 'in order to
preserve order'...

The instrument for all this lay ready to hand for the Germans and
Italians in the shape of the Trotskyist organization known as the
P.O.U.M.

The P.O.U.M., acting in cooperation with well-known criminal elements,
and with certain other deluded persons in the Anarchist organizations
planned, organized, and led the attack in the rearguard, accurately
timed to coincide with the attack on the front at Bilbao, etc., etc.

Later in the article the Barcelona fighting becomes 'the P.O.U.M.
attack', and in another article in the same issue it is stated that
there is 'no doubt that it is at the door of the P.O.U.M. that the
responsibility for the bloodshed in Catalonia must be laid'. _Inprecor_
(29 May) states that those who erected the barricades in Barcelona were
'only members of the P.O.U.M. organized from that party for this
purpose'.

I could quote a great deal more, but this is clear enough. The P.O.U.M.
was wholly responsible and the P.O.U.M. was acting under Fascist orders.
In a moment I will give some more extracts from the accounts that
appeared in the Communist press; it will be seen that they are so
self-contradictory as to be completely worthless. But before doing so it
is worth pointing to several _a priori_ reasons why this version of the
May fighting as a Fascist rising engineered by the P.O.U.M. is next door
to incredible.

(i) The P.O.U.M. had not the numbers or influence to provoke disorders
of this magnitude. Still less had it the power to call a general strike.
It was a political organization with no very definite footing in the
trade unions, and it would have been hardly more capable of producing a
strike throughout Barcelona than (say) the English Communist Party would
be of producing a general strike throughout Glasgow. As I said earlier,
the attitude of the P.O.U.M. leaders may have helped to prolong the
fighting to some extent; but they could not have originated it even if
they had wanted to.

(ii) The alleged Fascist plot rests on bare assertion and all the
evidence points in the other direction. We are told that the plan was
for the German and Italian Governments to land troops in Catalonia; but
no German or Italian troopships approached the coast. As to the
'Congress of the Fourth International' and the 'German and Italian
agents', they are pure myth. So far as I know there had not even been
any talk of a Congress of the Fourth International. There were vague
plans for a Congress of the P.O.U.M. and its brother-parties (English
I.L.P., German S.A.P., etc., etc.); this had been tentatively fixed for
some time in July--two months later--and not a single delegate had yet
arrived. The 'German and Italian agents' have no existence outside the
pages of the _Daily Worker_. Anyone who crossed the frontier at that
time knows that it was not so easy to 'pour' into Spain, or out of it,
for that matter.

(iii) Nothing happened either at Lérida, the chief stronghold of the
P.O.U.M., or at the front. It is obvious that if the P.O.U.M. leaders
had wanted to aid the Fascists they would have ordered their militia to
walk out of the line and let the Fascists through. But nothing of the
kind was done or suggested. Nor were any extra men brought out of the
line beforehand, though it would have been easy enough to smuggle, say,
a thousand or two thousand men back to Barcelona on various pretexts.
And there was no attempt even at indirect sabotage of the front. The
transport of food, munitions, and so forth continued as usual; I
verified this by inquiry afterwards. Above all, a planned rising of the
kind suggested would have needed months of preparation, subversive
propaganda among the militia, and so forth. But there was no sign or
rumour of any such thing. The fact that the militia at the front played
no part in the 'rising' should be conclusive. If the P.O.U.M. were
really planning a _coup d'état_ it is inconceivable that they would not
have used the ten thousand or so armed men who were the only striking
force they had.


It will be clear enough from this that the Communist thesis of a
P.O.U.M. 'rising' under Fascist orders rests on less than no evidence. I
will add a few more extracts from the Communist press. The Communist
accounts of the opening incident, the raid on the Telephone Exchange,
are illuminating; they agree in nothing except in putting the blame on
the other side. It is noticeable that in the English Communist papers
the blame is put first upon the Anarchists and only later upon the
P.O.U.M. There is a fairly obvious reason for this. Not everyone in
England has heard of 'Trotskyism', whereas every English-speaking person
shudders at the name of 'Anarchist'. Let it once be known that
'Anarchists' are implicated, and the right atmosphere of prejudice is
established; after that the blame can safely be transferred to the
'Trotskyists'. The _Daily Worker_ begins thus (6 May):


A minority gang of Anarchists on Monday and Tuesday seized and attempted
to hold the telephone and telegram buildings, and started firing into
the street.


There is nothing like starting off with a reversal of roles. The Civil
Guards attack a building held by the C.N.T.; so the C.N.T. are
represented as attacking their own building--attacking themselves, in
fact. On the other hand, the _Daily Worker_ of 11 May states:


The Left Catalan Minister of Public Security, Aiguade, and the United
Socialist General Commissar of Public Order, Rodrigue Salas, sent the
armed republican police into the Telefonica building to disarm the
employees there, most of them members of C.N.T. unions.


This does not seem to agree very well with the first statement;
nevertheless the _Daily Worker_ contains no admission that the first
statement was wrong. The _Daily Worker_ of 11 May states that the
leaflets of the Friends of Durruti, which were disowned by the C.N.T.,
appeared on 4 May and 5 May, during the fighting. _Inprecor_ (22 May)
states that they appeared on 3 May, _before_ the fighting, and adds that
'in view of these facts' (the appearance of various leaflets):


The police, led by the Prefect of Police in person, occupied the central
telephone exchange in the afternoon of 3 May. The police were shot at
while discharging their duty. This was the signal for the provocateurs
to begin shooting affrays all over the city.


And here is _Inprecor_ for 29 May:


At three o'clock in the afternoon the Commissar for Public Security,
Comrade Salas, went to the Telephone Exchange, which on the previous
night had been occupied by 50 members of the P.O.U.M. and various
uncontrollable elements.


This seems rather curious. The occupation of the Telephone Exchange by
50 P.O.U.M. members is what one might call a picturesque circumstance,
and one would have expected somebody to notice it at the time. Yet it
appears that it was discovered only three or four weeks later. In
another issue of _Inprecor_ the 50 P.O.U.M. members become 50 P.O.U.M.
militiamen. It would be difficult to pack together more contradictions
than are contained in these few short passages. At one moment the C.N.T.
are attacking the Telephone Exchange, the next they are being attacked
there; a leaflet appears before the seizure of the Telephone Exchange
and is the cause of it, or, alternatively, appears afterwards and is the
result of it; the people in the Telephone Exchange are alternatively
C.N.T. members and P.O.U.M. members--and so on. And in a still later
issue of the _Daily Worker_ (3 June) Mr J. R. Campbell informs us that
the Government only seized the Telephone Exchange because the barricades
were already erected!

For reasons of space I have taken only the reports of one incident, but
the same discrepancies run all through the accounts in the Communist
press. In addition there are various statements which are obviously pure
fabrication. Here for instance is something quoted by the _Daily Worker_
(7 May) and said to have been issued by the Spanish Embassy in Paris:


A significant feature of the uprising has been that the old monarchist
flag was flown from the balcony of various houses in Barcelona,
doubtless in the belief that those who took part in the rising had
become masters of the situation.


The _Daily Worker_ very probably reprinted this statement in good faith,
but those responsible for it at the Spanish Embassy must have been quite
deliberately lying. Any Spaniard would understand the internal situation
better than that. A monarchist flag in Barcelona! It was the one thing
that could have united the warring factions in a moment. Even the
Communists on the spot were obliged to smile when they read about it. It
is the same with the reports in the various Communist papers upon the
arms supposed to have been used by the P.O.U.M. during the 'rising'.
They would be credible only if one knew nothing whatever of the facts.
In the _Daily Worker_ of 17 May Mr Frank Pitcairn states:


There were actually all sorts of arms used by them in the outrage. There
were the arms which they have been stealing for months past, and hidden,
and there were arms such as tanks, which they stole from the barracks
just at the beginning of the rising. It is clear that scores of
machine-guns and several thousand rifles are still in their possession.


_Inprecor_ (29 May) also states:


On 3 May the P.O.U.M. had at its disposal some dozens of machine-guns
and several thousand rifles...On the Plaza de España the Trotskyists
brought into action batteries of '75' guns which were destined for the
front in Aragón and which the militia had carefully concealed on their
premises.


Mr Pitcairn does not tell us how and when it became clear that the
P.O.U.M. possessed scores of machine-guns and several thousand rifles. I
have given an estimate of the arms which were at three of the principal
P.O.U.M. buildings--about eighty rifles, a few bombs, and no
machine-guns; i.e. about sufficient for the armed guards which, at that
time, all the political parties placed on their buildings. It seems
strange that afterwards, when the P.O.U.M. was suppressed and all its
buildings seized, these thousands of weapons never came to light;
especially the tanks and field-guns, which are not the kind of thing
that can be hidden up the chimney. But what is revealing in the two
statements above is the complete ignorance they display of the local
circumstances. According to Mr Pitcairn the P.O.U.M. stole tanks 'from
the barracks'. He does not tell us which barracks. The P.O.U.M.
militiamen who were in Barcelona (now comparatively few, as direct
recruitment to the party militias had ceased) shared the Lenin Barracks
with a considerably larger number of Popular Army troops. Mr Pitcairn is
asking us to believe, therefore, that the P.O.U.M. stole tanks with the
connivance of the Popular Army. It is the same with the 'premises' on
which the 75-mm. guns were concealed. There is no mention of where these
'premises' were. Those batteries of guns, firing on the Plaza de España,
appeared in many newspaper reports, but I think we can say with
certainty that they never existed. As I mentioned earlier, I heard no
artillery-fire during the fighting, though the Plaza de España was only
a mile or so away. A few days later I examined the Plaza de España and
could find no buildings that showed marks of shell-fire. And an
eye-witness who was in that neighbourhood throughout the fighting
declares that no guns ever appeared there. (Incidentally, the tale of
the stolen guns may have originated with Antonov-Ovseenko, the Russian
Consul-General. He, at any rate, communicated it to a well-known English
journalist, who afterwards repeated it in good faith in a weekly paper.
Antonov-Ovseenko has since been 'purged'. How this would affect his
credibility I do not know.) The truth is, of course, that these tales
about tanks, field-guns, and so forth have only been invented because
otherwise it is difficult to reconcile the scale of the Barcelona
fighting with the P.O.U.M.'s small numbers. It was necessary to claim
that the P.O.U.M. was wholly responsible for the fighting; it was also
necessary to claim that it was an insignificant party with no following
and 'numbered only a few thousand members', according to _Inprecor_. The
only hope of making both statements credible was to pretend that the
P.O.U.M. had all the weapons of a modern mechanized army.

It is impossible to read through the reports in the Communist Press
without realizing that they are consciously aimed at a public ignorant
of the facts and have no other purpose than to work up prejudice. Hence,
for instance, such statements as Mr Pitcairn's in the _Daily Worker_ of
11 May that the 'rising' was suppressed by the Popular Army. The idea
here is to give outsiders the impression that all Catalonia was solid
against the 'Trotskyists'. But the Popular Army remained neutral
throughout the fighting; everyone in Barcelona knew this, and it is
difficult to believe that Mr Pitcairn did not know it too. Or again, the
juggling in the Communist Press with the figures for killed and wounded,
with the object of exaggerating the scale of the disorders. Diaz,
General Secretary of the Spanish Communist Party, widely quoted in the
Communist Press, gave the numbers as 900 dead and 2500 wounded. The
Catalan Minister of Propaganda, who was hardly likely to underestimate,
gave the numbers as 400 killed and 1000 wounded. The Communist Party
doubles the bid and adds a few more hundreds for luck.

The foreign capitalist newspapers, in general, laid the blame for the
fighting upon the Anarchists, but there were a few that followed the
Communist line. One of these was the English _News Chronicle_, whose
correspondent, Mr John Langdon-Davies, was in Barcelona at the time. I
quote portions of his article here:


A TROTSKYIST REVOLT

...This has not been an Anarchist uprising. It is a frustrated _putsch_
of the 'Trotskyist' P.O.U.M., working through their controlled
organizations, 'Friends of Durruti' and Libertarian Youth...The tragedy
began on Monday afternoon when the Government sent armed police into the
Telephone Building, to disarm the workers there, mostly C.N.T. men.
Grave irregularities in the service had been a scandal for some time. A
large crowd gathered in the Plaza de Cataluña outside, while the C.N.T.
men resisted, retreating floor by floor to the top of the building...The
incident was very obscure, but word went round that the Government was
out against the Anarchists. The streets filled with armed men...By
nightfall every workers'centre and Government building was barricaded,
and at ten o'clock the first volleys were fired and the first ambulances
began ringing their way through the streets. By dawn all Barcelona was
under fire...As the day wore on and the dead mounted to over a hundred,
one could make a guess at what was happening. The Anarchist C.N.T. and
Socialist U.G.T. were not technically 'out in the street'. So long as
they remained behind the barricades they were merely watchfully waiting,
an attitude which included the right to shoot at anything armed in the
open street...(the) general bursts were invariably aggravated by
_pacos_--hidden solitary men, usually Fascists, shooting from roof-tops
at nothing in particular, but doing all they could to add to the general
panic...By Wednesday evening, however, it began to be clear who was
behind the revolt. All the walls had been plastered with an inflammatory
poster calling for an immediate revolution and for the shooting of
Republican and Socialist leaders. It was signed by the 'Friends of
Durruti'. On Thursday morning the Anarchists daily denied all knowledge
or sympathy with it, but _La Batalla_, the P.O.U.M. paper, reprinted the
document with the highest praise. Barcelona, the first city of Spain,
was plunged into bloodshed by _agents provocateurs_ using this
subversive organization.


This does not agree very completely with the Communist versions I have
quoted above, but it will be seen that even as it stands it is
self-contradictory. First the affair is described as 'a Trotskyist
revolt', then it is shown to have resulted from a raid on the Telephone
building and the general belief that the Government was 'out against'
the Anarchists. The city is barricaded and both C.N.T. and U.G.T. are
behind the barricades; two days afterwards the inflammatory poster
(actually a leaflet) appears, and this is declared by implication to
have started the whole business--effect preceding cause. But there is a
piece of very serious misrepresentation here. Mr Langdon-Davies
describes the Friends of Durruti and Libertarian Youth as 'controlled
organizations' of the P.O.U.M. Both were Anarchist organizations and had
no connexion with the P.O.U.M. The Libertarian Youth was the youth
league of the Anarchists, corresponding to the J.S.U. of the P.S.U.C.,
etc. The Friends of Durruti was a small organization within the F.A.I.,
and was in general bitterly hostile to the P.O.U.M. So far as I can
discover, there was no one who was a member of both. It would be about
equally true to say that the Socialist League is a 'controlled
organization' of the English Liberal Party. Was Mr Langdon-Davies
unaware of this? If he was, he should have written with more caution
about this very complex subject.

I am not attacking Mr Langdon-Davies's good faith; but admittedly he
left Barcelona as soon as the fighting was over, i.e. at the moment when
he could have begun serious inquiries, and throughout his report there
are clear signs that he has accepted the official version of a
'Trotskyist revolt' without sufficient verification. This is obvious
even in the extract I have quoted. 'By nightfall' the barricades are
built, and 'at ten o'clock' the first volleys are fired. These are not
the words of an eye-witness. From this you would gather that it is usual
to wait for your enemy to build a barricade before beginning to shoot at
him. The impression given is that some hours elapsed between the
building of the barricades and the firing of the first volleys;
whereas--naturally--it was the other way about. I and many others saw
the first volleys fired early in the afternoon. Again, there are the
solitary men, 'usually Fascists', who are shooting from the roof-tops.
Mr Langdon-Davies does not explain how he knew that these men were
Fascists. Presumably he did not climb on to the roofs and ask them. He
is simply repeating what he has been told and, as it fits in with the
official version, is not questioning it. As a matter of fact, he
indicates one probable source of much of his information by an
incautious reference to the Minister of Propaganda at the beginning of
his article. Foreign journalists in Spain were hopelessly at the mercy
of the Ministry of Propaganda, though one would think that the very name
of this ministry would be a sufficient warning. The Minister of
Propaganda was, of course, about as likely to give an objective account
of the Barcelona trouble as (say) the late Lord Carson would have been
to give an objective account of the Dublin rising of 1916.

I have given reasons for thinking that the Communist version of the
Barcelona fighting cannot be taken seriously. In addition I must say
something about the general charge that the P.O.U.M. was a secret
Fascist organization in the pay of Franco and Hitler.

This charge was repeated over and over in the Communist Press,
especially from the beginning of 1937 onwards. It was part of the
world-wide drive of the official Communist Party against 'Trotskyism',
of which the P.O.U.M. was supposed to be representative in
Spain.'Trotskyism', according to _Frente Rojo_ (the Valencia Communist
paper) 'is not a political doctrine. Trotskyism is an official
capitalist organization, a Fascist terrorist band occupied in crime and
sabotage against the people.' The P.O.U.M. was a 'Trotskyist'
organization in league with the Fascists and part of 'Franco's Fifth
Column'. What was noticeable from the start was that no evidence was
produced in support of this accusation; the thing was simply asserted
with an air of authority. And the attack was made with the maximum of
personal libel and with complete irresponsibility as to any effects it
might have upon the war. Compared with the job of libelling the
P.O.U.M., many Communist writers appear to have considered the betrayal
of military secrets unimportant. In a February number of the _Daily
Worker_, for instance, a writer (Winifred Bates) is allowed to state
that the P.O.U.M. had only half as many troops on its section of the
front as it pretended. This was not true, but presumably the writer
believed it to be true. She and the _Daily Worker_ were perfectly
willing, therefore, to hand to the enemy one of the most important
pieces of information that can be handed through the columns of a
newspaper. In the _New Republic_ Mr Ralph Bates stated that the P.O.U.M.
troops were 'playing football with the Fascists in no man's land' at a
time when, as a matter of fact, the P.O.U.M. troops were suffering heavy
casualties and a number of my personal friends were killed and wounded.
Again, there was the malignant cartoon which was widely circulated,
first in Madrid and later in Barcelona, representing the P.O.U.M. as
slipping off a mask marked with the hammer and sickle and revealing a
face marked with the swastika. Had the Government not been virtually
under Communist control it would never have permitted a thing of this
kind to be circulated in wartime. It was a deliberate blow at the morale
not only of the P.O.U.M. militia, but of any others who happened to be
near them; for it is not encouraging to be told that the troops next to
you in the line are traitors. As a matter of fact, I doubt whether the
abuse that was heaped upon them from the rear actually had the effect of
demoralizing the P.O.U.M. militia. But certainly it was calculated to do
so, and those responsible for it must be held to have put political
spite before anti-Fascist unity.

The accusation against the P.O.U.M. amounted to this: that a body of
some scores of thousands of people, almost entirely working class,
besides numerous foreign helpers and sympathizers, mostly refugees from
Fascist countries, and thousands of militia, was simply a vast spying
organization in Fascist pay. The thing was opposed to common sense, and
the past history of the P.O.U.M. was enough to make it incredible. All
the P.O.U.M. leaders had revolutionary histories behind them. Some of
them had been mixed up in the 1934 revolt, and most of them had been
imprisoned for Socialist activities under the Lerroux Government or the
monarchy. In 1936 its then leader, Joaquin Maurin, was one of the
deputies who gave warning in the Cortes of Franco's impending revolt.
Some time after the outbreak of war he was taken prisoner by the
Fascists while trying to organize resistance in Franco's rear. When the
revolt broke out the P.O.U.M. played a conspicuous part in resisting it,
and in Madrid, in particular, many of its members were killed in the
street-fighting. It was one of the first bodies to form columns of
militia in Catalonia and Madrid. It seems almost impossible to explain
these as the actions of a party in Fascist pay. A party in Fascist pay
would simply have joined in on the other side.

Nor was there any sign of pro-Fascist activities during the war. It was
arguable--though finally I do not agree--that by pressing for a more
revolutionary policy the P.O.U.M. divided the Government forces and thus
aided the Fascists. I think any Government of reformist type would be
justified in regarding a party like the P.O.U.M. as a nuisance. But this
is a very different matter from direct treachery. There is no way of
explaining why, if the P.O.U.M. was really a Fascist body, its militia
remained loyal. Here were eight or ten thousand men holding important
parts of the line during the intolerable conditions of the winter of
1936-7. Many of them were in the trenches four or five months at a
stretch. It is difficult to see why they did not simply walk out of the
line or go over to the enemy. It was always in their power to do so, and
at times the effect might have been decisive. Yet they continued to
fight, and it was shortly after the P.O.U.M. was suppressed as a
political party, when the event was fresh in everyone's mind, that the
militia--not yet redistributed among the Popular Army--took part in the
murderous attack to the east of Huesca when several thousand men were
killed in one or two days. At the very least one would have expected
fraternization with the enemy and a constant trickle of deserters. But,
as I have pointed out earlier, the number of desertions was
exceptionally small. Again, one would have expected pro-Fascist
propaganda, 'defeatism', and so forth. Yet there was no sign of any such
thing. Obviously there must have been Fascist spies and _agents
provocateurs_ in the P.O.U.M.; they exist in all Left-wing parties; but
there is no evidence that there were more of them there than elsewhere.

It is true that some of the attacks in the Communist Press said, rather
grudgingly, that only the P.O.U.M. leaders were in Fascist pay, and not
the rank and file. But this was merely an attempt to detach the rank and
file from their leaders. The nature of the accusation implied that
ordinary members, militiamen, and so forth, were all in the plot
together; for it was obvious that if Nin, Gorkin, and the others were
really in Fascist pay, it was more likely to be known to their
followers, who were in contact with them, than to journalists in London,
Paris, and New York. And in any case, when the P.O.U.M. was suppressed
the Communist-controlled secret police acted on the assumption that all
were guilty alike, and arrested everyone connected with the P.O.U.M.
whom they could lay hands on, including even wounded men, hospital
nurses, wives of P.O.U.M. members, and in some cases, even children.

Finally, on 15-16 June, the P.O.U.M. was suppressed and declared an
illegal organization. This was one of the first acts of the Negrin
Government which came into office in May. When the Executive Committee
of the P.O.U.M. had been thrown into jail, the Communist Press produced
what purported to be the discovery of an enormous Fascist plot. For a
while the Communist Press of the whole world was flaming with this kind
of thing (_Daily Worker_, 21 June, summarizing various Spanish Communist
papers):


SPANISH TROTSKYISTS PLOT WITH FRANCO

Following the arrest of a large number of leading Trotskyists in
Barcelona and elsewhere...there became known, over the weekend, details
of one of the most ghastly pieces of espionage ever known in wartime,
and the ugliest revelation of Trotskyist treachery to date...Documents
in the possession of the police, together with the full confession of no
less than 200 persons under arrest, prove, etc. etc.


What these revelations 'proved' was that the P.O.U.M. leaders were
transmitting military secrets to General Franco by radio, were in touch
with Berlin, and were acting in collaboration with the secret Fascist
organization in Madrid. In addition there were sensational details about
secret messages in invisible ink, a mysterious document signed with the
letter N. (standing for Nin), and so on and so forth.

But the final upshot was this: six months after the event, as I write,
most of the P.O.U.M. leaders are still in jail, but they have never been
brought to trial, and the charges of communicating with Franco by radio,
etc., have never even been formulated. Had they really been guilty of
espionage they would have been tried and shot in a week, as so many
Fascist spies had been previously. But not a scrap of evidence was ever
produced except the unsupported statements in the Communist Press. As
for the two hundred 'full confessions', which, if they had existed,
would have been enough to convict anybody, they have never been heard of
again. They were, in fact, two hundred efforts of somebody's
imagination.

More than this, most of the members of the Spanish Government have
disclaimed all belief in the charges against the P.O.U.M. Recently the
cabinet decided by five to two in favour of releasing anti-Fascist
political prisoners; the two dissentients being the Communist ministers.
In August an international delegation headed by James Maxton M.P., went
to Spain to inquire into the charges against the P.O.U.M. and the
disappearance of Andres Nin. Prieto, the Minister of National Defence,
Irujo, the Minister of Justice, Zugazagoitia, Minister of the Interior,
Ortega y Gasset, the Procureur-General, Prat Garcia, and others all
repudiated any belief in the P.O.U.M. leaders being guilty of espionage.
Irujo added that he had been through the dossier of the case, that none
of the so-called pieces of evidence would bear examination, and that the
document supposed to have been signed by Nin was 'valueless'--i.e. a
forgery. Prieto considered the P.O.U.M. leaders to be responsible for
the May fighting in Barcelona, but dismissed the idea of their being
Fascist spies. 'What is most grave,' he added, 'is that the arrest of
the P.O.U.M. leaders was not decided upon by the Government, and the
police carried out these arrests on their own authority. Those
responsible are not the heads of the police, but their entourage, which
has been infiltrated by the Communists according to their usual custom.'
He cited other cases of illegal arrests by the police. Irujo likewise
declared that the police had become 'quasi-independent' and were in
reality under the control of foreign Communist elements. Prieto hinted
fairly broadly to the delegation that the Government could not afford to
offend the Communist Party while the Russians were supplying arms. When
another delegation, headed by John McGovern M.P., went to Spain in
December, they got much the same answers as before, and Zugazagoitia,
the Minister of the Interior, repeated Prieto's hint in even plainer
terms. 'We have received aid from Russia and have had to permit certain
actions which we did not like.' As an illustration of the autonomy of
the police, it is interesting to learn that even with a signed order
from the Director of Prisons and the Minister of Justice, McGovern and
the others could not obtain admission to one of the 'secret prisons'
maintained by the Communist Party in Barcelona.*

[* Footnote: For reports on the two delegations see _Le Populaire_ (7
September),_ La Flèche_ (18 September), report on the Maxton Delegation
published by _Independent News_ (219 Rue Saint-Denis, Paris), and
McGovern's pamphlet _Terror in Spain_.]

I think this should be enough to make the matter clear. The accusation
of espionage against the P.O.U.M. rested solely upon articles in the
Communist press and the activities of the Communist-controlled secret
police. The P.O.U.M. leaders, and hundreds or thousands of their
followers, are still in prison, and for six months past the Communist
press has continued to clamour for the execution of the 'traitors.' But
Negrin and the others have kept their heads and refused to stage a
wholesale massacre of 'Trotskyists'. Considering the pressure that has
been put upon them, it is greatly to their credit that they have done
so. Meanwhile, in face of what I have quoted above, it becomes very
difficult to believe that the P.O.U.M. was really a Fascist spying
organization, unless one also believes that Maxton, McGovern, Prieto,
Irujo, Zugazagoitia, and the rest are all in Fascist pay together.

Finally, as to the charge that the P.O.U.M. was 'Trotskyist'. This word
is now flung about with greater and greater freedom, and it is used in a
way that is extremely misleading and is often intended to mislead. It is
worth stopping to define it. The word Trotskyist is used to mean three
distinct things:


(i) One who, like Trotsky, advocates 'world revolution' as against
'Socialism in a single country'. More loosely, a revolutionary
extremist.

(ii) A member of the actual organization of which Trotsky is head.

(iii) A disguised Fascist posing as a revolutionary who acts especially
by sabotage in the U.S.S.R., but, in general, by splitting and
undermining the Left-wing forces.


In sense (i) the P.O.U.M. could probably be described as Trotskyist. So
can the English I.L.P., the German S.A.P., the Left Socialists in
France, and so on. But the P.O.U.M. had no connexion with Trotsky or the
Trotskyist ('Bolshevik-Leninist') organization. When the war broke out
the foreign Trotskyists who came to Spain (fifteen or twenty in number)
worked at first for the P.O.U.M., as the party nearest to their own
viewpoint, but without becoming party-members; later Trotsky ordered his
followers to attack the P.O.U.M. policy, and the Trotskyists were purged
from the party offices, though a few remained in the militia. Nin, the
P.O.U.M. leader after Maurin's capture by the Fascists, was at one time
Trotsky's secretary, but had left him some years earlier and formed the
P.O.U.M. by the amalgamation of various Opposition Communists with an
earlier party, the Workers' and Peasants' Bloc. Nin's one-time
association with Trotsky has been used in the Communist press to show
that the P.O.U.M. was really Trotskyist. By the same line of argument it
could be shown that the English Communist Party is really a Fascist
organization, because of Mr John Strachey's one-time association with
Sir Oswald Mosley.

In sense (ii), the only exactly defined sense of the word, the P.O.U.M.
was certainly not Trotskyist. It is important to make this distinction,
because it is taken for granted by the majority of Communists that a
Trotskyist in sense (ii) is invariably a Trotskyist in sense (iii)--i.e.
that the whole Trotskyist organization is simply a Fascist
spying-machine. 'Trotskyism' only came into public notice in the time of
the Russian sabotage trials, and to call a man a Trotskyist is
practically equivalent to calling him a murderer, agent provocateur,
etc. But at the same time anyone who criticizes Communist policy from a
Left-wing standpoint is liable to be denounced as a Trotskyist. Is it
then asserted that everyone professing revolutionary extremism is in
Fascist pay?

In practice it is or is not, according to local convenience. When Maxton
went to Spain with the delegation I have mentioned above, _Verdad_,
_Frente Rojo_, and other Spanish Communist papers instantly denounced
him as a 'Trotsky-Fascist', spy of the Gestapo, and so forth. Yet the
English Communists were careful not to repeat this accusation. In the
English Communist press Maxton becomes merely a 'reactionary enemy of
the working class', which is conveniently vague. The reason, of course,
is simply that several sharp lessons have given the English Communist
press a wholesome dread of the law of libel. The fact that the
accusation was not repeated in a country where it might have to be
proved is sufficient confession that it is a lie.

It may seem that I have discussed the accusations against the P.O.U.M.
at greater length than was necessary. Compared with the huge miseries of
a civil war, this kind of internecine squabble between parties, with its
inevitable injustices and false accusations, may appear trivial. It is
not really so. I believe that libels and press-campaigns of this kind,
and the habits of mind they indicate, are capable of doing the most
deadly damage to the anti-Fascist cause.

Anyone who has given the subject a glance knows that the Communist
tactic of dealing with political opponents by means of trumped-up
accusations is nothing new. Today the key-word is 'Trotsky-Fascist';
yesterday it was 'Social-Fascist'. It is only six or seven years since
the Russian State trials 'proved' that the leaders of the Second
International, including, for instance, Leon Blum and prominent members
of the British Labour Party, were hatching a huge plot for the military
invasion of the U.S.S.R. Yet today the French Communists are glad enough
to accept Blum as a leader, and the English Communists are raising
heaven and earth to get inside the Labour Party. I doubt whether this
kind of thing pays, even from a sectarian point of view. And meanwhile
there is no possible doubt about the hatred and dissension that the
'Trotsky-Fascist' accusation is causing. Rank-and-file Communists
everywhere are led away on a senseless witch-hunt after 'Trotskyists',
and parties of the type of the P.O.U.M. are driven back into the
terribly sterile position of being mere anti-Communist parties. There is
already the beginning of a dangerous split in the world working-class
movement. A few more libels against life-long Socialists, a few more
frame-ups like the charges against the P.O.U.M., and the split may
become irreconcilable. The only hope is to keep political controversy on
a plane where exhaustive discussion is possible. Between the Communists
and those who stand or claim to stand to the Left of them there is a
real difference. The Communists hold that Fascism can be beaten by
alliance with sections of the capitalist class (the Popular Front);
their opponents hold that this manoeuvre simply gives Fascism new
breeding-grounds. The question has got to be settled; to make the wrong
decision may be to land ourselves in for centuries of semi-slavery. But
so long as no argument is produced except a scream of 'Trotsky-Fascist!'
the discussion cannot even begin. It would be impossible for me, for
instance, to debate the rights and wrongs of the Barcelona fighting with
a Communist Party member, because no Communist--that is to say, no
'good' Communist--could admit that I have given a truthful account of
the facts. If he followed his party line dutifully he would have to
declare that I am lying or, at best, that I am hopelessly misled and
that anyone who glanced at the _Daily Worker_ headlines a thousand miles
from the scene of events knows more of what was happening in Barcelona
than I do. In such circumstances there can be no argument; the necessary
minimum of agreement cannot be reached. What purpose is served by saying
that men like Maxton are in Fascist pay? Only the purpose of making
serious discussion impossible. It is as though in the middle of a chess
tournament one competitor should suddenly begin screaming that the other
is guilty of arson or bigamy. The point that is really at issue remains
untouched. Libel settles nothing.



Chapter 12


It must have been three days after the Barcelona fighting ended that we
returned to the front. After the fighting--more particularly after the
slanging-match in the newspapers--it was difficult to think about this
war in quite the same naively idealistic manner as before. I suppose
there is no one who spent more than a few weeks in Spain without being
in some degree disillusioned. My mind went back to the newspaper
correspondent whom I had met my first day in Barcelona, and who said to
me: 'This war is a racket the same as any other.' The remark had shocked
me deeply, and at that time (December) I do not believe it was true; it
was not true even now, in May; but it was becoming truer. The fact is
that every war suffers a kind of progressive degradation with every
month that it continues, because such things as individual liberty and a
truthful press are simply not compatible with military efficiency.

One could begin now to make some kind of guess at what was likely to
happen. It was easy to see that the Caballero Government would fall and
be replaced by a more Right-wing Government with a stronger Communist
influence (this happened a week or two later), which would set itself to
break the power of the trade unions once and for all. And afterwards,
when Franco was beaten--and putting aside the huge problems raised by
the reorganization of Spain--the prospect was not rosy. As for the
newspaper talk about this being a 'war for democracy', it was plain
eyewash. No one in his senses supposed that there was any hope of
democracy, even as we understand it in England or France, in a country
so divided and exhausted as Spain would be when the war was over. It
would have to be a dictatorship, and it was clear that the chance of a
working-class dictatorship had passed. That meant that the general
movement would be in the direction of some kind of Fascism. Fascism
called, no doubt, by some politer name, and--because this was
Spain--more human and less efficient than the German or Italian
varieties. The only alternatives were an infinitely worse dictatorship
by Franco, or (always a possibility) that the war would end with Spain
divided up, either by actual frontiers or into economic zones.

Whichever way you took it it was a depressing outlook. But it did not
follow that the Government was not worth fighting for as against the
more naked and developed Fascism of Franco and Hitler. Whatever faults
the post-war Government might have, Franco's regime would certainly be
worse. To the workers--the town proletariat--it might in the end make
very little difference who won, but Spain is primarily an agricultural
country and the peasants would almost certainly benefit by a Government
victory. Some at least of the seized lands would remain in their
possession, in which case there would also be a distribution of land in
the territory that had been Franco's, and the virtual serfdom that had
existed in some parts of Spain was not likely to be restored. The
Government in control at the end of the war would at any rate be
anti-clerical and anti-feudal. It would keep the Church in check, at
least for the time being, and would modernize the country--build roads,
for instance, and promote education and public health; a certain amount
had been done in this direction even during the war. Franco, on the
other hand, in so far as he was not merely the puppet of Italy and
Germany, was tied to the big feudal landlords and stood for a stuffy
clerico-military reaction. The Popular Front might be a swindle, but
Franco was an anachronism. Only millionaires or romantics could want him
to win.

Moreover, there was the question of the international prestige of
Fascism, which for a year or two past had been haunting me like a
nightmare. Since 1930 the Fascists had won all the victories; it was
time they got a beating, it hardly mattered from whom. If we could drive
Franco and his foreign mercenaries into the sea it might make an immense
improvement in the world situation, even if Spain itself emerged with a
stifling dictatorship and all its best men in jail. For that alone the
war would have been worth winning.

This was how I saw things at the time. I may say that I now think much
more highly of the Negrin Government than I did when it came into
office. It has kept up the difficult fight with splendid courage, and it
has shown more political tolerance than anyone expected. But I still
believe that--unless Spain splits up, with unpredictable
consequences--the tendency of the post-war Government is bound to be
Fascistic. Once again I let this opinion stand, and take the chance that
time will do to me what it does to most prophets.

We had just reached the front when we heard that Bob Smillie, on his way
back to England, had been arrested at the frontier, taken down to
Valencia, and thrown into jail. Smillie had been in Spain since the
previous October. He had worked for several months at the P.O.U.M.
office and had then joined the militia when the other I.L.P. members
arrived, on the understanding that he was to do three months at the
front before going back to England to take part in a propaganda tour. It
was some time before we could discover what he had been arrested for. He
was being kept _incommunicado_, so that not even a lawyer could see him.
In Spain there is--at any rate in practice--no _habeas corpus_, and you
can be kept in jail for months at a stretch without even being charged,
let alone tried. Finally we learned from a released prisoner that
Smillie had been arrested for 'carrying arms'. The 'arms', as I happened
to know, were two hand-grenades of the primitive type used at the
beginning of the war, which he had been taking home to show off at his
lectures, along with shell splinters and other souvenirs. The charges
and fuses had been removed from them--they were mere cylinders of steel
and completely harmless. It was obvious that this was only a pretext and
that he had been arrested because of his known connexion with the
P.O.U.M. The Barcelona fighting had only just ended and the authorities
were, at that moment, extremely anxious not to let anyone out of Spain
who was in a position to contradict the official version. As a result
people were liable to be arrested at the frontier on more or less
frivolous pretexts. Very possibly the intention, at the beginning, was
only to detain Smillie for a few days. But the trouble is that, in
Spain, once you are in jail you generally stay there, with or without
trial.

We were still at Huesca, but they had placed us further to the right,
opposite the Fascist redoubt which we had temporarily captured a few
weeks earlier. I was now acting as _teniente_--corresponding to
second-lieutenant in the British Army, I suppose--in command of about
thirty men, English and Spanish. They had sent my name in for a regular
commission; whether I should get it was uncertain. Previously the
militia officers had refused to accept regular commissions, which meant
extra pay and conflicted with the equalitarian ideas of the militia, but
they were now obliged to do so. Benjamin had already been gazetted
captain and Kopp was in process of being gazetted major. The Government
could not, of course, dispense with the militia officers, but it was not
confirming any of them in a higher rank than major, presumably in order
to keep the higher commands for Regular Army officers and the new
officers from the School of War. As a result, in our division, the 29th,
and no doubt in many others, you had the queer temporary situation of
the divisional commander, the brigade commanders, and the battalion
commanders all being majors.

There was not much happening at the front. The battle round the Jaca
road had died away and did not begin again till mid June. In our
position the chief trouble was the snipers. The Fascist trenches were
more than a hundred and fifty yards away, but they were on higher ground
and were on two sides of us, our line forming a right-angle salient. The
corner of the salient was a dangerous spot; there had always been a toll
of sniper casualties there. From time to time the Fascists let fly at us
with a rifle-grenade or some similar weapon. It made a ghastly
crash--unnerving, because you could not hear it coming in time to
dodge--but was not really dangerous; the hole it blew in the ground was
no bigger than a wash-tub. The nights were pleasantly warm, the days
blazing hot, the mosquitoes were becoming a nuisance, and in spite of
the clean clothes we had brought from Barcelona we were almost
immediately lousy. Out in the deserted orchards in no man's land the
cherries were whitening on the trees. For two days there were torrential
rains, the dug-outs flooded, and the parapet sank a foot; after that
there were more days of digging out the sticky clay with the wretched
Spanish spades which have no handles and bend like tin spoons.

They had promised us a trench-mortar for the company; I was looking
forward to it greatly. At nights we patrolled as usual--more dangerous
than it used to be, because the Fascist trenches were better manned and
they had grown more alert; they had scattered tin cans just outside
their wire and used to open up with the machine-guns when they heard a
clank. In the daytime we sniped from no man's land. By crawling a
hundred yards you could get to a ditch, hidden by tall grasses, which
commanded a gap in the Fascist parapet. We had set up a rifle-rest in
the ditch. If you waited long enough you generally saw a khaki-clad
figure slip hurriedly across the gap. I had several shots. I don't know
whether I hit anyone--it is most unlikely; I am a very poor shot with a
rifle. But it was rather fun, the Fascists did not know where the shots
were coming from, and I made sure I would get one of them sooner or
later. However, the dog it was that died--a Fascist sniper got me
instead. I had been about ten days at the front when it happened. The
whole experience of being hit by a bullet is very interesting and I
think it is worth describing in detail.

It was at the corner of the parapet, at five o'clock in the morning.
This was always a dangerous time, because we had the dawn at our backs,
and if you stuck your head above the parapet it was clearly outlined
against the sky. I was talking to the sentries preparatory to changing
the guard. Suddenly, in the very middle of saying something, I felt--it
is very hard to describe what I felt, though I remember it with the
utmost vividness.

Roughly speaking it was the sensation of being _at the centre_ of an
explosion. There seemed to be a loud bang and a blinding flash of light
all round me, and I felt a tremendous shock--no pain, only a violent
shock, such as you get from an electric terminal; with it a sense of
utter weakness, a feeling of being stricken and shrivelled up to
nothing. The sand-bags in front of me receded into immense distance. I
fancy you would feel much the same if you were struck by lightning. I
knew immediately that I was hit, but because of the seeming bang and
flash I thought it was a rifle nearby that had gone off accidentally and
shot me. All this happened in a space of time much less than a second.
The next moment my knees crumpled up and I was falling, my head hitting
the ground with a violent bang which, to my relief, did not hurt. I had
a numb, dazed feeling, a consciousness of being very badly hurt, but no
pain in the ordinary sense.

The American sentry I had been talking to had started forward. 'Gosh!
Are you hit?' People gathered round. There was the usual fuss--'Lift him
up! Where's he hit? Get his shirt open!'etc., etc. The American called for
a knife to cut my shirt open. I knew that there was one in my pocket and
tried to get it out, but discovered that my right arm was paralysed. Not
being in pain, I felt a vague satisfaction. This ought to please my
wife, I thought; she had always wanted me to be wounded, which would
save me from being killed when the great battle came. It was only now
that it occurred to me to wonder where I was hit, and how badly; I could
feel nothing, but I was conscious that the bullet had struck me
somewhere in the front of the body. When I tried to speak I found that I
had no voice, only a faint squeak, but at the second attempt I managed
to ask where I was hit. In the throat, they said. Harry Webb, our
stretcher-bearer, had brought a bandage and one of the little bottles of
alcohol they gave us for field-dressings. As they lifted me up a lot of
blood poured out of my mouth, and I heard a Spaniard behind me say that
the bullet had gone clean through my neck. I felt the alcohol, which at
ordinary times would sting like the devil, splash on to the wound as a
pleasant coolness.

They laid me down again while somebody fetched a stretcher. As soon as I
knew that the bullet had gone clean through my neck I took it for
granted that I was done for. I had never heard of a man or an animal
getting a bullet through the middle of the neck and surviving it. The
blood was dribbling out of the corner of my mouth. 'The artery's gone,'
I thought. I wondered how long you last when your carotid artery is cut;
not many minutes, presumably. Everything was very blurry. There must
have been about two minutes during which I assumed that I was killed.
And that too was interesting--I mean it is interesting to know what your
thoughts would be at such a time. My first thought, conventionally
enough, was for my wife. My second was a violent resentment at having to
leave this world which, when all is said and done, suits me so well. I
had time to feel this very vividly. The stupid mischance infuriated me.
The meaninglessness of it! To be bumped off, not even in battle, but in
this stale corner of the trenches, thanks to a moment's carelessness! I
thought, too, of the man who had shot me--wondered what he was like,
whether he was a Spaniard or a foreigner, whether he knew he had got me,
and so forth. I could not feel any resentment against him. I reflected
that as he was a Fascist I would have killed him if I could, but that if
he had been taken prisoner and brought before me at this moment I would
merely have congratulated him on his good shooting. It may be, though,
that if you were really dying your thoughts would be quite different.

They had just got me on to the stretcher when my paralysed right arm
came to life and began hurting damnably. At the time I imagined that I
must have broken it in falling; but the pain reassured me, for I knew
that your sensations do not become more acute when you are dying. I
began to feel more normal and to be sorry for the four poor devils who
were sweating and slithering with the stretcher on their shoulders. It
was a mile and a half to the ambulance, and vile going, over lumpy,
slippery tracks. I knew what a sweat it was, having helped to carry a
wounded man down a day or two earlier. The leaves of the silver poplars
which, in places, fringed our trenches brushed against my face; I
thought what a good thing it was to be alive in a world where silver
poplars grow. But all the while the pain in my arm was diabolical,
making me swear and then try not to swear, because every time I breathed
too hard the blood bubbled out of my mouth.

The doctor re-bandaged the wound, gave me a shot of morphia, and sent me
off to Sietamo. The hospitals at Sietamo were hurriedly constructed
wooden huts where the wounded were, as a rule, only kept for a few hours
before being sent on to Barbastro or Lérida. I was dopey from morphia
but still in great pain, practically unable to move and swallowing blood
constantly. It was typical of Spanish hospital methods that while I was
in this state the untrained nurse tried to force the regulation hospital
meal--a huge meal of soup, eggs, greasy stew, and so forth--down my
throat and seemed surprised when I would not take it. I asked for a
cigarette, but this was one of the periods of tobacco famine and there
was not a cigarette in the place. Presently two comrades who had got
permission to leave the line for a few hours appeared at my bedside.

'Hullo! You're alive, are you? Good. We want your watch and your
revolver and your electric torch. And your knife, if you've got one.'

They made off with all my portable possessions. This always happened
when a man was wounded--everything he possessed was promptly divided up;
quite rightly, for watches, revolvers, and so forth were precious at the
front and if they went down the line in a wounded man's kit they were
certain to be stolen somewhere on the way.

By the evening enough sick and wounded had trickled in to make up a few
ambulance-loads, and they sent us on to Barbastro. What a journey! It
used to be said that in this war you got well if you were wounded in the
extremities, but always died of a wound in the abdomen. I now realized
why. No one who was liable to bleed internally could have survived those
miles of jolting over metal roads that had been smashed to pieces by
heavy lorries and never repaired since the war began. Bang, bump,
wallop! It took me back to my early childhood and a dreadful thing
called the Wiggle-Woggle at the White City Exhibition. They had
forgotten to tie us into the stretchers. I had enough strength in my
left arm to hang on, but one poor wretch was spilt on to the floor and
suffered God knows what agonies. Another, a walking case who was sitting
in the corner of the ambulance, vomited all over the place. The hospital
in Barbastro was very crowded, the beds so close together that they were
almost touching. Next morning they loaded a number of us on to the
hospital train and sent us down to Lérida.

I was five or six days in Lérida. It was a big hospital, with sick,
wounded, and ordinary civilian patients more or less jumbled up
together. Some of the men in my ward had frightful wounds. In the next
bed to me there was a youth with black hair who was suffering from some
disease or other and was being given medicine that made his urine as
green as emerald. His bed-bottle was one of the sights of the ward. An
English-speaking Dutch Communist, having heard that there was an
Englishman in the hospital, befriended me and brought me English
newspapers. He had been terribly wounded in the October fighting, and
had somehow managed to settle down at Lérida hospital and had married
one of the nurses. Thanks to his wound, one of his legs had shrivelled
till it was no thicker than my arm. Two militiamen on leave, whom I had
met my first week at the front, came in to see a wounded friend and
recognized me. They were kids of about eighteen. They stood awkwardly
beside my bed, trying to think of something to say, and then, as a way
of demonstrating that they were sorry I was wounded, suddenly took all
the tobacco out of their pockets, gave it to me, and fled before I could
give it back. How typically Spanish! I discovered afterwards that you
could not buy tobacco anywhere in the town and what they had given me
was a week's ration.

After a few days I was able to get up and walk about with my arm in a
sling. For some reason it hurt much more when it hung down. I also had,
for the time being, a good deal of internal pain from the damage I had
done myself in falling, and my voice had disappeared almost completely,
but I never had a moment's pain from the bullet wound itself. It seems
this is usually the case. The tremendous shock of a bullet prevents
sensation locally; a splinter of shell or bomb, which is jagged and
usually hits you less hard, would probably hurt like the devil. There
was a pleasant garden in the hospital grounds, and in it was a pool with
gold-fishes and some small dark grey fish--bleak, I think. I used to sit
watching them for hours. The way things were done at Lérida gave me an
insight into the hospital system on the Aragón front--whether it was the
same on other fronts I do not know. In some ways the hospitals were very
good. The doctors were able men and there seemed to be no shortage of
drugs and equipment. But there were two bad faults on account of which,
I have no doubt, hundreds or thousands of men have died who might have
been saved.

One was the fact that all the hospitals anywhere near the front line
were used more or less as casualty clearing-stations. The result was
that you got no treatment there unless you were too badly wounded to be
moved. In theory most of the wounded were sent straight to Barcelona or
Tarragona, but owing to the lack of transport they were often a week or
ten days in getting there. They were kept hanging about at Sietamo,
Barbastro, Monzon, Lérida, and other places, and meanwhile they were
getting no treatment except an occasional clean bandage, sometimes not
even that. Men with dreadful shell wounds, smashed bones, and so forth,
were swathed in a sort of casing made of bandages and plaster of Paris;
a description of the wound was written in pencil on the outside, and as
a rule the casing was not removed till the man reached Barcelona or
Tarragona ten days later. It was almost impossible to get one's wound
examined on the way; the few doctors could not cope with the work, and
they simply walked hurriedly past your bed, saying: 'Yes, yes, they'll
attend to you at Barcelona.' There were always rumours that the hospital
train was leaving for Barcelona _mañana_. The other fault was the lack
of competent nurses. Apparently there was no supply of trained nurses in
Spain, perhaps because before the war this work was done chiefly by
nuns. I have no complaint against the Spanish nurses, they always
treated me with the greatest kindness, but there is no doubt that they
were terribly ignorant. All of them knew how to take a temperature, and
some of them knew how to tie a bandage, but that was about all. The
result was that men who were too ill to fend for themselves were often
shamefully neglected. The nurses would let a man remain constipated for
a week on end, and they seldom washed those who were too weak to wash
themselves. I remember one poor devil with a smashed arm telling me that
he had been three weeks without having his face washed. Even beds were
left unmade for days together. The food in all the hospitals was very
good--too good, indeed. Even more in Spain than elsewhere it seemed to
be the tradition to stuff sick people with heavy food. At Lérida the
meals were terrific. Breakfast, at about six in the morning, consisted
of soup, an omelette, stew, bread, white wine, and coffee, and lunch was
even larger--this at a time when most of the civil population was
seriously underfed. Spaniards seem not to recognize such a thing as a
light diet. They give the same food to sick people as to well
ones--always the same rich, greasy cookery, with everything sodden in
olive oil.

One morning it was announced that the men in my ward were to be sent
down to Barcelona today. I managed to send a wire to my wife, telling
her that I was coming, and presently they packed us into buses and took
us down to the station. It was only when the train was actually starting
that the hospital orderly who travelled with us casually let fall that
we were not going to Barcelona after all, but to Tarragona. I suppose
the engine-driver had changed his mind. 'Just like Spain!' I thought.
But it was very Spanish, too, that they agreed to hold up the train
while I sent another wire, and more Spanish still that the wire never
got there.

They had put us into ordinary third-class carriages with wooden seats,
and many of the men were badly wounded and had only got out of bed for
the first time that morning. Before long, what with the heat and the
jolting, half of them were in a state of collapse and several vomited on
the floor. The hospital orderly threaded his way among the corpse-like
forms that sprawled everywhere, carrying a large goatskin bottle full of
water which he squirted into this mouth or that. It was beastly water; I
remember the taste of it still. We got into Tarragona as the sun was
getting low. The line runs along the shore a stone's throw from the sea.
As our train drew into the station a troop-train full of men from the
International Column was drawing out, and a knot of people on the bridge
were waving to them. It was a very long train, packed to bursting-point
with men, with field-guns lashed on the open trucks and more men
clustering round the guns. I remember with peculiar vividness the
spectacle of that train passing in the yellow evening light; window
after window full of dark, smiling faces, the long tilted barrels of the
guns, the scarlet scarves fluttering--all this gliding slowly past us
against a turquoise-coloured sea.

'_Extranjeros_--foreigners,' said someone. 'They're Italians.'

Obviously they were Italians. No other people could have grouped
themselves so picturesquely or returned the salutes of the crowd with so
much grace--a grace that was none the less because about half the men on
the train were drinking out of up-ended wine bottles. We heard
afterwards that these were some of the troops who won the great victory
at Guadalajara in March; they had been on leave and were being
transferred to the Aragón front. Most of them, I am afraid, were killed
at Huesca only a few weeks later. The men who were well enough to stand
had moved across the carriage to cheer the Italians as they went past. A
crutch waved out of the window; bandaged forearms made the Red Salute.
It was like an allegorical picture of war; the trainload of fresh men
gliding proudly up the line, the maimed men sliding slowly down, and all
the while the guns on the open trucks making one's heart leap as guns
always do, and reviving that pernicious feeling, so difficult to get rid
of, that war is glorious after all.

The hospital at Tarragona was a very big one and full of wounded from
all fronts. What wounds one saw there! They had a way of treating
certain wounds which I suppose was in accordance with the latest medical
practice, but which was peculiarly horrible to look at. This was to
leave the wound completely open and unbandaged, but protected from flies
by a net of butter-muslin, stretched over wires. Under the muslin you
would see the red jelly of a half-healed wound. There was one man
wounded in the face and throat who had his head inside a sort of
spherical helmet of butter-muslin; his mouth was closed up and he
breathed through a little tube that was fixed between his lips. Poor
devil, he looked so lonely, wandering to and fro, looking at you through
his muslin cage and unable to speak. I was three or four days at
Tarragona. My strength was coming back, and one day, by going slowly, I
managed to walk down as far as the beach. It was queer to see the
seaside life going on almost as usual; the smart cafés along the
promenade and the plump local bourgeoisie bathing and sunning themselves
in deck-chairs as though there had not been a war within a thousand
miles. Nevertheless, as it happened, I saw a bather drowned, which one
would have thought impossible in that shallow and tepid sea.

Finally, eight or nine days after leaving the front, I had my wound
examined. In the surgery where newly-arrived cases were examined,
doctors with huge pairs of shears were hacking away the breast-plates of
plaster in which men with smashed ribs, collar-bones, and so forth had
been cased at the dressing-stations behind the line; out of the
neck-hole of the huge clumsy breast-plate you would see protruding an
anxious, dirty face, scrubby with a week's beard. The doctor, a brisk,
handsome man of about thirty, sat me down in a chair, grasped my tongue
with a piece of rough gauze, pulled it out as far as it would go, thrust
a dentist's mirror down my throat, and told me to say 'Eh!' After doing
this till my tongue was bleeding and my eyes running with water, he told
me that one vocal cord was paralysed.

'When shall I get my voice back?' I said.

'Your voice? Oh, you'll never get your voice back,' he said cheerfully.

However, he was wrong, as it turned out. For about two months I could
not speak much above a whisper, but after that my voice became normal
rather suddenly, the other vocal cord having 'compensated'. The pain in
my arm was due to the bullet having pierced a bunch of nerves at the
back of the neck. It was a shooting pain like neuralgia, and it went on
hurting continuously for about a month, especially at night, so that I
did not get much sleep. The fingers of my right hand were also
semi-paralysed. Even now, five months afterwards, my forefinger is still
numb--a queer effect for a neck wound to have.

The wound was a curiosity in a small way and various doctors examined it
with much clicking of tongues and '_Qué suerte! Qué suerte!_' One of them
told me with an air of authority that the bullet had missed the artery
by 'about a millimetre'. I don't know how he knew. No one I met at this
time--doctors, nurses, _practicantes_, or fellow-patients--failed to
assure me that a man who is hit through the neck and survives it is the
luckiest creature alive. I could not help thinking that it would be even
luckier not to be hit at all.



Chapter 13


In Barcelona, during all those last weeks I spent there, there was a
peculiar evil feeling in the air--an atmosphere of suspicion, fear,
uncertainty, and veiled hatred. The May fighting had left ineradicable
after-effects behind it. With the fall of the Caballero Government the
Communists had come definitely into power, the charge of internal order
had been handed over to Communist ministers, and no one doubted that
they would smash their political rivals as soon as they got a quarter of
a chance. Nothing was happening as yet, I myself had not even any mental
picture of what was going to happen; and yet there was a perpetual vague
sense of danger, a consciousness of some evil thing that was impending.
However little you were actually conspiring, the atmosphere forced you
to feel like a conspirator. You seemed to spend all your time holding
whispered conversations in corners of cafés and wondering whether that
person at the next table was a police spy.

Sinister rumours of all kinds were flying round, thanks to the Press
censorship. One was that the Negrin-Prieto Government was planning to
compromise the war. At the time I was inclined to believe this, for the
Fascists were closing in on Bilbao and the Government was visibly doing
nothing to save it. Basque flags were displayed all over the town, girls
rattled collecting-boxes in the cafés, and there were the usual
broadcasts about 'heroic defenders', but the Basques were getting no
real assistance. It was tempting to believe that the Government was
playing a double game. Later events have proved that I was quite wrong
here, but it seems probable that Bilbao could have been saved if a
little more energy had been shown. An offensive on the Aragón front,
even an unsuccessful one, would have forced Franco to divert part of his
army; as it was the Government did not begin any offensive action till
it was far too late--indeed, till about the time when Bilbao fell. The
C.N.T. was distributing in huge numbers a leaflet saying: 'Be on your
guard!' and hinting that 'a certain Party' (meaning the Communists) was
plotting a _coup d'état_. There was also a widespread fear that
Catalonia was going to be invaded. Earlier, when we went back to the
front, I had seen the powerful defences that were being constructed
scores of miles behind the front line, and fresh bomb-proof shelters
were being dug all over Barcelona. There were frequent scares of
air-raids and sea-raids; more often than not these were false alarms,
but every time the sirens blew the lights all over the town blacked out
for hours on end and timid people dived for the cellars. Police spies
were everywhere. The jails were still crammed with prisoners left over
from the May fighting, and others--always, of course, Anarchist and
P.O.U.M. adherents--were disappearing into jail by ones and twos. So far
as one could discover, no one was ever tried or even charged--not even
charged with anything so definite as 'Trotskyism'; you were simply flung
into jail and kept there, usually _incommunicado_. Bob Smillie was still
in jail in Valencia. We could discover nothing except that neither the
I.L.P. representative on the spot nor the lawyer who had been engaged,
was permitted to see him. Foreigners from the International Column and
other militias were getting into jail in larger and larger numbers.
Usually they were arrested as deserters. It was typical of the general
situation that nobody now knew for certain whether a militiaman was a
volunteer or a regular soldier. A few months earlier anyone enlisting in
the militia had been told that he was a volunteer and could, if he
wished, get his discharge papers at any time when he was due for leave.
Now it appeared that the Government had changed its mind, a militiaman
was a regular soldier and counted as a deserter if he tried to go home.
But even about this no one seemed certain. At some parts of the front
the authorities were still issuing discharges. At the frontier these
were sometimes recognized, sometimes not; if not, you were promptly
thrown into jail. Later the number of foreign 'deserters' in jail
swelled into hundreds, but most of them were repatriated when a fuss was
made in their own countries.

Bands of armed Assault Guards roamed everywhere in the streets, the
Civil Guards were still holding cafés and other buildings in strategic
spots, and many of the P.S.U.C. buildings were still sandbagged and
barricaded. At various points in the town there were posts manned by
Civil Guards of Carabineros who stopped passers-by and demanded their
papers. Everyone warned me not to show my P.O.U.M. militiaman's card but
merely to show my passport and my hospital ticket. Even to be known to
have served in the P.O.U.M. militia was vaguely dangerous. P.O.U.M.
militiamen who were wounded or on leave were penalized in petty ways--it
was made difficult for them to draw their pay, for instance. _La
Batalla_ was still appearing, but it was censored almost out of
existence, and _Solidaridad_ and the other Anarchist papers were also
heavily censored. There was a new rule that censored portions of a
newspaper must not be left blank but filled up with other matter; as a
result it was often impossible to tell when something had been cut out.

The food shortage, which had fluctuated throughout the War, was in one
of its bad stages. Bread was scarce and the cheaper sorts were being
adulterated with rice; the bread the soldiers were getting in the
barracks was dreadful stuff like putty. Milk and sugar were very scarce
and tobacco almost non-existent, except for the expensive smuggled
cigarettes. There was an acute shortage of olive oil, which Spaniards
use for half a dozen different purposes. The queues of women waiting to
buy olive oil were controlled by mounted Civil Guards who sometimes
amused themselves by backing their horses into the queue and trying to
make them tread on the women's toes. A minor annoyance of the time was
the lack of small change. The silver had been withdrawn and as yet no
new coinage had been issued, so that there was nothing between the
ten-centime piece and the note for two and a half pesetas, and all notes
below ten pesetas were very scarce.* For the poorest people this meant
an aggravation of the food shortage. A woman with only a ten-peseta note
in her possession might wait for hours in a queue outside the grocery
and then be unable to buy anything after all because the grocer had no
change and she could not afford to spend the whole note.

[* Footnote: The purchasing value of the peseta was about fourpence.]

It is not easy to convey the nightmare atmosphere of that time--the
peculiar uneasiness produced by rumours that were always changing, by
censored newspapers, and the constant presence of armed men. It is not
easy to convey it because, at the moment, the thing essential to such an
atmosphere does not exist in England. In England political intolerance
is not yet taken for granted. There is political persecution in a petty
way; if I were a coal-miner I would not care to be known to the boss as
a Communist; but the 'good party man', the gangster-gramophone of
continental politics, is still a rarity, and the notion of 'liquidating'
or 'eliminating' everyone who happens to disagree with you does not yet
seem natural. It seemed only too natural in Barcelona. The 'Stalinists'
were in the saddle, and therefore it was a matter of course that every
'Trotskyist' was in danger. The thing everyone feared was a thing which,
after all, did not happen--a fresh outbreak of street-fighting, which,
as before, would be blamed on the P.O.U.M. and the Anarchists. There
were times when I caught my ears listening for the first shots. It was
as though some huge evil intelligence were brooding over the town.
Everyone noticed it and remarked upon it. And it was queer how everyone
expressed it in almost the same words: 'The atmosphere of this
place--it's horrible. Like being in a lunatic asylum.' But perhaps I
ought not to say _everyone_. Some of the English visitors who flitted
briefly through Spain, from hotel to hotel, seem not to have noticed
that there was anything wrong with the general atmosphere. The Duchess
of Atholl writes, I notice (_Sunday Express_, 17 October 1937):


I was in Valencia, Madrid, and Barcelona...perfect order prevailed in
all three towns without any display of force. All the hotels in which I
stayed were not only 'normal' and 'decent', but extremely comfortable,
in spite of the shortage of butter and coffee.


It is a peculiarity of English travellers that they do not really
believe in the existence of anything outside the smart hotels. I hope
they found some butter for the Duchess of Atholl.

I was at the Sanatorium Maurin, one of the sanatoria run by the P.O.U.M.
It was in the suburbs near Tibidabo, the queer-shaped mountain that
rises abruptly behind Barcelona and is traditionally supposed to have
been the hill from which Satan showed Jesus the countries of the earth
(hence its name). The house had previously belonged to some wealthy
bourgeois and had been seized at the time of the revolution. Most of the
men there had either been invalided out of the line or had some wound
that had permanently disabled them--amputated limbs, and so forth. There
were several other Englishmen there: Williams, with a damaged leg, and
Stafford Cottman, a boy of eighteen, who had been sent back from the
trenches with suspected tuberculosis, and Arthur Clinton, whose smashed
left arm was still strapped on to one of those huge wire contraptions,
nicknamed aeroplanes, which the Spanish hospitals were using. My wife
was still staying at the Hotel Continental, and I generally came into
Barcelona in the daytime. In the morning I used to attend the General
Hospital for electrical treatment of my arm. It was a queer business--a
series of prickly electric shocks that made the various sets of muscles
jerk up and down--but it seemed to do some good; the use of my fingers
came back and the pain grew somewhat less. Both of us had decided that
the best thing we could do was to go back to England as soon as
possible. I was extremely weak, my voice was gone, seemingly for good,
and the doctors told me that at best it would be several months before I
was fit to fight. I had got to start earning some money sooner or later,
and there did not seem much sense in staying in Spain and eating food
that was needed for other people. But my motives were mainly selfish. I
had an overwhelming desire to get away from it all; away from the
horrible atmosphere of political suspicion and hatred, from streets
thronged by armed men, from air-raids, trenches, machine-guns, screaming
trams, milkless tea, oil cookery, and shortage of cigarettes--from
almost everything that I had learnt to associate with Spain.

The doctors at the General Hospital had certified me medically unfit,
but to get my discharge I had to see a medical board at one of the
hospitals near the front and then go to Sietamo to get my papers stamped
at the P.O.U.M. militia headquarters. Kopp had just come back from the
front, full of jubilation. He had just been in action and said that
Huesca was going to be taken at last. The Government had brought troops
from the Madrid front and were concentrating thirty thousand men, with
aeroplanes in huge numbers. The Italians I had seen going up the line
from Tarragona had attacked on the Jaca road but had had heavy
casualties and lost two tanks. However, the town was bound to fall, Kopp
said. (Alas! It didn't. The attack was a frightful mess-up and led to
nothing except an orgy of lying in the newspapers.) Meanwhile Kopp had
to go down to Valencia for an interview at the Ministry of War. He had a
letter from General Pozas, now commanding the Army of the East--the
usual letter, describing Kopp as a 'person of all confidence' and
recommending him for a special appointment in the engineering section
(Kopp had been an engineer in civil life). He left for Valencia the same
day as I left for Sietamo--15 June.

It was five days before I got back to Barcelona. A lorry-load of us
reached Sietamo about midnight, and as soon as we got to the P.O.U.M.
headquarters they lined us up and began handling out rifles and
cartridges, before even taking our names. It seemed that the attack was
beginning and they were likely to call for reserves at any moment. I had
my hospital ticket in my pocket, but I could not very well refuse to go
with the others. I kipped down on the ground, with a cartridge-box for a
pillow, in a mood of deep dismay. Being wounded had spoiled my nerve for
the time being--I believe this usually happens--and the prospect of
being under fire frightened me horribly. However, there was a bit of
_mañana_, as usual, we were not called out after all, and next morning I
produced my hospital ticket and went in search of my discharge. It meant
a series of confused, tiresome journeys. As usual they bandied one to
and fro from hospital to hospital--Sietamo, Barbastro, Monzon, then back
to Sietamo to get my discharge stamped, then down the line again via
Barbastro and Lérida--and the convergence of troops on Huesca had
monopolized all the transport and disorganized everything. I remember
sleeping in queer places--once in a hospital bed, but once in a ditch,
once on a very narrow bench which I fell off in the middle of the night,
and once in a sort of municipal lodging-house in Barbastro. As soon as
you got away from the railroad there was no way of travelling except by
jumping chance lorries. You had to wait by the roadside for hours,
sometimes three or four hours at a stretch, with knots of disconsolate
peasants who carried bundles full of ducks and rabbits, waving to lorry
after lorry. When finally you struck a lorry that was not chock full of
men, loaves of bread, or ammunition-boxes the bumping over the vile
roads wallowed you to pulp. No horse has ever thrown me so high as those
lorries used to throw me. The only way of travelling was to crowd all
together and cling to one another. To my humiliation I found that I was
still too weak to climb on to a lorry without being helped.

I slept a night at Monzón Hospital, where I went to see my medical
board. In the next bed to me there was an Assault Guard, wounded over
the left eye. He was friendly and gave me cigarettes. I said: 'In
Barcelona we should have been shooting one another,' and we laughed over
this. It was queer how the general spirit seemed to change when you got
anywhere near the front line. All or nearly all of the vicious hatred of
the political parties evaporated. During all the time I was at the front
I never once remember any P.S.U.C. adherent showing me hostility because
I was P.O.U.M. That kind of thing belonged in Barcelona or in places
even remoter from the war. There were a lot of Assault Guards in
Sietamo. They had been sent on from Barcelona to take part in the attack
on Huesca. The Assault Guards were a corps not intended primarily for
the front, and many of them had not been under fire before. Down in
Barcelona they were lords of the street, but up here they were _quintos_
(rookies) and palled up with militia children of fifteen who had been in
the line for months.

At Monzón Hospital the doctor did the usual tongue-pulling and
mirror-thrusting business, assured me in the same cheerful manner as the
others that I should never have a voice again, and signed my
certificate. While I waited to be examined there was going on inside the
surgery some dreadful operation without anaesthetics--why without
anaesthetics I do not know. It went on and on, scream after scream, and
when I went in there were chairs flung about and on the floor were pools
of blood and urine.

The details of that final journey stand out in my mind with strange
clarity. I was in a different mood, a more observing mood, than I had
been in for months past. I had got my discharge, stamped with the seal
of the 29th Division, and the doctor's certificate in which I was
'declared useless'. I was free to go back to England; consequently I
felt able, almost for the first time, to look at Spain. I had a day to
put in to Barbastro, for there was only one train a day. Previously I
had seen Barbastro in brief glimpses, and it had seemed to me simply a
part of the war--a grey, muddy, cold place, full of roaring lorries and
shabby troops. It seemed queerly different now. Wandering through it I
became aware of pleasant tortuous streets, old stone bridges, wine shops
with great oozy barrels as tall as a man, and intriguing
semi-subterranean shops where men were making cartwheels, daggers,
wooden spoons, and goatskin water-bottles. I watched a man making a skin
bottle and discovered with great interest, what I had never known
before, that they are made with the fur inside and the fur is not
removed, so that you are really drinking distilled goat's hair. I had
drunk out of them for months without knowing this. And at the back of
the town there was a shallow jade-green river, and rising out of it a
perpendicular cliff of rock, with houses built into the rock, so that
from your bedroom window you could spit straight into the water a
hundred feet below. Innumerable doves lived in the holes in the cliff.
And in Lérida there were old crumbling buildings upon whose cornices
thousands upon thousands of swallows had built their nests, so that at a
little distance the crusted pattern of nests was like some florid
moulding of the rococo period. It was queer how for nearly six months
past I had had no eyes for such things. With my discharge papers in my
pocket I felt like a human being again, and also a little like a
tourist. For almost the first time I felt that I was really in Spain, in
a country that I had longed all my life to visit. In the quiet back
streets of Lérida and Barbastro I seemed to catch a momentary glimpse, a
sort of far-off rumour of the Spain that dwells in everyone's
imagination. White sierras, goatherds, dungeons of the Inquisition,
Moorish palaces, black winding trains of mules, grey olive trees and
groves of lemons, girls in black mantillas, the wines of Málaga and
Alicante, cathedrals, cardinals, bull-fights, gypsies, serenades--in
short, Spain. Of all Europe it was the country that had had most hold
upon my imagination. It seemed a pity that when at last I had managed to
come here I had seen only this north-eastern corner, in the middle of a
confused war and for the most part in winter.

It was late when I got back to Barcelona, and there were no taxis. It
was no use trying to get to the Sanatorium Maurin, which was right
outside the town, so I made for the Hotel Continental, stopping for
dinner on the way. I remember the conversation I had with a very
fatherly waiter about the oak jugs, bound with copper, in which they
served the wine. I said I would like to buy a set of them to take back
to England. The waiter was sympathetic. 'Yes, beautiful, were they not?
But impossible to buy nowadays. Nobody was manufacturing them any
longer--nobody was manufacturing anything. This war--such a pity!' We
agreed that the war was a pity. Once again I felt like a tourist. The
waiter asked me gently, had I liked Spain; would I come back to Spain?
Oh, yes, I should come back to Spain. The peaceful quality of this
conversation sticks in my memory, because of what happened immediately
afterwards.

When I got to the hotel my wife was sitting in the lounge. She got up
and came towards me in what struck me as a very unconcerned manner; then
she put an arm round my neck and, with a sweet smile for the benefit of
the other people in the lounge, hissed in my ear:

'_Get out!_'

'What?'

'Get out of here _at once!_'

'What?'

'Don't keep standing here! You must get outside quickly!'

'What? Why? What do you mean?'

She had me by the arm and was already leading me towards the stairs.
Half-way down we met a Frenchman--I am not going to give his name, for
though he had no connexion with the P.O.U.M. he was a good friend to us
all during the trouble. He looked at me with a concerned face.

'Listen! You mustn't come in here. Get out quickly and hide yourself
before they ring up the police.'

And behold! at the bottom of the stairs one of the hotel staff, who was
a P.O.U.M. member (unknown to the management, I fancy), slipped
furtively out of the lift and told me in broken English to get out. Even
now I did not grasp what had happened.

'What the devil is all this about?' I said, as soon as we were on the
pavement.

'Haven't you _heard_?'

'No. Heard what? I've heard nothing.'

'The P.O.U.M.'s been suppressed. They've seized all the buildings.
Practically everyone's in prison. And they say they're shooting people
already.'

So that was it. We had to have somewhere to talk. All the big cafés on
the Ramblas were thronged with police, but we found a quiet café in a
side street. My wife explained to me what had happened while I was away.

On 15 June the police had suddenly arrested Andres Nin in his office,
and the same evening had raided the Hotel Falcon and arrested all the
people in it, mostly militiamen on leave. The place was converted
immediately into a prison, and in a very little while it was filled to
the brim with prisoners of all kinds. Next day the P.O.U.M. was declared
an illegal organization and all its offices, book-stalls, sanatoria, Red
Aid centres, and so forth were seized. Meanwhile the police were
arresting everyone they could lay hands on who was known to have any
connexion with the P.O.U.M.Within a day or two all or almost all of the
forty members of the Executive Committee were in prison. Possibly one or
two had escaped into hiding, but the police were adopting the trick
(extensively used on both sides in this war) of seizing a man's wife as
a hostage if he disappeared. There was no way of discovering how many
people had been arrested. My wife had heard that it was about four
hundred in Barcelona alone. I have since thought that even at that time
the numbers must have been greater. And the most fantastic people had
been arrested. In some cases the police had even gone to the length of
dragging wounded militiamen out of the hospitals.

It was all profoundly dismaying. What the devil was it all about? I
could understand their suppressing the P.O.U.M., but what were they
arresting people for? For nothing, so far as one could discover.
Apparently the suppression of the P.O.U.M. had a retrospective effect;
the P.O.U.M. was now illegal, and therefore one was breaking the law by
having previously belonged to it. As usual, none of the arrested people
had been charged. Meanwhile, however, the Valencia Communist papers were
flaming with the story of a huge 'Fascist plot', radio communication
with the enemy, documents signed in invisible ink, etc., etc. I have
dealt with this story earlier. The significant thing was that it was
appearing only in the Valencia papers; I think I am right in saying that
there was not a single word about it, or about the suppression of the
P.O.U.M., in any Barcelona papers, Communist, Anarchist, or Republican.
We first learned the precise nature of the charges against the P.O.U.M.
leaders not from any Spanish paper but from the English papers that
reached Barcelona a day or two later. What we could not know at this
time was that the Government was not responsible for the charge of
treachery and espionage, and that members of the Government were later
to repudiate it. We only vaguely knew that the P.O.U.M. leaders, and
presumably all the rest of us, were accused of being in Fascist pay. And
already the rumours were flying round that people were being secretly
shot in jail. There was a lot of exaggeration about this, but it
certainly happened in some cases, and there is not much doubt that it
happened in the case of Nin. After his arrest Nin was transferred to
Valencia and thence to Madrid, and as early as 21 June the rumour
reached Barcelona that he had been shot. Later the rumour took a more
definite shape: Nin had been shot in prison by the secret police and his
body dumped into the street. This story came from several sources,
including Federica Montsenys, an ex-member of the Government. From that
day to this Nin has never been heard of alive again. When, later, the
Government were questioned by delegates from various countries, they
shilly-shallied and would say only that Nin had disappeared and they
knew nothing of his whereabouts. Some of the newspapers produced a tale
that he had escaped to Fascist territory. No evidence was given in
support of it, and Irujo, the Minister of Justice, later declared that
the Espagne news-agency had falsified his official communiqué.*
In any case it is most unlikely that a political prisoner of Nin's
importance would be allowed to escape. Unless at some future time he is
produced alive, I think we must take it that he was murdered in prison.

[* Footnote: See the reports of the Maxton delegation which I referred
to in Chapter 11.]

The tale of arrests went on and on, extending over months, until the
number of political prisoners, not counting Fascists, swelled into
thousands. One noticeable thing was the autonomy of the lower ranks of
the police. Many of the arrests were admittedly illegal, and various
people whose release had been ordered by the Chief of Police were
re-arrested at the jail gate and carried off to 'secret prisons'. A
typical case is that of Kurt Landau and his wife. They were arrested
about 17 June, and Landau immediately 'disappeared'. Five months later
his wife was still in jail, untried and without news of her husband. She
declared a hunger-strike, after which the Minister of Justice, sent word
to assure her that her husband was dead. Shortly afterwards she was
released, to be almost immediately re-arrested and flung into prison
again. And it was noticeable that the police, at any rate at first,
seemed completely indifferent as to any effect their actions might have
upon the war. They were quite ready to arrest military officers in
important posts without getting permission beforehand. About the end of
June Jose Rovira, the general commanding the 29th Division, was arrested
somewhere near the front line by a party of police who had been sent
from Barcelona. His men sent a delegation to protest at the Ministry of
War. It was found that neither the Ministry of War, nor Ortega, the
Chief of Police, had even been informed of Rovira's arrest. In the whole
business the detail that most sticks in my throat, though perhaps it is
not of great importance, is that all news of what was happening was kept
from the troops at the front. As you will have seen, neither I nor
anyone else at the front had heard anything about the suppression of the
P.O.U.M. All the P.O.U.M. militia headquarters, Red Aid centres, and so
forth were functioning as usual, and as late as 20 June and as far down
the line as Lérida, only about 100 miles from Barcelona, no one had
heard what was happening. All word of it was kept out of the Barcelona
papers (the Valencia papers, which were running the spy stories, did not
reach the Aragón front), and no doubt one reason for arresting all the
P.O.U.M. militiamen on leave in Barcelona was to prevent them from
getting back to the front with the news. The draft with which I had gone
up the line on 15 June must have been about the last to go. I am still
puzzled to know how the thing was kept secret, for the supply lorries
and so forth were still passing to and fro; but there is no doubt that
it was kept secret, and, as I have since learned from a number of
others, the men in the front line heard nothing till several days later.
The motive for all this is clear enough. The attack on Huesca was
beginning, the P.O.U.M. militia was still a separate unit, and it was
probably feared that if the men knew what was happening they would
refuse to fight. Actually nothing of the kind happened when the news
arrived. In the intervening days there must have been numbers of men who
were killed without ever learning that the newspapers in the rear were
calling them Fascists. This kind of thing is a little difficult to
forgive. I know it was the usual policy to keep bad news from the
troops, and perhaps as a rule that is justified. But it is a different
matter to send men into battle and not even tell them that behind their
backs their party is being suppressed, their leaders accused of
treachery, and their friends and relatives thrown into prison.

My wife began telling me what had happened to our various friends. Some
of the English and other foreigners had got across the frontier.
Williams and Stafford Cottman had not been arrested when the Sanatorium
Maurin was raided, and were in hiding somewhere. So was John Mc-Nair,
who had been in France and had re-entered Spain after the P.O.U.M. was
declared illegal--a rash thing to do, but he had not cared to stay in
safety while his comrades were in danger. For the rest it was simply a
chronicle of 'They've got so and so' and 'They've got so and so'. They
seemed to have 'got' nearly everyone. It took me aback to hear that they
had also 'got' George Kopp.

'What! Kopp? I thought he was in Valencia.'

It appeared that Kopp had come back to Barcelona; he had a letter from
the Ministry of War to the colonel commanding the engineering operations
on the eastern front. He knew that the P.O.U.M. had been suppressed, of
course, but probably it did not occur to him that the police could be
such fools as to arrest him when he was on his way to the front on an
urgent military mission. He had come round to the Hotel Continental to
fetch his kit-bags; my wife had been out at the time, and the hotel
people had managed to detain him with some lying story while they rang
up the police. I admit I was angry when I heard of Kopp's arrest. He was
my personal friend, I had served under him for months, I had been under
fire with him, and I knew his history. He was a man who had sacrificed
everything--family, nationality, livelihood--simply to come to Spain and
fight against Fascism. By leaving Belgium without permission and joining
a foreign army while he was on the Belgian Army reserve, and, earlier,
by helping to manufacture munitions illegally for the Spanish
Government, he had piled up years of imprisonment for himself if he
should ever return to his own country. He had been in the line since
October 1936, had worked his way up from militiaman to major, had been
in action I do not know how many times, and had been wounded once.
During the May trouble, as I had seen for myself, he had prevented
fighting locally and probably saved ten or twenty lives. And all they
could do in return was to fling him into jail. It is waste of time to be
angry, but the stupid malignity of this kind of thing does try one's
patience.

Meanwhile they had not 'got' my wife. Although she had remained at the
Continental the police had made no move to arrest her. It was fairly
obvious that she was being used as a decoy duck. A couple of nights
earlier, however, in the small hours of the morning, six of the
plain-clothes police had invaded our room at the hotel and searched it.
They had seized every scrap of paper we possessed, except, fortunately,
our passports and cheque-book. They had taken my diaries, all our books,
all the press-cuttings that had been piling up for months past (I have
often wondered what use those press-cuttings were to them), all my war
souvenirs, and all our letters. (Incidentally, they took away a number
of letters I had received from readers. Some of them had not been
answered, and of course I have not the addresses. If anyone who wrote to
me about my last book, and did not get an answer, happens to read these
lines, will he please accept this as an apology?) I learned afterwards
that the police had also seized various belongings that I had left at
the Sanatorium Maurin. They even carried off a bundle of my dirty linen.
Perhaps they thought it had messages written on it in invisible ink.

It was obvious that it would be safer for my wife to stay at the hotel,
at any rate for the time being. If she tried to disappear they would be
after her immediately. As for myself, I should have to go straight into
hiding. The prospect revolted me. In spite of the innumerable arrests it
was almost impossible for me to believe that I was in any danger. The
whole thing seemed too meaningless. It was the same refusal to take this
idiotic onslaught seriously that had led Kopp into jail. I kept saying,
but why should anyone want to arrest me? What had I done? I was not even
a party member of the P.O.U.M. Certainly I had carried arms during the
May fighting, but so had (at a guess) forty or fifty thousand people.
Besides, I was badly in need of a proper night's sleep. I wanted to risk
it and go back to the hotel. My wife would not hear of it. Patiently she
explained the state of affairs. It did not matter what I had done or not
done. This was not a round-up of criminals; it was merely a reign of
terror. I was not guilty of any definite act, but I was guilty of
'Trotskyism'. The fact that I had served in the P.O.U.M. militia was
quite enough to get me into prison. It was no use hanging on to the
English notion that you are safe so long as you keep the law.
Practically the law was what the police chose to make it. The only thing
to do was to lie low and conceal the fact that I had anything to do with
the P.O.U.M. We went through the papers in my pockets. My wife made me
tear up my militiaman's card, which had P.O.U.M. on it in big letters,
also a photo of a group of militiamen with a P.O.U.M. flag in the
background; that was the kind of thing that got you arrested nowadays. I
had to keep my discharge papers, however. Even these were a danger, for
they bore the seal of the 29th Division, and the police would probably
know that the 29th Division was the P.O.U.M.; but without them I could
be arrested as a deserter.

The thing we had got to think of now was getting out of Spain. There was
no sense in staying here with the certainty of imprisonment sooner or
later. As a matter of fact both of us would greatly have liked to stay,
just to see what happened. But I foresaw that Spanish prisons would be
lousy places (actually they were a lot worse than I imagined), once in
prison you never knew when you would get out, and I was in wretched
health, apart from the pain in my arm. We arranged to meet next day at
the British Consulate, where Cottman and McNair were also coming. It
would probably take a couple of days to get our passports in order.
Before leaving Spain you had to have your passport stamped in three
separate places--by the Chief of Police, by the French Consul, and by
the Catalan immigration authorities. The Chief of Police was the danger,
of course. But perhaps the British Consul could fix things up without
letting it be known that we had anything to do with the P.O.U.M.
Obviously there must be a list of foreign 'Trotskyist' suspects, and
very likely our names were on it, but with luck we might get to the
frontier before the list. There was sure to be a lot of muddle and
_mañana_. Fortunately this was Spain and not Germany. The Spanish secret
police had some of the spirit of the Gestapo, but not much of its
competence.

So we parted. My wife went back to the hotel and I wandered off into the
darkness to find somewhere to sleep. I remember feeling sulky and bored.
I had so wanted a night in bed! There was nowhere I could go, no house
where I could take refuge. The P.O.U.M. had practically no underground
organization. No doubt the leaders had always realized that the party
was likely to be suppressed, but they had never expected a wholesale
witch-hunt of this description. They had expected it so little, indeed,
that they were actually continuing the alterations to the P.O.U.M.
buildings (among other things they were constructing a cinema in the
Executive Building, which had previously been a bank) up to the very day
when the P.O.U.M. was suppressed. Consequently the rendezvous and
hiding-places which every revolutionary party ought to possess as a
matter of course did not exist. Goodness knows how many people--people
whose homes had been raided by the police--were sleeping in the streets
that night. I had had five days of tiresome journeys, sleeping in
impossible places, my arm was hurting damnably, and now these fools were
chasing me to and fro and I had got to sleep on the ground again. That
was about as far as my thoughts went. I did not make any of the correct
political reflections. I never do when things are happening. It seems to
be always the case when I get mixed up in war or politics--I am
conscious of nothing save physical discomfort and a deep desire for this
damned nonsense to be over. Afterwards I can see the significance of
events, but while they are happening I merely want to be out of them--an
ignoble trait, perhaps.

I walked a long way and fetched up somewhere near the General Hospital.
I wanted a place where I could lie down without some nosing policeman
finding me and demanding my papers. I tried an air-raid shelter, but it
was newly dug and dripping with damp. Then I came upon the ruins of a
church that had been gutted and burnt in the revolution. It was a mere
shell, four roofless walls surrounding piles of rubble. In the
half-darkness I poked about and found a kind of hollow where I could lie
down. Lumps of broken masonry are not good to lie on, but fortunately it
was a warm night and I managed to get several hours' sleep.



Chapter 14


The worst of being wanted by the police in a town like Barcelona is that
everything opens so late. When you sleep out of doors you always wake
about dawn, and none of the Barcelona cafés opens much before nine. It
was hours before I could get a cup of coffee or a shave. It seemed
queer, in the barber's shop, to see the Anarchist notice still on the
wall, explaining that tips were prohibited. 'The Revolution has struck
off our chains,' the notice said. I felt like telling the barbers that
their chains would soon be back again if they didn't look out.

I wandered back to the centre of the town. Over the P.O.U.M. buildings
the red flags had been torn down, Republican flags were floating in
their place, and knots of armed Civil Guards were lounging in the
doorways. At the Red Aid centre on the corner of the Plaza de Cataluña
the police had amused themselves by smashing most of the windows. The
P.O.U.M. book-stalls had been emptied of books and the notice-board
farther down the Ramblas had been plastered with an anti-P.O.U.M.
cartoon--the one representing the mask and the Fascist face beneath.
Down at the bottom of the Ramblas, near the quay, I came upon a queer
sight; a row of militiamen, still ragged and muddy from the front,
sprawling exhaustedly on the chairs placed there for the bootblacks. I
knew who they were--indeed, I recognized one of them. They were P.O.U.M.
militiamen who had come down the line on the previous day to find that
the P.O.U.M. had been suppressed, and had had to spend the night in the
streets because their homes had been raided. Any P.O.U.M. militiaman who
returned to Barcelona at this time had the choice of going straight into
hiding or into jail--not a pleasant reception after three or four months
in the line.

It was a queer situation that we were in. At night one was a hunted
fugitive, but in the daytime one could live an almost normal life. Every
house known to harbour P.O.U.M. supporters was--or at any rate was
likely to be--under observation, and it was impossible to go to a hotel
or boarding-house, because it had been decreed that on the arrival of a
stranger the hotel-keeper must inform the police immediately.
Practically this meant spending the night out of doors. In the daytime,
on the other hand, in a town the size of Barcelona, you were fairly
safe. The streets were thronged by Civil Guards, Assault Guards,
Carabineros, and ordinary police, besides God knows how many spies in
plain clothes; still, they could not stop everyone who passed, and if
you looked normal you might escape notice. The thing to do was to avoid
hanging round P.O.U.M. buildings and going to cafés and restaurants
where the waiters knew you by sight. I spent a long time that day, and
the next, in having a bath at one of the public baths. This struck me as
a good way of putting in the time and keeping out of sight.
Unfortunately the same idea occurred to a lot of people, and a few days
later--after I left Barcelona--the police raided one of the public baths
and arrested a number of 'Trotskyists' in a state of nature.

Half-way up the Ramblas I ran into one of the wounded men from the
Sanatorium Maurin. We exchanged the sort of invisible wink that people
were exchanging at that time, and managed in an unobtrusive way to meet
in a café farther up the street. He had escaped arrest when the Maurin
was raided, but, like the others, had been driven into the street. He
was in shirt-sleeves--had had to flee without his jacket--and had no
money. He described to me how one of the Civil Guards had torn the large
coloured portrait of Maurin from the wall and kicked it to pieces.
Maurin (one of the founders of the P.O.U.M.) was a prisoner in the hands
of the Fascists and at that time was believed to have been shot by them.

I met my wife at the British Consulate at ten o'clock. McNair and
Cottman turned up shortly afterwards. The first thing they told me was
that Bob Smillie was dead. He had died in prison at Valencia--of what,
nobody knew for certain. He had been buried immediately, and the I.L.P.
representative on the spot, David Murray, had been refused permission to
see his body.

Of course I assumed at once that Smillie had been shot. It was what
everyone believed at the time, but I have since thought that I may have
been wrong. Later the cause of his death was given out as appendicitis,
and we heard afterwards from another prisoner who had been released that
Smillie had certainly been ill in prison. So perhaps the appendicitis
story was true. The refusal to let Murray see his body may have been due
to pure spite. I must say this, however. Bob Smillie was only twenty-two
years old and physically he was one of the toughest people I have met.
He was, I think, the only person I knew, English or Spanish, who went
three months in the trenches without a day's illness. People so tough as
that do not usually die of appendicitis if they are properly looked
after. But when you saw what the Spanish jails were like--the makeshift
jails used for political prisoners--you realized how much chance there
was of a sick man getting proper attention. The jails were places that
could only be described as dungeons. In England you would have to go
back to the eighteenth century to find anything comparable. People were
penned together in small rooms where there was barely space for them to
lie down, and often they were kept in cellars and other dark places.
This was not as a temporary measure--there were cases of people being
kept four and five months almost without sight of daylight. And they
were fed on a filthy and insufficient diet of two plates of soup and two
pieces of bread a day. (Some months later, however, the food seems to
have improved a little.) I am not exaggerating; ask any political
suspect who was imprisoned in Spain. I have had accounts of the Spanish
jails from a number of separate sources, and they agree with one another
too well to be disbelieved; besides, I had a few glimpses into one
Spanish jail myself. Another English friend who was imprisoned later
writes that his experiences in jail 'make Smillie's case easier to
understand'. Smillie's death is not a thing I can easily forgive. Here
was this brave and gifted boy, who had thrown up his career at Glasgow
University in order to come and fight against Fascism, and who, as I saw
for myself, had done his job at the front with faultless courage and
willingness; and all they could find to do with him was to fling him
into jail and let him die like a neglected animal. I know that in the
middle of a huge and bloody war it is no use making too much fuss over
an individual death. One aeroplane bomb in a crowded street causes more
suffering than quite a lot of political persecution. But what angers one
about a death like this is its utter pointlessness. To be killed in
battle--yes, that is what one expects; but to be flung into jail, not
even for any imaginary offence, but simply owing to dull blind spite,
and then left to die in solitude--that is a different matter. I fail to
see how this kind of thing--and it is not as though Smillie's case were
exceptional--brought victory any nearer.

My wife and I visited Kopp that afternoon. You were allowed to visit
prisoners who were not _incommunicado_, though it was not safe to do so
more than once or twice. The police watched the people who came and
went, and if you visited the jails too often you stamped yourself as a
friend of 'Trotskyists' and probably ended in jail yourself. This had
already happened to a number of people.

Kopp was not _incommunicado_ and we got a permit to see him without
difficulty. As they led us through the steel doors into the jail, a
Spanish militiaman whom I had known at the front was being led out
between two Civil Guards. His eye met mine; again the ghostly wink. And
the first person we saw inside was an American militiaman who had left
for home a few days earlier; his papers were in good order, but they had
arrested him at the frontier all the same, probably because he was still
wearing corduroy breeches and was therefore identifiable as a
militiaman. We walked past one another as though we had been total
strangers. That was dreadful. I had known him for months, had shared a
dug-out with him, he had helped to carry me down the line when I was
wounded; but it was the only thing one could do. The blue-clad guards
were snooping everywhere. It would be fatal to recognize too many
people.

The so-called jail was really the ground floor of a shop. Into two rooms
each measuring about twenty feet square, close on a hundred people were
penned. The place had the real eighteenth-century Newgate Calendar
appearance, with its frowsy dirt, its huddle of human bodies, its lack
of furniture--just the bare stone floor, one bench, and a few ragged
blankets--and its murky light, for the corrugated steel shutters had
been drawn over the windows. On the grimy walls revolutionary
slogans--'_Visca P.O.U.M.!_' '_Viva la Revolucion!_' and so forth--had been
scrawled. The place had been used as a dump for political prisoners for
months past. There was a deafening racket of voices. This was the
visiting hour, and the place was so packed with people that it was
difficult to move. Nearly all of them were of the poorest of the
working-class population. You saw women undoing pitiful packets of food
which they had brought for their imprisoned men-folk. There were several
of the wounded men from the Sanatorium Maurin among the prisoners. Two
of them had amputated legs; one of them had been brought to prison
without his crutch and was hopping about on one foot. There was also a
boy of not more than twelve; they were even arresting children,
apparently. The place had the beastly stench that you always get when
crowds of people are penned together without proper sanitary
arrangements.

Kopp elbowed his way through the crowd to meet us. His plump
fresh-coloured face looked much as usual, and in that filthy place he
had kept his uniform neat and had even contrived to shave. There was
another officer in the uniform of the Popular Army among the prisoners.
He and Kopp saluted as they struggled past one another; the gesture was
pathetic, somehow. Kopp seemed in excellent spirits. 'Well, I suppose we
shall all be shot,' he said cheerfully. The word 'shot' gave me a sort
of inward shudder. A bullet had entered my own body recently and the
feeling of it was fresh in my memory; it is not nice to think of that
happening to anyone you know well. At that time I took it for granted
that all the principal people in the P.O.U.M., and Kopp among them,
_would_ be shot. The first rumour of Nin's death had just filtered
through, and we knew that the P.O.U.M. were being accused of treachery
and espionage. Everything pointed to a huge frame-up trial followed by a
massacre of leading 'Trotskyists.' It is a terrible thing to see your
friend in jail and to know yourself impotent to help him. For there was
nothing that one could do; useless even to appeal to the Belgian
authorities, for Kopp had broken the law of his own country by coming
here. I had to leave most of the talking to my wife; with my squeaking
voice I could not make myself heard in the din. Kopp was telling us
about the friends he had made among the other prisoners, about the
guards, some of whom were good fellows, but some of whom abused and beat
the more timid prisoners, and about the food, which was 'pig-wash'.
Fortunately we had thought to bring a packet of food, also cigarettes.
Then Kopp began telling us about the papers that had been taken from him
when he was arrested. Among them was his letter from the Ministry of
War, addressed to the colonel commanding engineering operations in the
Army of the East. The police had seized it and refused to give it back;
it was said to be lying in the Chief of Police's office. It might make a
very great difference if it were recovered.

I saw instantly how important this might be. An official letter of that
kind, bearing the recommendation of the Ministry of War and of General
Pozas, would establish Kopp's bona fides. But the trouble was to prove
that the letter existed; if it were opened in the Chief of Police's
office one could be sure that some nark or other would destroy it. There
was only one person who might possibly be able to get it back, and that
was the officer to whom it was addressed. Kopp had already thought of
this, and he had written a letter which he wanted me to smuggle out of
the jail and post. But it was obviously quicker and surer to go in
person. I left my wife with Kopp, rushed out, and, after a long search,
found a taxi. I knew that time was everything. It was now about half
past five, the colonel would probably leave his office at six, and by
tomorrow the letter might be God knew where--destroyed, perhaps, or lost
somewhere in the chaos of documents that was presumably piling up as
suspect after suspect was arrested. The colonel's office was at the War
Department down by the quay. As I hurried up the steps the Assault Guard
on duty at the door barred the way with his long bayonet and demanded
'papers'. I waved my discharge ticket at him; evidently he could not
read, and he let me pass, impressed by the vague mystery of 'papers'.
Inside, the place was a huge complicated warren running round a central
courtyard, with hundreds of offices on each floor; and, as this was
Spain, nobody had the vaguest idea where the office I was looking for
was. I kept repeating: '_El coronel ----, jefe de ingenieros, Ejercito de
Este!_' People smiled and shrugged their shoulders gracefully. Everyone
who had an opinion sent me in a different direction; up these stairs,
down those, along interminable passages which turned out to be blind
alleys. And time was slipping away. I had the strangest sensation of
being in a nightmare: the rushing up and down flights of stairs, the
mysterious people coming and going, the glimpses through open doors of
chaotic offices with papers strewn everywhere and typewriters clicking;
and time slipping away and a life perhaps in the balance.

However, I got there in time, and slightly to my surprise I was granted
a hearing. I did not see Colonel ----, but his aide-de-camp or
secretary, a little slip of an officer in smart uniform, with large and
squinting eyes, came out to interview me in the ante-room. I began to
pour forth my story. I had come on behalf of my superior officer. Major
Jorge Kopp, who was on an urgent mission to the front and had been
arrested by mistake. The letter to Colonel ---- was of a confidential
nature and should be recovered without delay. I had served with Kopp for
months, he was an officer of the highest character, obviously his arrest
was a mistake, the police had confused him with someone else, etc.,
etc., etc. I kept piling it on about the urgency of Kopp's mission to
the front, knowing that this was the strongest point. But it must have
sounded a strange tale, in my villainous Spanish which elapsed into
French at every crisis. The worst was that my voice gave out almost at
once and it was only by violent straining that I could produce a sort of
croak. I was in dread that it would disappear altogether and the little
officer would grow tired of trying to listen to me. I have often
wondered what he thought was wrong with my voice--whether he thought I
was drunk or merely suffering from a guilty conscience.

However, he heard me patiently, nodded his head a great number of times,
and gave a guarded assent to what I said. Yes, it sounded as though
there might have been a mistake. Clearly the matter should be looked
into. _Mañana_--. I protested. Not _mañana_! The matter was urgent; Kopp
was due at the front already. Again the officer seemed to agree. Then
came the question I was dreading:

'This Major Kopp--what force was he serving in?'

The terrible word had to come out: 'In the P.O.U.M. militia.'

'P.O.U.M.!'

I wish I could convey to you the shocked alarm in his voice. You have
got to remember how the P.O.U.M. was regarded at that moment. The
spy-scare was at its height; probably all good Republicans did believe
for a day or two that the P.O.U.M. was a huge spying organization in
German pay. To have to say such a thing to an officer in the Popular
Army was like going into the Cavalry Club immediately after the Red
Letter scare and announcing yourself a Communist. His dark eyes moved
obliquely across my face. Another long pause, then he said slowly:

'And you say you were with him at the front. Then you were serving in
the P.O.U.M. militia yourself?'

'Yes.'

He turned and dived into the colonel's room. I could hear an agitated
conversation. 'It's all up,' I thought. We should never get Kopp's
letter back. Moreover I had had to confess that I was in the P.O.U.M.
myself, and no doubt they would ring up the police and get me arrested,
just to add another Trotskyist to the bag. Presently, however, the
officer reappeared, fitting on his cap, and sternly signed to me to
follow. We were going to the Chief of Police's office. It was a long
way, twenty minutes' walk. The little officer marched stiffly in front
with a military step. We did not exchange a single word the whole way.
When we got to the Chief of Police's office a crowd of the most
dreadful-looking scoundrels, obviously police narks, informers, and
spies of every kind, were hanging about outside the door. The little
officer went in; there was a long, heated conversation. You could hear
voices furiously raised; you pictured violent gestures, shrugging of the
shoulders, hangings on the table. Evidently the police were refusing to
give the letter up. At last, however, the officer emerged, flushed, but
carrying a large official envelope. It was Kopp's letter. We had won a
tiny victory--which, as it turned out, made not the slightest
difference. The letter was duly delivered, but Kopp's military superiors
were quite unable to get him out of jail.

The officer promised me that the letter should be delivered. But what
about Kopp? I said. Could we not get him released? He shrugged his
shoulders. That was another matter. They did not know what Kopp had been
arrested for. He would only tell me that the proper inquiries would be
made. There was no more to be said; it was time to part. Both of us
bowed slightly. And then there happened a strange and moving thing. The
little officer hesitated a moment, then stepped across, and shook hands
with me.

I do not know if I can bring home to you how deeply that action touched
me. It sounds a small thing, but it was not. You have got to realize
what was the feeling of the time--the horrible atmosphere of suspicion
and hatred, the lies and rumours circulating everywhere, the posters
screaming from the hoardings that I and everyone like me was a Fascist
spy. And you have got to remember that we were standing outside the
Chief of Police's office, in front of that filthy gang of tale-bearers
and _agents provocateurs_, any one of whom might know that I was 'wanted'
by the police. It was like publicly shaking hands with a German during
the Great War. I suppose he had decided in some way that I was not
really a Fascist spy; still, it was good of him to shake hands.

I record this, trivial though it may sound, because it is somehow
typical of Spain--of the flashes of magnanimity that you get from
Spaniards in the worst of circumstances. I have the most evil memories
of Spain, but I have very few bad memories of Spaniards. I only twice
remember even being seriously angry with a Spaniard, and on each
occasion, when I look back, I believe I was in the wrong myself. They
have, there is no doubt, a generosity, a species of nobility, that do
not really belong to the twentieth century. It is this that makes one
hope that in Spain even Fascism may take a comparatively loose and
bearable form. Few Spaniards possess the damnable efficiency and
consistency that a modern totalitarian state needs. There had been a
queer little illustration of this fact a few nights earlier, when the
police had searched my wife's room. As a matter of fact that search was
a very interesting business, and I wish I had seen it, though perhaps it
is as well that I did not, for I might not have kept my temper.

The police conducted the search in the recognized Ogpu or Gestapo style.
In the small hours of the morning there was a pounding on the door, and
six men marched in, switched on the light, and immediately took up
various positions about the room, obviously agreed upon beforehand. They
then searched both rooms (there was a bathroom attached) with
inconceivable thoroughness. They sounded the walls, took up the mats,
examined the floor, felt the curtains, probed under the bath and the
radiator, emptied every drawer and suitcase and felt every garment and
held it up to the light. They impounded all papers, including the
contents of the waste-paper basket, and all our books into the bargain.
They were thrown into ecstasies of suspicion by finding that we
possessed a French translation of Hitler's _Mein Kampf_. If that had
been the only book they found our doom would have been sealed. It is
obvious that a person who reads _Mein Kampf_ must be a Fascist. The next
moment, however, they came upon a copy of Stalin's pamphlet, _Ways of
Liquidating Trotskyists and other Double Dealers_, which reassured them
somewhat. In one drawer there was a number of packets of cigarette
papers. They picked each packet to pieces and examined each paper
separately, in case there should be messages written on them. Altogether
they were on the job for nearly two hours. Yet all this time they _never
searched the bed_. My wife was lying in bed all the while; obviously
there might have been half a dozen sub-machine-guns under the mattress,
not to mention a library of Trotskyist documents under the pillow. Yet
the detectives made no move to touch the bed, never even looked
underneath it. I cannot believe that this is a regular feature of the
Ogpu routine. One must remember that the police were almost entirely
under Communist control, and these men were probably Communist Party
members themselves. But they were also Spaniards, and to turn a woman
out of bed was a little too much for them. This part of the job was
silently dropped, making the whole search meaningless.

That night McNair, Cottman, and I slept in some long grass at the edge
of a derelict building-lot. It was a cold night for the time of year and
no one slept much. I remember the long dismal hours of loitering about
before one could get a cup of coffee. For the first time since I had
been in Barcelona I went to have a look at the cathedral--a modern
cathedral, and one of the most hideous buildings in the world. It has
four crenellated spires exactly the shape of hock bottles. Unlike most
of the churches in Barcelona it was not damaged during the
revolution--it was spared because of its 'artistic value', people said.
I think the Anarchists showed bad taste in not blowing it up when they
had the chance, though they did hang a red and black banner between its
spires. That afternoon my wife and I went to see Kopp for the last time.
There was nothing that we could do for him, absolutely nothing, except
to say good-bye and leave money with Spanish friends who would take him
food and cigarettes. A little while later, however, after we had left
Barcelona, he was placed _incommunicado_ and not even food could be sent
to him. That night, walking down the Ramblas, we passed the Café Moka,
which the Civil Guards were still holding in force. On an impulse I went
in and spoke to two of them who were leaning against the counter with
their rifles slung over their shoulders. I asked them if they knew which
of their comrades had been on duty here at the time of the May fighting.
They did not know, and, with the usual Spanish vagueness, did not know
how one could find out. I said that my friend Jorge Kopp was in prison
and would perhaps be put on trial for something in connexion with the
May fighting; that the men who were on duty here would know that he had
stopped the fighting and saved some of their lives; they ought to come
forward and give evidence to that effect. One of the men I was talking
to was a dull, heavy-looking man who kept shaking his head because he
could not hear my voice in the din of the traffic. But the other was
different. He said he had heard of Kopp's action from some of his
comrades; Kopp was _buen chico_ (a good fellow). But even at the time I
knew that it was all useless. If Kopp were ever tried, it would be, as
in all such trials, with faked evidence. If he has been shot (and I am
afraid it is quite likely), that will be his epitaph: the _buen chico_
of the poor Civil Guard who was part of a dirty system but had remained
enough of a human being to know a decent action when he saw one.

It was an extraordinary, insane existence that we were leading. By night
we were criminals, but by day we were prosperous English visitors--that
was our pose, anyway. Even after a night in the open, a shave, a bath,
and a shoe-shine do wonders with your appearance. The safest thing at
present was to look as bourgeois as possible. We frequented the
fashionable residential quarter of the town, where our faces were not
known, went to expensive restaurants, and were very English with the
waiters. For the first time in my life I took to writing things on
walls. The passage-ways of several smart restaurants had '_Visca
P.O.U.M.!_' scrawled on them as large as I could write it. All the while,
though I was technically in hiding, I could not feel myself in danger.
The whole thing seemed too absurd. I had the ineradicable English belief
that 'they' cannot arrest you unless you have broken the law. It is a
most dangerous belief to have during a political pogrom. There was a
warrant out for McNair's arrest, and the chances were that the rest of
us were on the list as well. The arrests, raids, searchings were
continuing without pause; practically everyone we knew, except those who
were still at the front, was in jail by this time. The police were even
boarding the French ships that periodically took off refugees and
seizing suspected 'Trotskyists'.

Thanks to the kindness of the British consul, who must have had a very
trying time during that week, we had managed to get our passports into
order. The sooner we left the better. There was a train that was due to
leave for Port Bou at half past seven in the evening and might normally
be expected to leave at about half past eight. We arranged that my wife
should order a taxi beforehand and then pack her bags, pay her bill, and
leave the hotel at the last possible moment. If she gave the hotel
people too much notice they would be sure to send for the police. I got
down to the station at about seven to find that the train had already
gone--it had left at ten to seven. The engine-driver had changed his
mind, as usual. Fortunately we managed to warn my wife in time. There
was another train early the following morning. McNair, Cottman, and I
had dinner at a little restaurant near the station and by cautious
questioning discovered that the restaurant-keeper was a C.N.T. member
and friendly. He let us a three-bedded room and forgot to warn the
police. It was the first time in five nights that I had been able to
sleep with my clothes off.

Next morning my wife slipped out of the hotel successfully. The train
was about an hour late in starting. I filled in the time by writing a
long letter to the Ministry of War, telling them about Kopp's case--that
without a doubt he had been arrested by mistake, that he was urgently
needed at the front, that countless people would testify that he was
innocent of any offence, etc., etc., etc. I wonder if anyone read that
letter, written on pages torn out of a note-book in wobbly handwriting
(my fingers were still partly paralysed) and still more wobbly Spanish.
At any rate, neither this letter nor anything else took effect. As I
write, six months after the event, Kopp (if he has not been shot) is
still in jail, untried and uncharged. At the beginning we had two or
three letters from him, smuggled out by released prisoners and posted in
France. They all told the same story--imprisonment in filthy dark dens,
bad and insufficient food, serious illness due to the conditions of
imprisonment, and refusal of medical attention. I have had all this
confirmed from several other sources, English and French. More recently
he disappeared into one of the 'secret prisons' with which it seems
impossible to make any kind of communication. His case is the case of
scores or hundreds of foreigners and no one knows how many thousands of
Spaniards.

In the end we crossed the frontier without incident. The train had a
first class and a dining-car, the first I had seen in Spain. Until
recently there had been only one class on the trains in Catalonia. Two
detectives came round the train taking the names of foreigners, but when
they saw us in the dining-car they seemed satisfied that we were
respectable. It was queer how everything had changed. Only six months
ago, when the Anarchists still reigned, it was looking like a
proletarian that made you respectable. On the way down from Perpignan to
Cerberes a French commercial traveller in my carriage had said to me in
all solemnity: 'You mustn't go into Spain looking like that. Take off
that collar and tie. They'll tear them off you in Barcelona.' He was
exaggerating, but it showed how Catalonia was regarded. And at the
frontier the Anarchist guards had turned back a smartly dressed
Frenchman and his wife, solely--I think--because they looked too
bourgeois. Now it was the other way about; to look bourgeois was the one
salvation. At the passport office they looked us up in the card-index of
suspects, but thanks to the inefficiency of the police our names were
not listed, not even McNair's. We were searched from head to foot, but
we possessed nothing incriminating, except my discharge-papers, and the
carabineros who searched me did not know that the 29th Division was the
P.O.U.M. So we slipped through the barrier, and after just six months I
was on French soil again. My only souvenirs of Spain were a goatskin
water-bottle and one of those tiny iron lamps in which the Aragón
peasants burn olive oil-lamps almost exactly the shape of the
terra-cotta lamps that the Romans used two thousand years ago--which I
had picked up in some ruined hut, and which had somehow got stuck in my
luggage.

After all, it turned out that we had come away none too soon. The very
first newspaper we saw announced McNair's arrest for espionage. The
Spanish authorities had been a little premature in announcing this.
Fortunately, 'Trotskyism' is not extraditable.

I wonder what is the appropriate first action when you come from a
country at war and set foot on peaceful soil. Mine was to rush to the
tobacco-kiosk and buy as many cigars and cigarettes as I could stuff
into my pockets. Then we all went to the buffet and had a cup of tea,
the first tea with fresh milk in it that we had had for many months. It
was several days before I could get used to the idea that you could buy
cigarettes whenever you wanted them. I always half-expected to see the
tobacconists' doors barred and the forbidding notice '_No hay tabaco_' in
the window.

McNair and Cottman were going on to Paris. My wife and I got off the
train at Banyuls, the first station up the line, feeling that we would
like a rest. We were not too well received in Banyuls when they
discovered that we had come from Barcelona. Quite a number of times I
was involved in the same conversation: 'You come from Spain? Which side
were you fighting on? The Government? Oh!'--and then a marked coolness.
The little town seemed solidly pro-Franco, no doubt because of the
various Spanish Fascist refugees who had arrived there from time to
time. The waiter at the café I frequented was a pro-Franco Spaniard and
used to give me lowering glances as he served me with an aperitif. It
was otherwise in Perpignan, which was stiff with Government partisans
and where all the different factions were caballing against one another
almost as in Barcelona. There was one café where the word 'P.O.U.M.'
immediately procured you French friends and smiles from the waiter.

I think we stayed three days in Banyuls. It was a strangely restless
time. In this quiet fishing-town, remote from bombs, machine-guns,
food-queues, propaganda, and intrigue, we ought to have felt profoundly
relieved and thankful. We felt nothing of the kind. The things we had
seen in Spain did not recede and fall into proportion now that we were
away from them; instead they rushed back upon us and were far more vivid
than before. We thought, talked, dreamed incessantly of Spain. For
months past we had been telling ourselves that 'when we get out of
Spain' we would go somewhere beside the Mediterranean and be quiet for a
little while and perhaps do a little fishing, but now that we were here
it was merely a bore and a disappointment. It was chilly weather, a
persistent wind blew off the sea, the water was dull and choppy, round
the harbour's edge a scum of ashes, corks, and fish-guts bobbed against
the stones. It sounds like lunacy, but the thing that both of us wanted
was to be back in Spain. Though it could have done no good to anybody,
might indeed have done serious harm, both of us wished that we had
stayed to be imprisoned along with the others. I suppose I have failed
to convey more than a little of what those months in Spain meant to me.
I have recorded some of the outward events, but I cannot record the
feeling they have left me with. It is all mixed up with sights, smells,
and sounds that cannot be conveyed in writing: the smell of the
trenches, the mountain dawns stretching away into inconceivable
distances, the frosty crackle of bullets, the roar and glare of bombs;
the clear cold light of the Barcelona mornings, and the stamp of boots
in the barrack yard, back in December when people still believed in the
revolution; and the food-queues and the red and black flags and the
faces of Spanish militiamen; above all the faces of militiamen--men whom
I knew in the line and who are now scattered Lord knows where, some
killed in battle, some maimed, some in prison--most of them, I hope,
still safe and sound. Good luck to them all; I hope they win their war
and drive all the foreigners out of Spain, Germans, Russians, and
Italians alike. This war, in which I played so ineffectual a part, has
left me with memories that are mostly evil, and yet I do not wish that I
had missed it. When you have had a glimpse of such a disaster as
this--and however it ends the Spanish war will turn out to have been an
appalling disaster, quite apart from the slaughter and physical
suffering--the result is not necessarily disillusionment and cynicism.
Curiously enough the whole experience has left me with not less but more
belief in the decency of human beings. And I hope the account I have
given is not too misleading. I believe that on such an issue as this no
one is or can be completely truthful. It is difficult to be certain
about anything except what you have seen with your own eyes, and
consciously or unconsciously everyone writes as a partisan. In case I
have not said this somewhere earlier in the book I will say it now:
beware of my partisanship, my mistakes of fact, and the distortion
inevitably caused by my having seen only one corner of events. And
beware of exactly the same things when you read any other book on this
period of the Spanish war.

Because of the feeling that we ought to be doing something, though
actually there was nothing we could do, we left Banyuls earlier than we
had intended. With every mile that you went northward France grew
greener and softer. Away from the mountain and the vine, back to the
meadow and the elm. When I had passed through Paris on my way to Spain
it had seemed to me decayed and gloomy, very different from the Paris I
had known eight years earlier, when living was cheap and Hitler was not
heard of. Half the cafés I used to know were shut for lack of custom,
and everyone was obsessed with the high cost of living and the fear of
war. Now, after poor Spain, even Paris seemed gay and prosperous. And
the Exhibition was in full swing, though we managed to avoid visiting
it.

And then England--southern England, probably the sleekest landscape in
the world. It is difficult when you pass that way, especially when you
are peacefully recovering from sea-sickness with the plush cushions of a
boat-train carriage under your bum, to believe that anything is really
happening anywhere. Earthquakes in Japan, famines in China, revolutions
in Mexico? Don't worry, the milk will be on the doorstep tomorrow
morning, the _New Statesman_ will come out on Friday. The industrial
towns were far away, a smudge of smoke and misery hidden by the curve of
the earth's surface. Down here it was still the England I had known in
my childhood: the railway-cuttings smothered in wild flowers, the deep
meadows where the great shining horses browse and meditate, the
slow-moving streams bordered by willows, the green bosoms of the elms,
the larkspurs in the cottage gardens; and then the huge peaceful
wilderness of outer London, the barges on the miry river, the familiar
streets, the posters telling of cricket matches and Royal weddings, the
men in bowler hats, the pigeons in Trafalgar Square, the red buses, the
blue policemen--all sleeping the deep, deep sleep of England, from which
I sometimes fear that we shall never wake till we are jerked out of it
by the roar of bombs.

THE END

Project Gutenberg Australia

Title:      Coming Up For Air
Author:     George Orwell


'He's dead, but he won't lie down'

Popular song



PART I



1


The idea really came to me the day I got my new false teeth.

I remember the morning well.  At about a quarter to eight I'd
nipped out of bed and got into the bathroom just in time to shut
the kids out.  It was a beastly January morning, with a dirty
yellowish-grey sky.  Down below, out of the little square of
bathroom window, I could see the ten yards by five of grass, with
a privet hedge round it and a bare patch in the middle, that we call
the back garden.  There's the same back garden, same privets, and
same grass, behind every house in Ellesmere Road.  Only difference--
where there are no kids there's no bare patch in the middle.

I was trying to shave with a bluntish razor-blade while the water
ran into the bath.  My face looked back at me out of the mirror,
and underneath, in a tumbler of water on the little shelf over the
washbasin, the teeth that belonged in the face.  It was the
temporary set that Warner, my dentist, had given me to wear while
the new ones were being made.  I haven't such a bad face, really.
It's one of those bricky-red faces that go with butter-coloured
hair and pale-blue eyes.  I've never gone grey or bald, thank God,
and when I've got my teeth in I probably don't look my age, which
is forty-five.

Making a mental note to buy razor-blades, I got into the bath and
started soaping.  I soaped my arms (I've got those kind of pudgy
arms that are freckled up to the elbow) and then took the back-
brush and soaped my shoulder-blades, which in the ordinary way I
can't reach.  It's a nuisance, but there are several parts of my
body that I can't reach nowadays.  The truth is that I'm inclined
to be a little bit on the fat side.  I don't mean that I'm like
something in a sideshow at a fair.  My weight isn't much over
fourteen stone, and last time I measured round my waist it was
either forty-eight or forty-nine, I forget which.  And I'm not what
they call 'disgustingly' fat, I haven't got one of those bellies
that sag half-way down to the knees.  It's merely that I'm a little
bit broad in the beam, with a tendency to be barrel-shaped.  Do you
know the active, hearty kind of fat man, the athletic bouncing type
that's nicknamed Fatty or Tubby and is always the life and soul of
the party?  I'm that type.  'Fatty' they mostly call me.  Fatty
Bowling.  George Bowling is my real name.

But at that moment I didn't feel like the life and soul of the
party.  And it struck me that nowadays I nearly always do have a
morose kind of feeling in the early mornings, although I sleep well
and my digestion's good.  I knew what it was, of course--it was
those bloody false teeth.  The things were magnified by the water
in the tumbler, and they were grinning at me like the teeth in a
skull.  It gives you a rotten feeling to have your gums meet, a
sort of pinched-up, withered feeling like when you've bitten into
a sour apple.  Besides, say what you will, false teeth are a
landmark.  When your last natural tooth goes, the time when you can
kid yourself that you're a Hollywood sheik, is definitely at an
end.  And I was fat as well as forty-five.  As I stood up to soap
my crutch I had a look at my figure.  It's all rot about fat men
being unable to see their feet, but it's a fact that when I stand
upright I can only see the front halves of mine.  No woman, I
thought as I worked the soap round my belly, will ever look twice
at me again, unless she's paid to.  Not that at that moment I
particularly wanted any woman to look twice at me.

But it struck me that this morning there were reasons why I ought
to have been in a better mood.  To begin with I wasn't working
today.  The old car, in which I 'cover' my district (I ought to
tell you that I'm in the insurance business.  The Flying
Salamander.  Life, fire, burglary, twins, shipwreck--everything),
was temporarily in dock, and though I'd got to look in at the
London office to drop some papers, I was really taking the day off
to go and fetch my new false teeth.  And besides, there was another
business that had been in and out of my mind for some time past.
This was that I had seventeen quid which nobody else had heard
about--nobody in the family, that is.  It had happened this way.
A chap in our firm, Mellors by name, had got hold of a book called
Astrology applied to Horse-racing which proved that it's all a
question of influence of the planets on the colours the jockey is
wearing.  Well, in some race or other there was a mare called
Corsair's Bride, a complete outsider, but her jockey's colour was
green, which it seemed was just the colour for the planets that
happened to be in the ascendant.  Mellors, who was deeply bitten
with this astrology business, was putting several quid on the horse
and went down on his knees to me to do the same.  In the end,
chiefly to shut him up, I risked ten bob, though I don't bet as a
general rule.  Sure enough Corsair's Bride came home in a walk.  I
forget the exact odds, but my share worked out at seventeen quid.
By a kind of instinct--rather queer, and probably indicating
another landmark in my life--I just quietly put the money in the
bank and said nothing to anybody.  I'd never done anything of this
kind before.  A good husband and father would have spent it on a
dress for Hilda (that's my wife) and boots for the kids.  But I'd
been a good husband and father for fifteen years and I was
beginning to get fed up with it.

After I'd soaped myself all over I felt better and lay down in the
bath to think about my seventeen quid and what to spend it on.  The
alternatives, it seemed to me, were either a week-end with a woman
or dribbling it quietly away on odds and ends such as cigars and
double whiskies.  I'd just turned on some more hot water and was
thinking about women and cigars when there was a noise like a herd
of buffaloes coming down the two steps that lead to the bathroom.
It was the kids, of course.  Two kids in a house the size of ours
is like a quart of beer in a pint mug.  There was a frantic
stamping outside and then a yell of agony.

'Dadda!  I wanna come in!'

'Well, you can't.  Clear out!'

'But dadda!  I wanna go somewhere!'

'Go somewhere else, then.  Hop it.  I'm having my bath.'

'Dad-DA!  I wanna GO SOME--WHERE!'

No use!  I knew the danger signal.  The W.C. is in the bathroom--it
would be, of course, in a house like ours.  I hooked the plug out
of the bath and got partially dry as quickly as I could.  As I
opened the door, little Billy--my youngest, aged seven--shot past
me, dodging the smack which I aimed at his head.  It was only when
I was nearly dressed and looking for a tie that I discovered that
my neck was still soapy.

It's a rotten thing to have a soapy neck.  It gives you a disgusting
sticky feeling, and the queer thing is that, however carefully you
sponge it away, when you've once discovered that your neck is soapy
you feel sticky for the rest of the day.  I went downstairs in a bad
temper and ready to make myself disagreeable.

Our dining-room, like the other dining-rooms in Ellesmere Road, is
a poky little place, fourteen feet by twelve, or maybe it's twelve
by ten, and the Japanese oak sideboard, with the two empty
decanters and the silver egg-stand that Hilda's mother gave us for
a wedding present, doesn't leave much room.  Old Hilda was glooming
behind the teapot, in her usual state of alarm and dismay because
the News Chronicle had announced that the price of butter was going
up, or something.  She hadn't lighted the gas-fire, and though the
windows were shut it was beastly cold.  I bent down and put a match
to the fire, breathing rather loudly through my nose (bending
always makes me puff and blow) as a kind of hint to Hilda.  She
gave me the little sidelong glance that she always gives me when
she thinks I'm doing something extravagant.

Hilda is thirty-nine, and when I first knew her she looked just
like a hare.  So she does still, but she's got very thin and rather
wizened, with a perpetual brooding, worried look in her eyes, and
when she's more upset than usual she's got a trick of humping her
shoulders and folding her arms across her breast, like an old gypsy
woman over her fire.  She's one of those people who get their main
kick in life out of foreseeing disasters.  Only petty disasters,
of course.  As for wars, earthquakes, plagues, famines, and
revolutions, she pays no attention to them.  Butter is going up,
and the gas-bill is enormous, and the kids' boots are wearing out,
and there's another instalment due on the radio--that's Hilda's
litany.  She gets what I've finally decided is a definite pleasure
out of rocking herself to and fro with her arms across her breast,
and glooming at me, 'But, George, it's very SERIOUS!  I don't know
what we're going to DO!  I don't know where the money's coming
from!  You don't seem to realize how serious it IS!' and so on and
so forth.  It's fixed firmly in her head that we shall end up in
the workhouse.  The funny thing is that if we ever do get to the
workhouse Hilda won't mind it a quarter as much as I shall, in fact
she'll probably rather enjoy the feeling of security.

The kids were downstairs already, having washed and dressed at
lightning speed, as they always do when there's no chance to keep
anyone else out of the bathroom.  When I got to the breakfast table
they were having an argument which went to the tune of 'Yes, you
did!' 'No, I didn't!' 'Yes, you did!' 'No, I didn't!' and looked
like going on for the rest of the morning, until I told them to
cheese it.  There are only the two of them, Billy, aged seven, and
Lorna, aged eleven.  It's a peculiar feeling that I have towards
the kids.  A great deal of the time I can hardly stick the sight of
them.  As for their conversation, it's just unbearable.  They're at
that dreary bread-and-butter age when a kid's mind revolves round
things like rulers, pencil-boxes, and who got top marks in French.
At other times, especially when they're asleep, I have quite a
different feeling.  Sometimes I've stood over their cots, on summer
evenings when it's light, and watched them sleeping, with their
round faces and their tow-coloured hair, several shades lighter
than mine, and it's given me that feeling you read about in the
Bible when it says your bowels yearn.  At such times I feel that
I'm just a kind of dried-up seed-pod that doesn't matter twopence
and that my sole importance has been to bring these creatures into
the world and feed them while they're growing.  But that's only at
moments.  Most of the time my separate existence looks pretty
important to me, I feel that there's life in the old dog yet and
plenty of good times ahead, and the notion of myself as a kind of
tame dairy-cow for a lot of women and kids to chase up and down
doesn't appeal to me.

We didn't talk much at breakfast.  Hilda was in her 'I don't know
what we're going to DO!' mood, partly owing to the price of butter
and partly because the Christmas holidays were nearly over and
there was still five pounds owing on the school fees for last term.
I ate my boiled egg and spread a piece of bread with Golden Crown
marmalade.  Hilda will persist in buying the stuff.  It's
fivepence-halfpenny a pound, and the label tells you, in the
smallest print the law allows, that it contains 'a certain
proportion of neutral fruit-juice'.  This started me off, in the
rather irritating way I have sometimes, talking about neutral
fruit-trees, wondering what they looked like and what countries
they grew in, until finally Hilda got angry.  It's not that she
minds me chipping her, it's only that in some obscure way she
thinks it's wicked to make jokes about anything you save money on.

I had a look at the paper, but there wasn't much news.  Down in
Spain and over in China they were murdering one another as usual,
a woman's legs had been found in a railway waiting-room, and King
Zog's wedding was wavering in the balance.  Finally, at about ten
o'clock, rather earlier than I'd intended, I started out for town.
The kids had gone off to play in the public gardens.  It was a
beastly raw morning.  As I stepped out of the front door a nasty
little gust of wind caught the soapy patch on my neck and made me
suddenly feel that my clothes didn't fit and that I was sticky all
over.



2


Do you know the road I live in--Ellesmere Road, West Bletchley?
Even if you don't, you know fifty others exactly like it.

You know how these streets fester all over the inner-outer suburbs.
Always the same.  Long, long rows of little semi-detached houses--
the numbers in Ellesmere Road run to 212 and ours is 191--as much
alike as council houses and generally uglier.  The stucco front,
the creosoted gate, the privet hedge, the green front door.  The
Laurels, the Myrtles, the Hawthorns, Mon Abri, Mon Repos, Belle
Vue.  At perhaps one house in fifty some anti-social type who'll
probably end in the workhouse has painted his front door blue
instead of green.

That sticky feeling round my neck had put me into a demoralized
kind of mood.  It's curious how it gets you down to have a sticky
neck.  It seems to take all the bounce out of you, like when you
suddenly discover in a public place that the sole of one of your
shoes is coming off.  I had no illusions about myself that morning.
It was almost as if I could stand at a distance and watch myself
coming down the road, with my fat, red face and my false teeth and
my vulgar clothes.  A chap like me is incapable of looking like a
gentleman.  Even if you saw me at two hundred yards' distance you'd
know immediately--not, perhaps, that I was in the insurance
business, but that I was some kind of tout or salesman.  The
clothes I was wearing were practically the uniform of the tribe.
Grey herring-bone suit, a bit the worse for wear, blue overcoat
costing fifty shillings, bowler hat, and no gloves.  And I've got
the look that's peculiar to people who sell things on commission, a
kind of coarse, brazen look.  At my best moments, when I've got a
new suit or when I'm smoking a cigar, I might pass for a bookie or
a publican, and when things are very bad I might be touting vacuum
cleaners, but at ordinary times you'd place me correctly.  'Five to
ten quid a week', you'd say as soon as you saw me.  Economically
and socially I'm about at the average level of Ellesmere Road.

I had the street pretty much to myself.  The men had bunked to
catch the 8.21 and the women were fiddling with the gas-stoves.
When you've time to look about you, and when you happen to be in
the right mood, it's a thing that makes you laugh inside to walk
down these streets in the inner-outer suburbs and to think of the
lives that go on there.  Because, after all, what IS a road like
Ellesmere Road?  Just a prison with the cells all in a row.  A line
of semidetached torture-chambers where the poor little five-to-ten-
pound-a-weekers quake and shiver, every one of them with the boss
twisting his tail and his wife riding him like the nightmare and
the kids sucking his blood like leeches.  There's a lot of rot
talked about the sufferings of the working class.  I'm not so sorry
for the proles myself.  Did you ever know a navvy who lay awake
thinking about the sack?  The prole suffers physically, but he's a
free man when he isn't working.  But in every one of those little
stucco boxes there's some poor bastard who's NEVER free except when
he's fast asleep and dreaming that he's got the boss down the
bottom of a well and is bunging lumps of coal at him.

Of course, the basic trouble with people like us, I said to myself,
is that we all imagine we've got something to lose.  To begin with,
nine-tenths of the people in Ellesmere Road are under the
impression that they own their houses.  Ellesmere Road, and the
whole quarter surrounding it, until you get to the High Street, is
part of a huge racket called the Hesperides Estate, the property of
the Cheerful Credit Building Society.  Building societies are
probably the cleverest racket of modern times.  My own line,
insurance, is a swindle, I admit, but it's an open swindle with the
cards on the table.  But the beauty of the building society
swindles is that your victims think you're doing them a kindness.
You wallop them, and they lick your hand.  I sometimes think I'd
like to have the Hesperides Estate surmounted by an enormous statue
to the god of building societies.  It would be a queer sort of god.
Among other things it would be bisexual.  The top half would be a
managing director and the bottom half would be a wife in the family
way.  In one hand it would carry an enormous key--the key of the
workhouse, of course--and in the other--what do they call those
things like French horns with presents coming out of them?--a
cornucopia, out of which would be pouring portable radios, life-
insurance policies, false teeth, aspirins, French letters, and
concrete garden rollers.

As a matter of fact, in Ellesmere Road we don't own our houses,
even when we've finished paying for them.  They're not freehold,
only leasehold.  They're priced at five-fifty, payable over a
period of sixteen years, and they're a class of house, which, if
you bought them for cash down, would cost round about three-eighty.
That represents a profit of a hundred and seventy for the Cheerful
Credit, but needless to say that Cheerful Credit makes a lot more
out of it than that.  Three-eighty includes the builder's profit,
but the Cheerful Credit, under the name of Wilson & Bloom, builds
the houses itself and scoops the builder's profit.  All it has to
pay for is the materials.  But it also scoops the profit on the
materials, because under the name of Brookes & Scatterby it sells
itself the bricks, tiles, doors, window-frames, sand, cement, and,
I think, glass.  And it wouldn't altogether surprise me to learn
that under yet another alias it sells itself the timber to make the
doors and window-frames.  Also--and this was something which we
really might have foreseen, though it gave us all a knock when we
discovered it--the Cheerful Credit doesn't always keep to its end
of the bargain.  When Ellesmere Road was built it gave on some open
fields--nothing very wonderful, but good for the kids to play in--
known as Platt's Meadows.  There was nothing in black and white,
but it had always been understood that Platt's Meadows weren't to
be built on.  However, West Bletchley was a growing suburb,
Rothwell's jam factory had opened in '28 and the Anglo-American
All-Steel Bicycle factory started in '33, and the population was
increasing and rents were going up.  I've never seen Sir Herbert
Crum or any other of the big noises of the Cheerful Credit in the
flesh, but in my mind's eye I could see their mouths watering.
Suddenly the builders arrived and houses began to go up on Platt's
Meadows.  There was a howl of agony from the Hesperides, and a
tenants' defence association was set up.  No use!  Crum's lawyers
had knocked the stuffing out of us in five minutes, and Platt's
Meadows were built over.  But the really subtle swindle, the one
that makes me feel old Crum deserved his baronetcy, is the mental
one.  Merely because of the illusion that we own our houses and
have what's called 'a stake in the country', we poor saps in the
Hesperides, and in all such places, are turned into Crum's devoted
slaves for ever.  We're all respectable householders--that's to say
Tories, yes-men, and bumsuckers.  Daren't kill the goose that lays
the gilded eggs!  And the fact that actually we aren't householders,
that we're all in the middle of paying for our houses and eaten up
with the ghastly fear that something might happen before we've made
the last payment, merely increases the effect. We're all bought, and
what's more we're bought with our own money.  Every one of those poor
downtrodden bastards, sweating his guts out to pay twice the proper
price for a brick doll's house that's called Belle Vue because
there's no view and the bell doesn't ring--every one of those poor
suckers would die on the field of battle to save his country from
Bolshevism.

I turned down Walpole Road and got into the High Street.  There's a
train to London at 10.14.  I was just passing the Sixpenny Bazaar
when I remembered the mental note I'd made that morning to buy a
packet of razor-blades.  When I got to the soap counter the floor-
manager, or whatever his proper title is, was cursing the girl in
charge there.  Generally there aren't many people in the Sixpenny
at that hour of the morning.  Sometimes if you go in just after
opening-time you see all the girls lined up in a row and given
their morning curse, just to get them into trim for the day.  They
say these big chain-stores have chaps with special powers of
sarcasm and abuse who are sent from branch to branch to ginger the
girls up.  The floor-manager was an ugly little devil, under-sized,
with very square shoulders and a spiky grey moustache.  He'd just
pounced on her about something, some mistake in the change
evidently, and was going for her with a voice like a circular saw.

'Ho, no!  Course you couldn't count it!  COURSE you couldn't.  Too
much trouble, that'd be.  Ho, no!'

Before I could stop myself I'd caught the girl's eye.  It wasn't
so nice for her to have a fat middle-aged bloke with a red face
looking on while she took her cursing.  I turned away as quickly as
I could and pretended to be interested in some stuff at the next
counter, curtain rings or something.  He was on to her again.  He
was one of those people who turn away and then suddenly dart back
at you, like a dragon-fly.

'COURSE you couldn't count it!  Doesn't matter to YOU if we're two
bob out.  Doesn't matter at all.  What's two bob to YOU?  Couldn't
ask YOU to go to the trouble of counting it properly.  Ho, no!
Nothing matters 'ere 'cept YOUR convenience.  You don't think about
others, do you?'

This went on for about five minutes in a voice you could hear half
across the shop.  He kept turning away to make her think he'd
finished with her and then darting back to have another go.  As I
edged a bit farther off I had a glance at them.  The girl was a kid
about eighteen, rather fat, with a sort of moony face, the kind
that would never get the change right anyway.  She'd turned pale
pink and she was wriggling, actually wriggling with pain.  It was
just the same as if he'd been cutting into her with a whip.  The
girls at the other counters were pretending not to hear.  He was an
ugly, stiff-built little devil, the sort of cock-sparrow type of
man that sticks his chest out and puts his hands under his
coattails--the type that'd be a sergeant-major only they aren't
tall enough.  Do you notice how often they have under-sized men for
these bullying jobs?  He was sticking his face, moustaches and all,
almost into hers so as to scream at her better.  And the girl all
pink and wriggling.

Finally he decided that he'd said enough and strutted off like an
admiral on the quarter-deck, and I came up to the counter for my
razor-blades.  He knew I'd heard every word, and so did she, and
both of them knew I knew they knew.  But the worst of it was that
for my benefit she'd got to pretend that nothing had happened and
put on the standoffish keep-your-distance attitude that a shopgirl's
supposed to keep up with male customers.  Had to act the grown-up
young lady half a minute after I'd seen her cursed like a skivvy!
Her face was still pink and her hands were trembling.  I asked her
for penny blades and she started fumbling in the threepenny tray.
Then the little devil of a floor-manager turned our way and for a
moment both of us thought he was coming back to begin again.  The
girl flinched like a dog that sees the whip.  But she was looking at
me out of the corner of her eye.  I could see that because I'd seen
her cursed she hated me like the devil. Queer!

I cleared out with my razor-blades.  Why do they stand it? I was
thinking.  Pure funk, of course.  One back-answer and you get the
sack.  It's the same everywhere.  I thought of the lad that
sometimes serves me at the chain-store grocery we deal at.  A great
hefty lump of twenty, with cheeks like roses and enormous fore-
arms, ought to be working in a blacksmith's shop.  And there he is
in his white jacket, bent double across the counter, rubbing his
hands together with his 'Yes, sir!  Very true, sir!  Pleasant
weather for the time of the year, sir!  What can I have the
pleasure of getting you today, sir?' practically asking you to kick
his bum.  Orders, of course.  The customer is always right.  The
thing you can see in his face is mortal dread that you might report
him for impertinence and get him sacked.  Besides, how's he to know
you aren't one of the narks the company sends round?  Fear!  We
swim in it.  It's our element.  Everyone that isn't scared stiff of
losing his job is scared stiff of war, or Fascism, or Communism, or
something.  Jews sweating when they think of Hitler.  It crossed my
mind that that little bastard with the spiky moustache was probably
a damn sight more scared for his job than the girl was.  Probably
got a family to support.  And perhaps, who knows, at home he's meek
and mild, grows cucumbers in the back garden, lets his wife sit on
him and the kids pull his moustache.  And by the same token you
never read about a Spanish Inquisitor or one of these higher-ups in
the Russian Ogpu without being told that in private life he was
such a good kind man, best of husbands and fathers, devoted to his
tame canary, and so forth.

The girl at the soap counter was looking after me as I went out of
the door.  She'd have murdered me if she could.  How she hated me
because of what I'd seen!  Much more than she hated the floor-
manager.



3


There was a bombing plane flying low overhead.  For a minute or two
it seemed to be keeping pace with the train.  Two vulgar kind of
blokes in shabby overcoats, obviously commercials of the lowest
type, newspaper canvassers probably, were sitting opposite me.  One
of them was reading the Mail and the other was reading the Express.
I could see by their manner that they'd spotted me for one of their
kind.  Up at the other end of the carriage two lawyers' clerks with
black bags were keeping up a conversation full of legal baloney
that was meant to impress the rest of us and show that they didn't
belong to the common herd.

I was watching the backs of the houses sliding past.  The line from
West Bletchley runs most of the way through slums, but it's kind of
peaceful, the glimpses you get of little backyards with bits of
flowers stuck in boxes and the flat roofs where the women peg out
the washing and the bird-cage on the wall.  The great black bombing
plane swayed a little in the air and zoomed ahead so that I
couldn't see it.  I was sitting with my back to the engine.  One of
the commercials cocked his eye at it for just a second.  I knew
what he was thinking.  For that matter it's what everybody else is
thinking.  You don't have to be a highbrow to think such thoughts
nowadays.  In two years' time, one year's time, what shall we be
doing when we see one of those things?  Making a dive for the
cellar, wetting our bags with fright.

The commercial bloke put down his Daily Mail.

'Templegate's winner come in,' he said.

The lawyers' clerks were sprouting some learned rot about fee-
simple and peppercorns.  The other commercial felt in his waistcoat
pocket and took out a bent Woodbine.  He felt in the other pocket
and then leaned across to me.

'Got a match, Tubby?'

I felt for my matches.  'Tubby', you notice.  That's interesting,
really.  For about a couple of minutes I stopped thinking about
bombs and began thinking about my figure as I'd studied it in my
bath that morning.

It's quite true I'm tubby, in fact my upper half is almost exactly
the shape of a tub.  But what's interesting, I think, is that
merely because you happen to be a little bit fat, almost anyone,
even a total, stranger, will take it for granted to give you a
nickname that's an insulting comment on your personal appearance.
Suppose a chap was a hunchback or had a squint or a hare-lip--would
you give him a nickname to remind him of it?  But every fat man's
labelled as a matter of course.  I'm the type that people
automatically slap on the back and punch in the ribs, and nearly
all of them think I like it.  I never go into the saloon bar of the
Crown at Pudley (I pass that way once a week on business) without
that ass Waters, who travels for the Seafoam Soap people but who's
more or less a permanency in the saloon bar of the Crown, prodding
me in the ribs and singing out 'Here a sheer hulk lies poor Tom
Bowling!' which is a joke the bloody fools in the bar never get
tired of.  Waters has got a finger like a bar of iron.  They all
think a fat man doesn't have any feelings.

The commercial took another of my matches, to pick his teeth with,
and chucked the box back.  The train whizzed on to an iron bridge.
Down below I got a glimpse of a baker's van and a long string of
lorries loaded with cement.  The queer thing, I was thinking, is
that in a way they're right about fat men.  It's a fact that a fat
man, particularly a man who's been fat from birth--from childhood,
that's to say--isn't quite like other men.  He goes through his
life on a different plane, a sort of light-comedy plane, though in
the case of blokes in side-shows at fairs, or in fact anyone over
twenty stone, it isn't so much light comedy as low farce.  I've
been both fat and thin in my life, and I know the difference
fatness makes to your outlook.  It kind of prevents you from taking
things too hard.  I doubt whether a man who's never been anything
but fat, a man who's been called Fatty ever since he could walk,
even knows of the existence of any really deep emotions.  How could
he?  He's got no experience of such things.  He can't ever be
present at a tragic scene, because a scene where there's a fat man
present isn't tragic, it's comic.  Just imagine a fat Hamlet, for
instance!  Or Oliver Hardy acting Romeo.  Funnily enough I'd been
thinking something of the kind only a few days earlier when I was
reading a novel I'd got out of Boots.  Wasted Passion, it was
called.  The chap in the story finds out that his girl has gone off
with another chap.  He's one of these chaps you read about in
novels, that have pale sensitive faces and dark hair and a private
income.  I remember more or less how the passage went:


David paced up and down the room, his hands pressed to his
forehead.  The news seemed to have stunned him.  For a long time
he could not believe it.  Sheila untrue to him!  It could not be!
Suddenly realization rushed over him, and he saw the fact in all
its stark horror.  It was too much.  He flung himself down in a
paroxysm of weeping.


Anyway, it went something like that.  And even at the time it
started me thinking.  There you have it, you see.  That's how
people--some people--are expected to behave.  But how about a chap
like me?  Suppose Hilda went off for a week-end with somebody else-
-not that I'd care a damn, in fact it would rather please me to
find that she'd still got that much kick left in her--but suppose I
did care, would I fling myself down in a paroxysm of weeping?
Would anyone expect me to?  You couldn't, with a figure like mine.
It would be downright obscene.

The train was running along an embankment.  A little below us you
could see the roofs of the houses stretching on and on, the little
red roofs where the bombs are going to drop, a bit lighted up at
this moment because a ray of sunshine was catching them.  Funny how
we keep on thinking about bombs.  Of course there's no question
that it's coming soon.  You can tell how close it is by the cheer-
up stuff they're talking about it in the newspaper.  I was reading
a piece in the News Chronicle the other day where it said that
bombing planes can't do any damage nowadays.  The anti-aircraft
guns have got so good that the bomber has to stay at twenty
thousand feet.  The chap thinks, you notice, that if an aeroplane's
high enough the bombs don't reach the ground.  Or more likely what
he really meant was that they'll miss Woolwich Arsenal and only hit
places like Ellesmere Road.

But taking it by and large, I thought, it's not so bad to be fat.
One thing about a fat man is that he's always popular.  There's
really no kind of company, from bookies to bishops, where a fat man
doesn't fit in and feel at home.  As for women, fat men have more
luck with them than people seem to think.  It's all bunk to
imagine, as some people do, that a woman looks on a fat man as just
a joke.  The truth is that a woman doesn't look on ANY man as a
joke if he can kid her that he's in love with her.

Mind you, I haven't always been fat.  I've been fat for eight or
nine years, and I suppose I've developed most of the characteristics.
But it's also a fact that internally, mentally, I'm not altogether
fat.  No!  Don't mistake me.  I'm not trying to put myself over as a
kind of tender flower, the aching heart behind the smiling face and
so forth.  You couldn't get on in the insurance business if you were
anything like that.  I'm vulgar, I'm insensitive, and I fit in with
my environment.  So long as anywhere in the world things are being
sold on commission and livings are picked up by sheer brass and lack
of finer feelings, chaps like me will be doing it.  In almost all
circumstances I'd manage to make a living--always a living and never
a fortune--and even in war, revolution, plague, and famine I'd back
myself to stay alive longer than most people.  I'm that type.  But
also I've got something else inside me, chiefly a hangover from the
past.  I'll tell you about that later.  I'm fat, but I'm thin
inside.  Has it ever struck you that there's a thin man inside every
fat man, just as they say there's a statue inside every block of
stone?

The chap who'd borrowed my matches was having a good pick at his
teeth over the Express.

'Legs case don't seem to get much forrader,' he said.

'They'll never get 'im,' said the other. ''Ow could you identify a
pair of legs?  They're all the bleeding same, aren't they?'

'Might trace 'im through the piece of paper 'e wrapped 'em up in,'
said the first.

Down below you could see the roofs of the houses stretching on and
on, twisting this way and that with the streets, but stretching on
and on, like an enormous plain that you could have ridden over.
Whichever way you cross London it's twenty miles of houses almost
without a break.  Christ! how can the bombers miss us when they
come?  We're just one great big bull's-eye.  And no warning,
probably.  Because who's going to be such a bloody fool as to
declare war nowadays?  If I was Hitler I'd send my bombers across
in the middle of a disarmament conference.  Some quiet morning,
when the clerks are streaming across London Bridge, and the
canary's singing, and the old woman's pegging the bloomers on the
line--zoom, whizz, plonk!  Houses going up into the air, bloomers
soaked with blood, canary singing on above the corpses.

Seems a pity somehow, I thought.  I looked at the great sea of
roofs stretching on and on.  Miles and miles of streets, fried-fish
shops, tin chapels, picture houses, little printing-shops up back
alleys, factories, blocks of flats, whelk stalls, dairies, power
stations--on and on and on.  Enormous!  And the peacefulness of it!
Like a great wilderness with no wild beasts.  No guns firing,
nobody chucking pineapples, nobody beating anybody else up with a
rubber truncheon.  If you come to think of it, in the whole of
England at this moment there probably isn't a single bedroom window
from which anyone's firing a machine-gun.

But how about five years from now?  Or two years?  Or one year?



4


I'd dropped my papers at the office.  Warner is one of these cheap
American dentists, and he has his consulting-room, or 'parlour' as
he likes to call it, halfway up a big block of offices, between a
photographer and a rubber-goods wholesaler.  I was early for my
appointment, but it was time for a bit of grub.  I don't know what
put it into my head to go into a milk-bar.  They're places I
generally avoid.  We five-to-ten-pound-a-weekers aren't well served
in the way of eating-places in London.  If your idea of the amount
to spend on a meal is one and threepence, it's either Lyons, the
Express Dairy, or the A.B.C., or else it's the kind of funeral
snack they serve you in the saloon bar, a pint of bitter and a slab
of cold pie, so cold that it's colder than the beer.  Outside the
milk-bar the boys were yelling the first editions of the evening
papers.

Behind the bright red counter a girl in a tall white cap was
fiddling with an ice-box, and somewhere at the back a radio was
playing, plonk-tiddle-tiddle-plonk, a kind of tinny sound.  Why the
hell am I coming here? I thought to myself as I went in.  There's a
kind of atmosphere about these places that gets me down.  Everything
slick and shiny and streamlined; mirrors, enamel, and chromium plate
whichever direction you look in.  Everything spent on the decorations
and nothing on the food.  No real food at all.  Just lists of stuff
with American names, sort of phantom stuff that you can't taste and
can hardly believe in the existence of.  Everything comes out of a
carton or a tin, or it's hauled out of a refrigerator or squirted
out of a tap or squeezed out of a tube.  No comfort, no privacy.
Tall stools to sit on, a kind of narrow ledge to eat off, mirrors
all round you.  A sort of propaganda floating round, mixed up with
the noise of the radio, to the effect that food doesn't matter,
comfort doesn't matter, nothing matters except slickness and
shininess and streamlining.  Everything's streamlined nowadays, even
the bullet Hitler's keeping for you.  I ordered a large coffee and a
couple of frankfurters.  The girl in the white cap jerked them at me
with about as much interest as you'd throw ants' eggs to a goldfish.

Outside the door a newsboy yelled 'StarnoosstanNERD!'  I saw the
poster flapping against his knees:  LEGS.  FRESH DISCOVERIES.  Just
'legs', you notice.  It had got down to that.  Two days earlier
they'd found a woman's legs in a railway waiting-room, done up in a
brown-paper parcel, and what with successive editions of the
papers, the whole nation was supposed to be so passionately
interested in these blasted legs that they didn't need any further
introduction.  They were the only legs that were news at the
moment.  It's queer, I thought, as I ate a bit of roll, how dull
the murders are getting nowadays.  All this cutting people up and
leaving bits of them about the countryside.  Not a patch on the old
domestic poisoning dramas, Crippen, Seddon, Mrs Maybrick; the truth
being, I suppose, that you can't do a good murder unless you
believe you're going to roast in hell for it.

At this moment I bit into one of my frankfurters, and--Christ!

I can't honestly say that I'd expected the thing to have a pleasant
taste.  I'd expected it to taste of nothing, like the roll.  But
this--well, it was quite an experience.  Let me try and describe it
to you.

The frankfurter had a rubber skin, of course, and my temporary
teeth weren't much of a fit.  I had to do a kind of sawing movement
before I could get my teeth through the skin.  And then suddenly--
pop!  The thing burst in my mouth like a rotten pear.  A sort of
horrible soft stuff was oozing all over my tongue.  But the taste!
For a moment I just couldn't believe it.  Then I rolled my tongue
round it again and had another try.  It was FISH!  A sausage, a
thing calling itself a frankfurter, filled with fish!  I got up and
walked straight out without touching my coffee.  God knows what
that might have tasted of.

Outside the newsboy shoved the Standard into my face and yelled,
'Legs!  'Orrible revelations!  All the winners!  Legs!  Legs!'  I
was still rolling the stuff round my tongue, wondering where I
could spit it out.  I remembered a bit I'd read in the paper
somewhere about these food-factories in Germany where everything's
made out of something else.  Ersatz, they call it.  I remembered
reading that THEY were making sausages out of fish, and fish, no
doubt, out of something different.  It gave me the feeling that I'd
bitten into the modern world and discovered what it was really made
of.  That's the way we're going nowadays.  Everything slick and
streamlined, everything made out of something else.  Celluloid,
rubber, chromium-steel everywhere, arc-lamps blazing all night,
glass roofs over your head, radios all playing the same tune, no
vegetation left, everything cemented over, mock-turtles grazing
under the neutral fruit-trees.  But when you come down to brass
tacks and get your teeth into something solid, a sausage for
instance, that's what you get.  Rotten fish in a rubber skin.
Bombs of filth bursting inside your mouth.

When I'd got the new teeth in I felt a lot better.  They sat nice
and smooth over the gums, and though very likely it sounds absurd
to say that false teeth can make you feel younger, it's a fact that
they did so.  I tried a smile at myself in a shop window.  They
weren't half bad.  Warner, though cheap, is a bit of an artist and
doesn't aim at making you look like a toothpaste advert.  He's got
huge cabinets full of false teeth--he showed them to me once--all
graded according to size and colour, and he picks them out like a
jeweller choosing stones for a necklace.  Nine people out of ten
would have taken my teeth for natural.

I caught a full-length glimpse of myself in another window I was
passing, and it struck me that really I wasn't such a bad figure of
a man.  A bit on the fat side, admittedly, but nothing offensive,
only what the tailors call a 'full figure', and some women like a
man to have a red face.  There's life in the old dog yet, I
thought.  I remembered my seventeen quid, and definitely made up my
mind that I'd spend it on a woman.  There was time to have a pint
before the pubs shut, just to baptize the teeth, and feeling rich
because of my seventeen quid I stopped at a tobacconist's and
bought myself a sixpenny cigar of a kind I'm rather partial to.
They're eight inches long and guaranteed pure Havana leaf all
through.  I suppose cabbages grow in Havana the same as anywhere
else.

When I came out of the pub I felt quite different.

I'd had a couple of pints, they'd warmed me up inside, and the
cigar smoke oozing round my new teeth gave me a fresh, clean,
peaceful sort of feeling.  All of a sudden I felt kind of
thoughtful and philosophic.  It was partly because I didn't have
any work to do.  My mind went back to the thoughts of war I'd been
having earlier that morning, when the bomber flew over the train.
I felt in a kind of prophetic mood, the mood in which you foresee
the end of the world and get a certain kick out of it.

I was walking westward up the Strand, and though it was coldish I
went slowly to get the pleasure of my cigar.  The usual crowd that
you can hardly fight your way through was streaming up the
pavement, all of them with that insane fixed expression on their
faces that people have in London streets, and there was the usual
jam of traffic with the great red buses nosing their way between
the cars, and the engines roaring and horns tooting.  Enough noise
to waken the dead, but not to waken this lot, I thought.  I felt as
if I was the only person awake in a city of sleep-walkers.  That's
an illusion, of course.  When you walk through a crowd of strangers
it's next door to impossible not to imagine that they're all
waxworks, but probably they're thinking just the same about you.
And this kind of prophetic feeling that keeps coming over me
nowadays, the feeling that war's just round the corner and that
war's the end of all things, isn't peculiar to me.  We've all got
it, more or less.  I suppose even among the people passing at that
moment there must have been chaps who were seeing mental pictures
of the shellbursts and the mud.  Whatever thought you think there's
always a million people thinking it at the same moment.  But that
was how I felt.  We're all on the burning deck and nobody knows it
except me.  I looked at the dumb-bell faces streaming past.  Like
turkeys in November, I thought.  Not a notion of what's coming to
them.  It was as if I'd got X-rays in my eyes and could see the
skeletons walking.

I looked forward a few years.  I saw this street as it'll be in
five years' time, say, or three years' time (1941 they say it's
booked for), after the fighting's started.

No, not all smashed to pieces.  Only a little altered, kind of
chipped and dirty-looking, the shop-windows almost empty and so
dusty that you can't see into them.  Down a side street there's an
enormous bomb-crater and a block of buildings burnt out so that it
looks like a hollow tooth.  Thermite.  It's all curiously quiet,
and everyone's very thin.  A platoon of soldiers comes marching up
the street.  They're all as thin as rakes and their boots are
dragging.  The sergeant's got corkscrew moustaches and holds
himself like a ramrod, but he's thin too and he's got a cough that
almost tears him open.  Between his coughs he's trying to bawl at
them in the old parade-ground style.  'Nah then, Jones!  Lift yer
'ed up!  What yer keep starin' at the ground for?  All them fag-
ends was picked up years ago.'  Suddenly a fit of coughing catches
him.  He tries to stop it, can't, doubles up like a ruler, and
almost coughs his guts out.  His face turns pink and purple, his
moustache goes limp, and the water runs out of his eyes.

I can hear the air-raid sirens blowing and the loud-speakers
bellowing that our glorious troops have taken a hundred thousand
prisoners.  I see a top-floor-back in Birmingham and a child of
five howling and howling for a bit of bread.  And suddenly the
mother can't stand it any longer, and she yells at it, 'Shut your
trap, you little bastard!' and then she ups the child's frock and
smacks its bottom hard, because there isn't any bread and isn't
going to be any bread.  I see it all.  I see the posters and the
food-queues, and the castor oil and the rubber truncheons and the
machine-guns squirting out of bedroom windows.

Is it going to happen?  No knowing.  Some days it's impossible to
believe it.  Some days I say to myself that it's just a scare got
up by the newspapers.  Some days I know in my bones there's no
escaping it.

When I got down near Charing Cross the boys were yelling a later
edition of the evening papers.  There was some more drivel about
the murder.  LEGS.  FAMOUS SURGEON'S STATEMENT.  Then another
poster caught my eye:  KING ZOG'S WEDDING POSTPONED.  King Zog!
What a name!  It's next door to impossible to believe a chap with a
name like that isn't a jet-black Negro.

But just at that moment a queer thing happened.  King Zog's name--
but I suppose, as I'd already seen the name several times that day,
it was mixed up with some sound in the traffic or the smell of
horse-dung or something--had started memories in me.

The past is a curious thing.  It's with you all the time.  I
suppose an hour never passes without your thinking of things that
happened ten or twenty years ago, and yet most of the time it's got
no reality, it's just a set of facts that you've learned, like a
lot of stuff in a history book.  Then some chance sight or sound or
smell, especially smell, sets you going, and the past doesn't
merely come back to you, you're actually IN the past.  It was like
that at this moment.

I was back in the parish church at Lower Binfield, and it was
thirty-eight years ago.  To outward appearances, I suppose, I was
still walking down the Strand, fat and forty-five, with false teeth
and a bowler hat, but inside me I was Georgie Bowling, aged seven,
younger son of Samuel Bowling, corn and seed merchant, of 57 High
Street, Lower Binfield.  And it was Sunday morning, and I could
smell the church.  How I could smell it!  You know the smell
churches have, a peculiar, dank, dusty, decaying, sweetish sort of
smell.  There's a touch of candle-grease in it, and perhaps a whiff
of incense and a suspicion of mice, and on Sunday mornings it's a
bit overlaid by yellow soap and serge dresses, but predominantly
it's that sweet, dusty, musty smell that's like the smell of death
and life mixed up together.  It's powdered corpses, really.

In those days I was about four feet high.  I was standing on the
hassock so as to see over the pew in front, and I could feel
Mother's black serge dress under my hand.  I could also feel my
stockings pulled up over my knees--we used to wear them like that
then--and the saw edge of the Eton collar they used to buckle me
into on Sunday mornings.  And I could hear the organ wheezing and
two enormous voices bellowing out the psalm.  In our church there
were two men who led the singing, in fact they did so much of the
singing that nobody else got much of a chance.  One was Shooter,
the fishmonger, and the other was old Wetherall, the joiner and
undertaker.  They used to sit opposite one another on either side
of the nave, in the pews nearest the pulpit.  Shooter was a short
fat man with a very pink, smooth face, a big nose, drooping
moustache, and a chin that kind of fell away beneath his mouth.
Wetherall was quite different.  He was a great, gaunt, powerful old
devil of about sixty, with a face like a death's-head and stiff
grey hair half an inch long all over his head.  I've never seen a
living man who looked so exactly like a skeleton.  You could see
every line of the skull in his face, his skin was like parchment,
and his great lantern jaw full of yellow teeth worked up and down
just like the jaw of a skeleton in an anatomical museum.  And yet
with all his leanness he looked as strong as iron, as though he'd
live to be a hundred and make coffins for everyone in that church
before he'd finished.  Their voices were quite different, too.
Shooter had a kind of desperate, agonized bellow, as though someone
had a knife at his throat and he was just letting out his last yell
for help.  But Wetherall had a tremendous, churning, rumbling noise
that happened deep down inside him, like enormous barrels being
rolled to and fro underground.  However much noise he let out, you
always knew he'd got plenty more in reserve.  The kids nicknamed
him Rumbletummy.

They used to get up a kind of antiphonal effect, especially in the
psalms.  It was always Wetherall who had the last word.  I suppose
really they were friends in private life, but in my kid's way I
used to imagine that they were deadly enemies and trying to shout
one another down.  Shooter would roar out 'The Lord is my
shepherd', and then Wetherall would come in with 'Therefore can I
lack nothing', drowning him completely.  You always knew which of
the two was master.  I used especially to look forward to that
psalm that has the bit about Sihon king of the Amorites and Og the
king of Bashan (this was what King Zog's name had reminded me of).
Shooter would start off with 'Sihon king of the Amorites', then
perhaps for half a second you could hear the rest of the
congregation singing the 'and', and then Wetherall's enormous bass
would come in like a tidal wave and swallow everybody up with 'Og
the king of Bashan'.  I wish I could make you hear the tremendous,
rumbling, subterranean barrel-noise that he could get into that
word 'Og'.  He even used to clip off the end of the 'and', so that
when I was a very small kid I used to think it was Dog the king of
Bashan.  But later, when I got the names right, I formed a picture
in my mind's eye of Sihon and Og.  I saw them as a couple of those
great Egyptian statues that I'd seen pictures of in the penny
encyclopedia, enormous stone statues thirty feet high, sitting on
their thrones opposite one another, with their hands on their knees
and a faint mysterious smile on their faces.

How it came back to me!  That peculiar feeling--it was only a
feeling, you couldn't describe it as an activity--that we used to
call 'Church'.  The sweet corpsy smell, the rustle of Sunday
dresses, the wheeze of the organ and the roaring voices, the spot
of light from the hole in the window creeping slowly up the nave.
In some way the grown-ups could put it across that this extraordinary
performance was necessary.  You took it for granted, just as you
took the Bible, which you got in big doses in those days.  There
were texts on every wall and you knew whole chapters of the O.T. by
heart.  Even now my head's stuffed full of bits out of the Bible.
And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord.
And Asher abode in his breeches.  Followed them from Dan until thou
come unto Beersheba.  Smote him under the fifth rib, so that he
died.  You never understood it, you didn't try to or want to, it was
just a kind of medicine, a queer-tasting stuff that you had to
swallow and knew to be in some way necessary.  An extraordinary
rigmarole about people with names like Shimei and Nebuchadnezzar and
Ahithophel and Hashbadada; people with long stiff garments and
Assyrian beards, riding up and down on camels among temples and
cedar trees and doing extraordinary things.  Sacrificing burnt
offerings, walking about in fiery furnaces, getting nailed on
crosses, getting swallowed by whales.  And all mixed up with the
sweet graveyard smell and the serge dresses and the wheeze of the
organ.

That was the world I went back to when I saw the poster about King
Zog.  For a moment I didn't merely remember it, I was IN it.  Of
course such impressions don't last more than a few seconds.  A
moment later it was as though I'd opened my eyes again, and I was
forty-five and there was a traffic jam in the Strand.  But it had
left a kind of after-effect behind.  Sometimes when you come out of
a train of thought you feel as if you were coming up from deep
water, but this time it was the other way about, it was as though
it was back in 1900 that I'd been breathing real air.  Even now,
with my eyes open, so to speak, all those bloody fools hustling to
and fro, and the posters and the petrol-stink and the roar of the
engines, seemed to me less real than Sunday morning in Lower
Binfield thirty-eight years ago.

I chucked away my cigar and walked on slowly.  I could smell the
corpse-smell.  In a manner of speaking I can smell it now.  I'm
back in Lower Binfield, and the year's 1900.  Beside the horse-
trough in the market-place the carrier's horse is having its nose-
bag.  At the sweet-shop on the corner Mother Wheeler is weighing
out a ha'porth of brandy balls.  Lady Rampling's carriage is
driving by, with the tiger sitting behind in his pipeclayed
breeches with his arms folded.  Uncle Ezekiel is cursing Joe
Chamberlain.  The recruiting-sergeant in his scarlet jacket, tight
blue overalls, and pillbox hat, is strutting up and down twisting
his moustache.  The drunks are puking in the yard behind the
George.  Vicky's at Windsor, God's in heaven, Christ's on the
cross, Jonah's in the whale, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego are in
the fiery furnace, and Sihon king of the Amorites and Og the king
of Bashan are sitting on their thrones looking at one another--not
doing anything exactly, just existing, keeping their appointed
place, like a couple of fire-dogs, or the Lion and the Unicorn.

Is it gone for ever?  I'm not certain.  But I tell you it was a
good world to live in.  I belong to it.  So do you.




PART II



1


The world I momentarily remembered when I saw King Zog's name on
the poster was so different from the world I live in now that you
might have a bit of difficulty in believing I ever belonged to it.

I suppose by this time you've got a kind of picture of me in your
mind--a fat middle-aged bloke with false teeth and a red face--and
subconsciously you've been imagining that I was just the same even
when I was in my cradle.  But forty-five years is a long time, and
though some people don't change and develop, others do.  I've
changed a great deal, and I've had my ups and downs, mostly ups.
It may seem queer, but my father would probably be rather proud of
me if he could see me now.  He'd think it a wonderful thing that a
son of his should own a motor-car and live in a house with a
bathroom.  Even now I'm a little above my origin, and at other
times I've touched levels that we should never have dreamed of in
those old days before the war.

Before the war!  How long shall we go on saying that, I wonder?
How long before the answer will be 'Which war?'  In my case the
never-never land that people are thinking of when they say 'before
the war' might almost be before the Boer War.  I was born in '93,
and I can actually remember the outbreak of the Boer War, because
of the first-class row that Father and Uncle Ezekiel had about it.
I've several other memories that would date from about a year
earlier than that.

The very first thing I remember is the smell of sainfoin chaff.
You went up the stone passage that led from the kitchen to the
shop, and the smell of sainfoin got stronger all the way.  Mother
had fixed a wooden gate in the doorway to prevent Joe and myself
(Joe was my elder brother) from getting into the shop.  I can still
remember standing there clutching the bars, and the smell of
sainfoin mixed up with the damp plastery smell that belonged to the
passage.  It wasn't till years later that I somehow managed to
crash the gate and get into the shop when nobody was there.  A
mouse that had been having a go at one of the meal-bins suddenly
plopped out and ran between my feet.  It was quite white with meal.
This must have happened when I was about six.

When you're very young you seem to suddenly become conscious of
things that have been under your nose for a long time past.  The
things round about you swim into your mind one at a time, rather as
they do when you're waking from sleep.  For instance, it was only
when I was nearly four that I suddenly realized that we owned a
dog.  Nailer, his name was, an old white English terrier of the
breed that's gone out nowadays.  I met him under the kitchen table
and in some way seemed to grasp, having only learnt it that moment,
that he belonged to us and that his name was Nailer.  In the same
way, a bit earlier, I'd discovered that beyond the gate at the end
of the passage there was a place where the smell of sainfoin came
from.  And the shop itself, with the huge scales and the wooden
measures and the tin shovel, and the white lettering on the window,
and the bullfinch in its cage--which you couldn't see very well
even from the pavement, because the window was always dusty--all
these things dropped into place in my mind one by one, like bits of
a jig-saw puzzle.

Time goes on, you get stronger on your legs, and by degrees you
begin to get a grasp of geography.  I suppose Lower Binfield was
just like any other market town of about two thousand inhabitants.
It was in Oxfordshire--I keep saying WAS, you notice, though after
all the place still exists--about five miles from the Thames.  It
lay in a bit of a valley, with a low ripple of hills between itself
and the Thames, and higher hills behind.  On top of the hills there
were woods in sort of dim blue masses among which you could see a
great white house with a colonnade.  This was Binfield House ('The
Hall', everybody called it), and the top of the hill was known as
Upper Binfield, though there was no village there and hadn't been
for a hundred years or more.  I must have been nearly seven before
I noticed the existence of Binfield House.  When you're very small
you don't look into the distance.  But by that time I knew every
inch of the town, which was shaped roughly like a cross with the
market-place in the middle.  Our shop was in the High Street a
little before you got to the market-place, and on the corner there
was Mrs Wheeler's sweet-shop where you spent a halfpenny when you
had one.  Mother Wheeler was a dirty old witch and people suspected
her of sucking the bull's-eyes and putting them back in the bottle,
though this was never proved.  Farther down there was the barber's
shop with the advert for Abdulla cigarettes--the one with the
Egyptian soldiers on it, and curiously enough they're using the
same advert to this day--and the rich boozy smell of bay rum and
latakia.  Behind the houses you could see the chimneys of the
brewery.  In the middle of the market-place there was the stone
horse-trough, and on top of the water there was always a fine film
of dust and chaff.

Before the war, and especially before the Boer War, it was summer
all the year round.  I'm quite aware that that's a delusion.  I'm
merely trying to tell you how things come back to me.  If I shut my
eyes and think of Lower Binfield any time before I was, say, eight,
it's always in summer weather that I remember it.  Either it's the
market-place at dinner-time, with a sort of sleepy dusty hush over
everything and the carrier's horse with his nose dug well into his
nose-bag, munching away, or it's a hot afternoon in the great green
juicy meadows round the town, or it's about dusk in the lane behind
the allotments, and there's a smell of pipe-tobacco and night-
stocks floating through the hedge.  But in a sense I do remember
different seasons, because all my memories are bound up with things
to eat, which varied at different times of the year.  Especially
the things you used to find in the hedges.  In July there were
dewberries--but they're very rare--and the blackberries were
getting red enough to eat.  In September there were sloes and
hazel-nuts.  The best hazelnuts were always out of reach.  Later on
there were beech-nuts and crab-apples.  Then there were the kind of
minor foods that you used to eat when there was nothing better
going.  Haws--but they're not much good--and hips, which have a
nice sharp taste if you clean the hairs out of them.  Angelica is
good in early summer, especially when you're thirsty, and so are
the stems of various grasses.  Then there's sorrel, which is good
with bread and butter, and pig-nuts, and a kind of wood shamrock
which has a sour taste.  Even plantain seeds are better than
nothing when you're a long way from home and very hungry.

Joe was two years older than myself.  When we were very small
Mother used to pay Katie Simmons eighteen pence a week to take us
out for walks in the afternoons.  Katie's father worked in the
brewery and had fourteen children, so that the family were always
on the lookout for odd jobs.  She was only twelve when Joe was
seven and I was five, and her mental level wasn't very different
from ours.  She used to drag me by the arm and call me 'Baby', and
she had just enough authority over us to prevent us from being run
over by dogcarts or chased by bulls, but so far as conversation
went we were almost on equal terms.  We used to go for long,
trailing kind of walks--always, of course, picking and eating
things all the way--down the lane past the allotments, across
Roper's Meadows, and down to the Mill Farm, where there was a pool
with newts and tiny carp in it (Joe and I used to go fishing there
when we were a bit older), and back by the Upper Binfield Road so
as to pass the sweet-shop that stood on the edge of the town.  This
shop was in such a bad position that anyone who took it went
bankrupt, and to my own knowledge it was three times a sweet-shop,
once a grocer's, and once a bicycle-repair shop, but it had a
peculiar fascination for children.  Even when we had no money, we'd
go that way so as to glue our noses against the window.  Katie
wasn't in the least above sharing a farthing's worth of sweets and
quarrelling over her share.  You could buy things worth having for
a farthing in those days.  Most sweets were four ounces a penny,
and there was even some stuff called Paradise Mixture, mostly
broken sweets from other bottles, which was six.  Then there were
Farthing Everlastings, which were a yard long and couldn't be
finished inside half an hour.  Sugar mice and sugar pigs were eight
a penny, and so were liquorice pistols, popcorn was a halfpenny for
a large bag, and a prize packet which contained several different
kinds of sweets, a gold ring, and sometimes a whistle, was a penny.
You don't see prize packets nowadays.  A whole lot of the kinds of
sweets we had in those days have gone out.  There was a kind of
flat white sweet with mottoes printed on them, and also a kind of
sticky pink stuff in an oval matchwood box with a tiny tin spoon to
eat it with, which cost a halfpenny.  Both of those have disappeared.
So have Caraway Comfits, and so have chocolate pipes and sugar
matches, and even Hundreds and Thousands you hardly ever see.
Hundreds and Thousands were a great standby when you'd only a
farthing.  And what about Penny Monsters?  Does one ever see a Penny
Monster nowadays?  It was a huge bottle, holding more than a quart
of fizzy lemonade, all for a penny.  That's another thing that the
war killed stone dead.

It always seems to be summer when I look back.  I can feel the
grass round me as tall as myself, and the heat coming out of the
earth.  And the dust in the lane, and the warm greeny light coming
through the hazel boughs.  I can see the three of us trailing
along, eating stuff out of the hedge, with Katie dragging at my arm
and saying 'Come on, Baby!' and sometimes yelling ahead to Joe,
'Joe!  You come back 'ere this minute!  You'll catch it!'  Joe was
a hefty boy with a big, lumpy sort of head and tremendous calves,
the kind of boy who's always doing something dangerous.  At seven
he'd already got into short trousers, with the thick black
stockings drawn up over the knee and the great clumping boots that
boys had to wear in those days.  I was still in frocks--a kind of
holland overall that Mother used to make for me.  Katie used to
wear a dreadful ragged parody of a grown-up dress that descended
from sister to sister in her family.  She had a ridiculous great
hat with her pigtails hanging down behind it, and a long, draggled
skirt which trailed on the ground, and button boots with the heels
trodden down.  She was a tiny thing, not much taller than Joe, but
not bad at 'minding' children.  In a family like that a child is
'minding' other children about as soon as it's weaned.  At times
she'd try to be grown-up and ladylike, and she had a way of cutting
you short with a proverb, which to her mind was something
unanswerable.  If you said 'Don't care', she'd answer immediately:


'Don't care was made to care,
Don't care was hung,
Don't care was put in a pot
And boiled till he was done.'


Or if you called her names it would be 'Hard words break no bones',
or, when you'd been boasting, 'Pride comes before a fall'.  This
came very true one day when I was strutting along pretending to be
a soldier and fell into a cowpat.  Her family lived in a filthy
little rat-hole of a place in the slummy street behind the brewery.
The place swarmed with children like a kind of vermin.  The whole
family had managed to dodge going to school, which was fairly easy
to do in those days, and started running errands and doing other
odd jobs as soon as they could walk.  One of the elder brothers got
a month for stealing turnips.  She stopped taking us out for walks
a year later when Joe was eight and getting too tough for a girl to
handle.  He'd discovered that in Katie's home they slept five in a
bed, and used to tease the life out of her about it.

Poor Katie!  She had her first baby when she was fifteen.  No one
knew who was the father, and probably Katie wasn't too certain
herself.  Most people believe it was one of her brothers.  The
workhouse people took the baby, and Katie went into service in
Walton.  Some time afterwards she married a tinker, which even by
the standards of her family was a come-down.  The last time I saw
her was in 1913.  I was biking through Walton, and I passed some
dreadful wooden shacks beside the railway line, with fences round
them made out of barrel-staves, where the gypsies used to camp at
certain times of the year, when the police would let them.  A
wrinkled-up hag of a woman, with her hair coming down and a smoky
face, looking at least fifty years old, came out of one of the huts
and began shaking out a rag mat.  It was Katie, who must have been
twenty-seven.



2


Thursday was market day.  Chaps with round red faces like pumpkins
and dirty smocks and huge boots covered with dry cow-dung, carrying
long hazel switches, used to drive their brutes into the market-
place early in the morning.  For hours there'd be a terrific
hullabaloo: dogs barking, pigs squealing, chaps in tradesmen's vans
who wanted to get through the crush cracking their whips and
cursing, and everyone who had anything to do with the cattle
shouting and throwing sticks.  The big noise was always when they
brought a bull to market.  Even at that age it struck me that most
of the bulls were harmless law-abiding brutes that only wanted to
get to their stalls in peace, but a bull wouldn't have been
regarded as a bull if half the town hadn't had to turn out and
chase it.  Sometimes some terrified brute, generally a half-grown
heifer, used to break loose and charge down a side street, and then
anyone who happened to be in the way would stand in the middle of
the road and swing his arms backwards like the sails of a windmill,
shouting, 'Woo! Woo!'  This was supposed to have a kind of hypnotic
effect on an animal and certainly it did frighten them.

Half-way through the morning some of the farmers would come into
the shop and run samples of seed through their fingers.  Actually
Father did very little business with the farmers, because he had no
delivery van and couldn't afford to give long credits.  Mostly he
did a rather petty class of business, poultry food and fodder for
the tradesmen's horses and so forth.  Old Brewer, of the Mill Farm,
who was a stingy old bastard with a grey chin-beard, used to stand
there for half an hour, fingering samples of chicken corn and
letting them drop into his pocket in an absent-minded manner, after
which, of course, he finally used to make off without buying
anything.  In the evenings the pubs were full of drunken men.  In
those days beer cost twopence a pint, and unlike the beer nowadays
it had some guts in it.  All through the Boer War the recruiting
sergeant used to be in the four-ale bar of the George every
Thursday and Saturday night, dressed up to the nines and very free
with his money.  Sometimes next morning you'd see him leading off
some great sheepish, red-faced lump of a farm lad who'd taken the
shilling when he was too drunk to see and found in the morning that
it would cost him twenty pounds to get out of it.  People used to
stand in their doorways and shake their heads when they saw them go
past, almost as if it had been a funeral.  'Well now!  Listed for a
soldier!  Just think of it!  A fine young fellow like that!'  It
just shocked them.  Listing for a soldier, in their eyes, was the
exact equivalent of a girl's going on the streets.  Their attitude
to the war, and to the Army, was very curious.  They had the good
old English notions that the red-coats are the scum of the earth
and anyone who joins the Army will die of drink and go straight to
hell, but at the same time they were good patriots, stuck Union
Jacks in their windows, and held it as an article of faith that the
English had never been beaten in battle and never could be.  At
that time everyone, even the Nonconformists, used to sing
sentimental songs about the thin red line and the soldier boy who
died on the battlefield far away.  These soldier boys always used
to die 'when the shot and shell were flying', I remember.  It
puzzled me as a kid.  Shot I could understand, but it produced a
queer picture in my mind to think of cockle-shells flying through
the air.  When Mafeking was relieved the people nearly yelled the
roof off, and there were at any rate times when they believed the
tales about the Boers chucking babies into the air and skewering
them on their bayonets.  Old Brewer got so fed up with the kids
yelling 'Krooger!' after him that towards the end of the war he
shaved his beard off.  The people's attitude towards the Government
was really the same.  They were all true-blue Englishmen and swore
that Vicky was the best queen that ever lived and foreigners were
dirt, but at the same time nobody ever thought of paying a tax, not
even a dog-licence, if there was any way of dodging it.

Before and after the war Lower Binfield was a Liberal constituency.
During the war there was a by-election which the Conservatives won.
I was too young to grasp what it was all about, I only knew that I
was a Conservative because I liked the blue streamers better than
the red ones, and I chiefly remember it because of a drunken man
who fell on his nose on the pavement outside the George.  In the
general excitement nobody took any notice of him, and he lay there
for hours in the hot sun with his blood drying round him, and when
it dried it was purple.  By the time the 1906 election came along I
was old enough to understand it, more or less, and this time I was
a Liberal because everybody else was.  The people chased the
Conservative candidate half a mile and threw him into a pond full
of duckweed.  People took politics seriously in those days.  They
used to begin storing up rotten eggs weeks before an election.

Very early in life, when the Boer War broke out, I remember the big
row between Father and Uncle Ezekiel.  Uncle Ezekiel had a little
boot-shop in one of the streets off the High Street, and also did
some cobbling.  It was a small business and tended to get smaller,
which didn't matter greatly because Uncle Ezekiel wasn't married.
He was only a half-brother and much older than Father, twenty years
older at least, and for the fifteen years or so that I knew him he
always looked exactly the same.  He was a fine-looking old chap,
rather tall, with white hair and the whitest whiskers I ever saw--
white as thistledown.  He had a way of slapping his leather apron
and standing up very straight--a reaction from bending over the
last, I suppose--after which he'd bark his opinions straight in
your face, ending up with a sort of ghostly cackle.  He was a real
old nineteenth-century Liberal, the kind that not only used to ask
you what Gladstone said in '78 but could tell you the answer, and
one of the very few people in Lower Binfield who stuck to the same
opinions all through the war.  He was always denouncing Joe
Chamberlain and some gang of people that he referred to as 'the
Park Lane riff-raff'.  I can hear him now, having one of his
arguments with Father.  'Them and their far-flung Empire!  Can't
fling it too far for me.  He-he-he!'  And then Father's voice, a
quiet, worried, conscientious kind of voice, coming back at him
with the white man's burden and our dooty to the pore blacks whom
these here Boars treated something shameful.  For a week or so
after Uncle Ezekiel gave it out that he was a pro-Boer and a Little
Englander they were hardly on speaking terms.  They had another row
when the atrocity stories started.  Father was very worried by the
tales he'd heard, and he tackled Uncle Ezekiel about it.  Little
Englander or no, surely he couldn't think it right for these here
Boars to throw babies in the air and catch them on their bayonets,
even if they WERE only nigger babies?  But Uncle Ezekiel just
laughed in his face.  Father had got it all wrong!  It wasn't the
Boars who threw babies in the air, it was the British soldiers!
He kept grabbing hold of me--I must have been about five--to
illustrate.  'Throw them in the air and skewer them like frogs, I
tell you!  Same as I might throw this youngster here!'  And then
he'd swing me up and almost let go of me, and I had a vivid picture
of myself flying through the air and landing plonk on the end of a
bayonet.

Father was quite different from Uncle Ezekiel.  I don't know much
about my grandparents, they were dead before I was born, I only
know that my grandfather had been a cobbler and late in life he
married the widow of a seedsman, which was how we came to have the
shop.  It was a job that didn't really suit Father, though he knew
the business inside out and was everlastingly working.  Except on
Sunday and very occasionally on week-day evenings I never remember
him without meal on the backs of his hands and in the lines of his
face and in what was left of his hair.  He'd married when he was in
his thirties and must have been nearly forty when I first remember
him.  He was a small man, a sort of grey, quiet little man, always
in shirtsleeves and white apron and always dusty-looking because of
the meal.  He had a round head, a blunt nose, a rather bushy
moustache, spectacles, and butter-coloured hair, the same colour
as mine, but he'd lost most of it and it was always mealy.  My
grandfather had bettered himself a good deal by marrying the
seedsman's widow, and Father had been educated at Walton Grammar
School, where the farmers and the better-off tradesmen sent their
sons, whereas Uncle Ezekiel liked to boast that he'd never been to
school in his life and had taught himself to read by a tallow
candle after working hours.  But he was a much quicker-witted man
than Father, he could argue with anybody, and he used to quote
Carlyle and Spencer by the yard.  Father had a slow sort of mind,
he'd never taken to 'book-learning', as he called it, and his
English wasn't good.  On Sunday afternoons, the only time when he
really took things easy, he'd settle down by the parlour fireplace
to have what he called a 'good read' at the Sunday paper.  His
favourite paper was The People--Mother preferred the News of the
World, which she considered had more murders in it.  I can see them
now.  A Sunday afternoon--summer, of course, always summer--a smell
of roast pork and greens still floating in the air, and Mother on
one side of the fireplace, starting off to read the latest murder
but gradually falling asleep with her mouth open, and Father on the
other, in slippers and spectacles, working his way slowly through
the yards of smudgy print.  And the soft feeling of summer all
round you, the geranium in the window, a starling cooing somewhere,
and myself under the table with the B.O.P., making believe that the
tablecloth is a tent.  Afterwards, at tea, as he chewed his way
through the radishes and spring onions, Father would talk in a
ruminative kind of way about the stuff he'd been reading, the fires
and shipwrecks and scandals in high society, and these here new
flying machines and the chap (I notice that to this day he turns up
in the Sunday papers about once in three years) who was swallowed
by a whale in the Red Sea and taken out three days later, alive but
bleached white by the whale's gastric juice.  Father was always a
bit sceptical of this story, and of the new flying machines,
otherwise he believed everything he read.  Until 1909 no one in
Lower Binfield believed that human beings would ever learn to fly.
The official doctrine was that if God had meant us to fly He'd have
given us wings.  Uncle Ezekiel couldn't help retorting that if God
had meant us to ride He'd have given us wheels, but even he didn't
believe in the new flying machines.

It was only on Sunday afternoons, and perhaps on the one evening a
week when he looked in at the George for a half-pint, that Father
turned his mind to such things.  At other times he was always more
or less overwhelmed by business.  There wasn't really such a lot to
do, but he seemed to be always busy, either in the loft behind the
yard, struggling about with sacks and bales, or in the kind of
dusty little cubby-hole behind the counter in the shop, adding
figures up in a notebook with a stump of pencil.  He was a very
honest man and a very obliging man, very anxious to provide good
stuff and swindle nobody, which even in those days wasn't the best
way to get on in business.  He would have been just the man for
some small official job, a postmaster, for instance, or station-
master of a country station.  But he hadn't either the cheek and
enterprise to borrow money and expand the business, or the
imagination to think of new selling-lines.  It was characteristic
of him that the only streak of imagination he ever showed, the
invention of a new seed mixture for cage-birds (Bowling's Mixture
it was called, and it was famous over a radius of nearly five
miles) was really due to Uncle Ezekiel.  Uncle Ezekiel was a bit of
a bird-fancier and had quantities of goldfinches in his dark little
shop.  It was his theory that cage-birds lose their colour because
of lack of variation in their diet.  In the yard behind the shop
Father had a tiny plot of ground in which he used to grow about
twenty kinds of weed under wire-netting, and he used to dry them
and mix their seeds with ordinary canary seed.  Jackie, the
bullfinch who hung in the shop-window, was supposed to be an
advertisement for Bowling's Mixture.  Certainly, unlike most
bullfinches in cages, Jackie never turned black.

Mother was fat ever since I remember her.  No doubt it's from her
that I inherit my pituitary deficiency, or whatever it is that
makes you get fat.

She was a largish woman, a bit taller than Father, with hair a good
deal fairer than his and a tendency to wear black dresses.  But
except on Sundays I never remember her without an apron.  It would
be an exaggeration, but not a very big one, to say that I never
remember her when she wasn't cooking.  When you look back over a
long period you seem to see human beings always fixed in some
special place and some characteristic attitude.  It seems to you
that they were always doing exactly the same thing.  Well, just as
when I think of Father I remember him always behind the counter,
with his hair all mealy, adding up figures with a stump of pencil
which he moistens between his lips, and just as I remember Uncle
Ezekiel, with his ghostly white whiskers, straightening himself out
and slapping his leather apron, so when I think of Mother I
remember her at the kitchen table, with her forearms covered with
flour, rolling out a lump of dough.

You know the kind of kitchen people had in those days.  A huge
place, rather dark and low, with a great beam across the ceiling
and a stone floor and cellars underneath.  Everything enormous, or
so it seemed to me when I was a kid.  A vast stone sink which
didn't have a tap but an iron pump, a dresser covering one wall and
going right up to the ceiling, a gigantic range which burned half a
ton a month and took God knows how long to blacklead.  Mother at
the table rolling out a huge flap of dough.  And myself crawling
round, messing about with bundles of firewood and lumps of coal and
tin beetle-traps (we had them in all the dark corners and they used
to be baited with beer) and now and again coming up to the table to
try and cadge a bit of food.  Mother 'didn't hold with' eating
between meals.  You generally got the same answer:  'Get along with
you, now!  I'm not going to have you spoiling your dinner.  Your
eye's bigger than your belly.'  Very occasionally, however, she'd
cut you off a thin strip of candied peel.

I used to like to watch Mother rolling pastry.  There's always a
fascination in watching anybody do a job which he really
understands.  Watch a woman--a woman who really knows how to cook,
I mean--rolling dough.  She's got a peculiar, solemn, indrawn air,
a satisfied kind of air, like a priestess celebrating a sacred
rite.  And in her own mind, of course, that's exactly what she is.
Mother had thick, pink, strong forearms which were generally
mottled with flour.  When she was cooking, all her movements were
wonderfully precise and firm.  In her hands egg-whisks and mincers
and rolling-pins did exactly what they were meant to do.  When you
saw her cooking you knew that she was in a world where she
belonged, among things she really understood.  Except through the
Sunday papers and an occasional bit of gossip the outside world
didn't really exist for her.  Although she read more easily than
Father, and unlike him used to read novelettes as well as
newspapers, she was unbelievably ignorant.  I realized this even by
the time I was ten years old.  She certainly couldn't have told you
whether Ireland was east or west of England, and I doubt whether
any time up to the outbreak of the Great War she could have told
you who was Prime Minister.  Moreover she hadn't the smallest wish
to know such things.  Later on when I read books about Eastern
countries where they practise polygamy, and the secret harems where
the women are locked up with black eunuchs mounting guard over
them, I used to think how shocked Mother would have been if she'd
heard of it.  I can almost hear her voice--'Well, now!  Shutting
their wives up like that!  The IDEA!'  Not that she'd have known
what a eunuch was.  But in reality she lived her life in a space
that must have been as small and almost as private as the average
zenana.  Even in our own house there were parts where she never set
foot.  She never went into the loft behind the yard and very seldom
into the shop.  I don't think I ever remember her serving a
customer.  She wouldn't have known where any of the things were
kept, and until they were milled into flour she probably didn't
know the difference between wheat and oats.  Why should she?  The
shop was Father's business, it was 'the man's work', and even about
the money side of it she hadn't very much curiosity.  Her job, 'the
woman's work', was to look after the house and the meals and the
laundry and the children.  She'd have had a fit if she'd seen
Father or anyone else of the male sex trying to sew on a button for
himself.

So far as the meals and so forth went, ours was one of those houses
where everything goes like clockwork.  Or no, not like clockwork,
which suggests something mechanical.  It was more like some kind of
natural process.  You knew that breakfast would be on the table
tomorrow morning in much the same way as you knew the sun would
rise.  All through her life Mother went to bed at nine and got up
at five, and she'd have thought it vaguely wicked--sort of decadent
and foreign and aristocratic--to keep later hours.  Although she
didn't mind paying Katie Simmons to take Joe and me out for walks,
she would never tolerate the idea of having a woman in to help with
the housework.  It was her firm belief that a hired woman always
sweeps the dirt under the dresser.  Our meals were always ready on
the tick.  Enormous meals--boiled beef and dumplings, roast beef
and Yorkshire, boiled mutton and capers, pig's head, apple pie,
spotted dog, and jam roly-poly--with grace before and after.  The
old ideas about bringing up children still held good, though they
were going out fast.  In theory children were still thrashed and
put to bed on bread and water, and certainly you were liable to be
sent away from table if you made too much noise eating, or choked,
or refused something that was 'good for you', or 'answered back'.
In practice there wasn't much discipline in our family, and of the
two Mother was the firmer.  Father, though he was always quoting
'Spare the rod and spoil the child', was really much too weak with
us, especially with Joe, who was a hard case from the start.  He
was always 'going to' give Joe a good hiding, and he used to tell
us stories, which I now believe were lies, about the frightful
thrashings his own father used to give him with a leather strap,
but nothing ever came of it.  By the time Joe was twelve he was too
strong for Mother to get him across her knee, and after that there
was no doing anything with him.

At that time it was still thought proper for parents to say 'don't'
to their children all day long.  You'd often hear a man boasting
that he'd 'thrash the life out of' his son if he caught him
smoking, or stealing apples, or robbing a bird's nest.  In some
families these thrashings actually took place.  Old Lovegrove, the
saddler, caught his two sons, great lumps aged sixteen and fifteen,
smoking in the garden shed and walloped them so that you could hear
it all over the town.  Lovegrove was a very heavy smoker.  The
thrashings never seemed to have any effect, all boys stole apples,
robbed birds' nests, and learned to smoke sooner or later, but the
idea was still knocking around that children should be treated
rough.  Practically everything worth doing was forbidden, in theory
anyway.  According to Mother, everything that a boy ever wants to
do was 'dangerous'.  Swimming was dangerous, climbing trees was
dangerous, and so were sliding, snowballing, hanging on behind
carts, using catapults and squailers, and even fishing.  All
animals were dangerous, except Nailer, the two cats, and Jackie the
bullfinch.  Every animal had its special recognized methods of
attacking you.  Horses bit, bats got into your hair, earwigs got
into your ears, swans broke your leg with a blow of their wings,
bulls tossed you, and snakes 'stung'.  All snakes stung, according
to Mother, and when I quoted the penny encyclopedia to the effect
that they didn't sting but bit, she only told me not to answer
back.  Lizards, slow-worms, toads, frogs, and newts also stung.
All insects stung, except flies and blackbeetles.  Practically all
kinds of food, except the food you had at meals, were either
poisonous or 'bad for you'.  Raw potatoes were deadly poison, and
so were mushrooms unless you bought them at the greengrocer's.  Raw
gooseberries gave you colic and raw raspberries gave you a skin-
rash.  If you had a bath after a meal you died of cramp, if you cut
yourself between the thumb and forefinger you got lockjaw, and if
you washed your hands in the water eggs were boiled in you got
warts.  Nearly everything in the shop was poisonous, which was why
Mother had put the gate in the doorway.  Cowcake was poisonous, and
so was chicken corn, and so were mustard seed and Karswood poultry
spice.  Sweets were bad for you and eating between meals was bad
for you, though curiously enough there were certain kinds of eating
between meals that Mother always allowed.  When she was making plum
jam she used to let us eat the syrupy stuff that was skimmed off
the top, and we used to gorge ourselves with it till we were sick.
Although nearly everything in the world was either dangerous or
poisonous, there were certain things that had mysterious virtues.
Raw onions were a cure for almost everything.  A stocking tied
round your neck was a cure for a sore throat.  Sulphur in a dog's
drinking water acted as a tonic, and old Nailer's bowl behind the
back door always had a lump of sulphur in it which stayed there
year after year, never dissolving.

We used to have tea at six.  By four Mother had generally finished
the housework, and between four and six she used to have a quiet
cup of tea and 'read her paper', as she called it.  As a matter of
fact she didn't often read the newspaper except on Sundays.  The
week-day papers only had the day's news, and it was only
occasionally that there was a murder.  But the editors of the
Sunday papers had grasped that people don't really mind whether
their murders are up to date and when there was no new murder on
hand they'd hash up an old one, sometimes going as far back as Dr
Palmer and Mrs Manning.  I think Mother thought of the world
outside Lower Binfleld chiefly as a place where murders were
committed.  Murders had a terrible fascination for her, because, as
she often said, she just didn't know how people could BE so wicked.
Cutting their wives' throats, burying their fathers under cement
floors, throwing babies down wells!  How anyone could DO such
things!  The Jack the Ripper scare had happened about the time when
Father and Mother were married, and the big wooden shutters we used
to draw over the shop windows every night dated from then.
Shutters for shop windows were going out, most of the shops in the
High Street didn't have them, but Mother felt safe behind them.
All along, she said, she'd had a dreadful feeling that Jack the
Ripper was hiding in Lower Binfield.  The Crippen case--but that
was years later, when I was almost grown up--upset her badly.  I
can hear her voice now.  'Gutting his poor wife up and burying her
in the coal cellar!  The IDEA!  What I'd do to that man if I got
hold of him!'  And curiously enough, when she thought of the
dreadful wickedness of that little American doctor who dismembered
his wife (and made a very neat job of it by taking all the bones
out and chucking the head into the sea, if I remember rightly) the
tears actually came into her eyes.

But what she mostly read on week-days was Hilda's Home Companion.
In those days it was part of the regular furnishing of any home
like ours, and as a matter of fact it still exists, though it's
been a bit crowded out by the more streamlined women's papers that
have come up since the war.  I had a look at a copy only the other
day.  It's changed, but less than most things.  There are still the
same enormous serial stories that go on for six months (and it all
comes right in the end with orange blossoms to follow), and the
same Household Hints, and the same ads for sewing-machines and
remedies for bad legs.  It's chiefly the print and the illustrations
that have changed.  In those days the heroine had to look like an
egg-timer and now she has to look like a cylinder.  Mother was a slow
reader and believed in getting her threepennyworth out of Hilda's
Home Companion.  Sitting in the old yellow armchair beside the
hearth, with her feet on the iron fender and the little pot of
strong tea stewing on the hob, she'd work her way steadily from
cover to cover, right through the serial, the two short stories,
the Household Hints, the ads for Zam-Buk, and the answers to
correspondents.  Hilda's Home Companion generally lasted her the
week out, and some weeks she didn't even finish it.  Sometimes the
heat of the fire, or the buzzing of the bluebottles on summer
afternoons, would send her off into a doze, and at about a quarter
to six she'd wake up with a tremendous start, glance at the clock on
the mantelpiece, and then get into a stew because tea was going to
be late.  But tea was never late.

In those days--till 1909, to be exact--Father could still afford an
errand boy, and he used to leave the shop to him and come in to tea
with the backs of his hands all mealy.  Then Mother would stop
cutting slices of bread for a moment and say, 'If you'll give us
grace, Father', and Father, while we all bent our heads on our
chests, would mumble reverently, 'Fwat we bout to receive--Lord
make us truly thankful--Amen.'  Later on, when Joe was a bit older,
it would be 'YOU give us grace today, Joe', and Joe would pipe it
out.  Mother never said grace: it had to be someone of the male
sex.

There were always bluebottles buzzing on summer afternoons.  Ours
wasn't a sanitary house, precious few houses in Lower Binfield
were.  I suppose the town must have contained five hundred houses
and there certainly can't have been more than ten with bathrooms or
fifty with what we should now describe as a W.C.  In summer our
backyard always smelt of dustbins.  And all houses had insects in
them.  We had blackbeetles in the wainscoting and crickets
somewhere behind the kitchen range, besides, of course, the meal-
worms in the shop.  In those days even a house-proud woman like
Mother didn't see anything to object to in blackbeetles.  They were
as much a part of the kitchen as the dresser or the rolling-pin.
But there were insects and insects.  The houses in the bad street
behind the brewery, where Katie Simmons lived, were overrun by
bugs.  Mother or any of the shopkeepers' wives would have died of
shame if they'd had bugs in the house.  In fact it was considered
proper to say that you didn't even know a bug by sight.

The great blue flies used to come sailing into the larder and sit
longingly on the wire covers over the meat.  'Drat the flies!'
people used to say, but the flies were an act of God and apart from
meat-covers and fly-papers you couldn't do much about them.  I said
a little while back that the first thing I remember is the smell of
sainfoin, but the smell of dustbins is also a pretty early memory.
When I think of Mother's kitchen, with the stone floor and the
beetle-traps and the steel fender and the blackleaded range, I
always seem to hear the bluebottles buzzing and smell the dustbin,
and also old Nailer, who carried a pretty powerful smell of dog.
And God knows there are worse smells and sounds.  Which would you
sooner listen to, a bluebottle or a bombing plane?



3


Joe started going to Walton Grammar School two years before I did.
Neither us went there till we were nine.  It meant a four-mile bike
ride morning and evening, and Mother was scared of allowing us
among the traffic, which by that time included a very few motor-
cars.

For several years we went to the dame-school kept by old Mrs
Howlett.  Most of the shopkeepers' children went there, to save
them from the shame and come-down of going to the board school,
though everyone knew that Mother Howlett was an old imposter and
worse than useless as a teacher.  She was over seventy, she was
very deaf, she could hardly see through her spectacles, and all she
owned in the way of equipment was a cane, a blackboard, a few dog-
eared grammar books, and a couple of dozen smelly slates.  She
could just manage the girls, but the boys simply laughed at her and
played truant as often as they felt like it.  Once there was a
frightful scandal cause a boy put his hand up a girl's dress, a
thing I didn't understand at the time.  Mother Howlett succeeded in
hushing it up.  When you did something particularly bad her formula
was 'I'll tell your father', and on very rare occasions she did so.
But we were quite sharp enough to see that she daren't do it too
often, and even when she let out at you with the cane she was so
old and clumsy that it was easy to dodge.

Joe was only eight when he got in with a tough gang of boys who
called themselves the Black Hand.  The leader was Sid Lovegrove,
the saddler's younger son, who was about thirteen, and there were
two other shopkeepers' sons, an errand boy from the brewery, and
two farm lads who sometimes managed to cut work and go off with
the gang for a couple of hours.  The farm lads were great lumps
bursting out of corduroy breeches, with very broad accents and
rather looked down on by the rest of the gang, but they were
tolerated because they knew twice as much about animals as any of
the others.  One of them, nicknamed Ginger, would even catch a
rabbit in his hands occasionally.  If he saw one lying in the grass
he used to fling himself on it like a spread-eagle.  There was a
big social distinction between the shopkeepers' sons and the sons
of labourers and farm-hands, but the local boys didn't usually pay
much attention to it till they were about sixteen.  The gang had a
secret password and an 'ordeal' which included cutting your finger
and eating an earthworm, and they gave themselves out to be
frightful desperadoes.  Certainly they managed to make a nuisance
of themselves, broke windows chased cows, tore the knockers off
doors, and stole fruit by the hundredweight.  Sometimes in winter
they managed to borrow a couple of ferrets and go ratting, when the
farmers would let them.  They all had catapults and squailers, and
they were always saving up to buy a saloon pistol, which in those
days cost five shillings, but the savings never amounted to more
than about threepence.  In summer they used to go fishing and bird-
nesting.  When Joe was at Mrs Howlett's he used to cut school at
least once a week, and even at the Grammar School he managed it
about once a fortnight.  There was a boy at the Grammar School, an
auctioneer's son, who could copy any handwriting and for a penny
he'd forge a letter from your mother saying you'd been ill
yesterday.  Of course I was wild to join the Black Hand, but Joe
always choked me off and said they didn't want any blasted kids
hanging round.

It was the thought of going fishing that really appealed to me.  At
eight years old I hadn't yet been fishing, except with a penny net,
with which you can sometimes catch a stickleback.  Mother was
always terrified of letting us go anywhere near water.  She
'forbade' fishing, in the way in which parents in those days
'forbade' almost everything, and I hadn't yet grasped that grownups
can't see round corners.  But the thought of fishing sent me wild
with excitement.  Many a time I'd been past the pool at the Mill
Farm and watched the small carp basking on the surface, and
sometimes under the willow tree at the corner a great diamond-
shaped carp that to my eyes looked enormous--six inches long, I
suppose--would suddenly rise to the surface, gulp down a grub, and
sink again.  I'd spent hours gluing my nose against the window of
Wallace's in the High Street, where fishing tackle and guns and
bicycles were sold.  I used to lie awake on summer mornings
thinking of the tales Joe had told me about fishing, how you mixed
bread paste, how your float gives a bob and plunges under and you
feel the rod bending and the fish tugging at the line.  Is it any
use talking about it, I wonder--the sort of fairy light that fish
and fishing tackle have in a kid's eyes?  Some kids feel the same
about guns and shooting, some feel it about motor-bikes or
aeroplanes or horses.  It's not a thing that you can explain or
rationalize, it's merely magic.  One morning--it was in June and I
must have been eight--I knew that Joe was going to cut school and
go out fishing, and I made up my mind to follow.  In some way Joe
guessed what I was thinking about, and he started on me while we
were dressing.

'Now then, young George!  Don't you get thinking you're coming with
the gang today.  You stay back home.'

'No, I didn't.  I didn't think nothing about it.'

'Yes, you did!  You thought you were coming with the gang.'

'No, I didn't!'

'Yes, you did!'

'No, I didn't!'

'Yes, you did!  You stay back home.  We don't want any bloody kids
along.'

Joe had just learned the word 'bloody' and was always using it.
Father overheard him once and swore that he'd thrash the life out
of Joe, but as usual he didn't do so.  After breakfast Joe started
off on his bike, with his satchel and his Grammar School cap, five
minutes early as he always did when he meant to cut school, and
when it was time for me to leave for Mother Howlett's I sneaked off
and hid in the lane behind the allotments.  I knew the gang were
going to the pond at the Mill Farm, and I was going to follow them
if they murdered me for it.  Probably they'd give me a hiding, and
probably I wouldn't get home to dinner, and then Mother would know
that I'd cut school and I'd get another hiding, but I didn't care.
I was just desperate to go fishing with the gang.  I was cunning,
too.  I allowed Joe plenty of time to make a circuit round and get
to the Mill Farm by road, and then I followed down the lane and
skirted round the meadows on the far side of the hedge, so as to
get almost to the pond before the gang saw me.  It was a wonderful
June morning.  The buttercups were up to my knees.  There was a
breath of wind just stirring the tops of the elms, and the great
green clouds of leaves were sort of soft and rich like silk.  And
it was nine in the morning and I was eight years old, and all round
me it was early summer, with great tangled hedges where the wild
roses were still in bloom, and bits of soft white cloud drifting
overhead, and in the distance the low hills and the dim blue masses
of the woods round Upper Binfield.  And I didn't give a damn for
any of it.  All I was thinking of was the green pool and the carp
and the gang with their hooks and lines and bread paste.  It was as
though they were in paradise and I'd got to join them.  Presently I
managed to sneak up on them--four of them, Joe and Sid Lovegrove
and the errand boy and another shopkeeper's son, Harry Barnes I
think his name was.

Joe turned and saw me.  'Christ!' he said.  'It's the kid.'  He
walked up to me like a tom-cat that's going to start a fight.  'Now
then, you!  What'd I tell you?  You get back 'ome double quick.'

Both Joe and I were inclined to drop our aitches if we were at all
excited.  I backed away from him.

'I'm not going back 'ome.'

'Yes you are.'

'Clip his ear, Joe,' said Sid.  'We don't want no kids along.'

'ARE you going back 'ome?' said Joe.

'No.'

'Righto, my boy!  Right-HO!'

Then he started on me.  The next minute he was chasing me round,
catching me one clip after another.  But I didn't run away from the
pool, I ran in circles.  Presently he'd caught me and got me down,
and then he knelt on my upper arms and began screwing my ears,
which was his favourite torture and one I couldn't stand.  I was
blubbing by this time, but still I wouldn't give in and promise to
go home.  I wanted to stay and go fishing with the gang.  And
suddenly the others swung round in my favour and told Joe to get up
off my chest and let me stay if I wanted to.  So I stayed after
all.

The others had some hooks and lines and floats and a lump of bread
paste in a rag, and we all cut ourselves willow switches from the
tree at the corner of the pool.  The farmhouse was only about two
hundred yards away, and you had to keep out of sight because old
Brewer was very down on fishing.  Not that it made any difference
to him, he only used the pool for watering his cattle, but he hated
boys.  The others were still jealous of me and kept telling me to
get out of the light and reminding me that I was only a kid and
knew nothing about fishing.  They said that I was making such a
noise I'd scare all the fish away, though actually I was making
about half as much noise as anyone else there.  Finally they
wouldn't let me sit beside them and sent me to another part of the
pool where the water was shallower and there wasn't so much shade.
They said a kid like me was sure to keep splashing the water and
frighten the fish away.  It was a rotten part of the pool, a part
where no fish would ordinarily come.  I knew that.  I seemed to
know by a kind of instinct the places where a fish would lie.
Still, I was fishing at last.  I was sitting on the grass bank with
the rod in my hands, with the flies buzzing round, and the smell of
wild peppermint fit to knock you down, watching the red float on
the green water, and I was happy as a tinker although the tear-
marks mixed up with dirt were still all over my face.

Lord knows how long we sat there.  The morning stretched out and
out, and the sun got higher and higher, and nobody had a bite.  It
was a hot still day, too clear for fishing.  The floats lay on the
water with never a quiver.  You could see deep down into the water
as though you were looking into a kind of dark green glass.  Out in
the middle of the pool you could see the fish lying just under the
surface, sunning themselves, and sometimes in the weeds near the
side a newt would come gliding upwards and rest there with his
fingers on the weeds and his nose just out of the water.  But the
fish weren't biting.  The others kept shouting that they'd got a
nibble, but it was always a lie.  And the time stretched out and
out and it got hotter and hotter, and the flies ate you alive, and
the wild peppermint under the bank smelt like Mother Wheeler's
sweet-shop.  I was getting hungrier and hungrier, all the more
because I didn't know for certain where my dinner was coming from.
But I sat as still as a mouse and never took my eyes off the float.
The others had given me a lump of bait about the size of a marble,
telling me that would have to do for me, but for a long time I
didn't even dare to re-bait my hook, because every time I pulled my
line up they swore I was making enough noise to frighten every fish
within five miles.

I suppose we must have been there about two hours when suddenly my
float gave a quiver.  I knew it was a fish.  It must have been a
fish that was just passing accidentally and saw my bait.  There's
no mistaking the movement your float gives when it's a real bite.
It's quite different from the way it moves when you twitch your
line accidentally.  The next moment it gave a sharp bob and almost
went under.  I couldn't hold myself in any longer.  I yelled to the
others:

'I've got a bite!'

'Rats!' yelled Sid Lovegrove instantly.

But the next moment there wasn't any doubt about it.  The float
dived straight down, I could still see it under the water, kind of
dim red, and I felt the rod tighten in my hand.  Christ, that
feeling!  The line jerking and straining and a fish on the other
end of it!  The others saw my rod bending, and the next moment
they'd all flung their rods down and rushed round to me.  I gave a
terrific haul and the fish--a great huge silvery fish--came flying
up through the air.  The same moment all of us gave a yell of
agony.  The fish had slipped off the hook and fallen into the wild
peppermint under the bank.  But he'd fallen into shallow water
where he couldn't turn over, and for perhaps a second he lay there
on his side helpless.  Joe flung himself into the water, splashing
us all over, and grabbed him in both hands.  'I got 'im!' he
yelled.  The next moment he'd flung the fish on to the grass and we
were all kneeling round it.  How we gloated!  The poor dying brute
flapped up and down and his scales glistened all the colours of the
rainbow.  It was a huge carp, seven inches long at least, and must
have weighed a quarter of a pound.  How we shouted to see him!  But
the next moment it was as though a shadow had fallen across us.  We
looked up, and there was old Brewer standing over us, with his tall
billycock hat--one of those hats they used to wear that were a
cross between a top hat and a bowler--and his cowhide gaiters and a
thick hazel stick in his hand.

We suddenly cowered like partridges when there's a hawk overhead.
He looked from one to other of us.  He had a wicked old mouth with
no teeth in it, and since he'd shaved his beard off his chin looked
like a nutcracker.

'What are you boys doing here?' he said.

There wasn't much doubt about what we were doing.  Nobody answered.

'I'll learn 'ee come fishing in my pool!' he suddenly roared, and
the next moment he was on us, whacking out in all directions.

The Black Hand broke and fled.  We left all the rods behind and
also the fish.  Old Brewer chased us half across the meadow.  His
legs were stiff and he couldn't move fast, but he got in some good
swipes before we were out of his reach.  We left him in the middle
of the field, yelling after us that he knew all our names and was
going to tell our fathers.  I'd been at the back and most of the
wallops had landed on me.  I had some nasty red weals on the calves
of my legs when we got to the other side of the hedge.

I spent the rest of the day with the gang.  They hadn't made up
their mind whether I was really a member yet, but for the time
being they tolerated me.  The errand boy, who'd had the morning off
on some lying pretext or other, had to go back to the brewery.  The
rest of us went for a long, meandering, scrounging kind of walk,
the sort of walk that boys go for when they're away from home all
day, and especially when they're away without permission.  It was
the first real boy's walk I'd had, quite different from the walks
we used to go with Katie Simmons.  We had our dinner in a dry ditch
on the edge of the town, full of rusty cans and wild fennel.  The
others gave me bits of their dinner, and Sid Lovegrove had a penny,
so someone fetched a Penny Monster which we had between us.  It was
very hot, and the fennel smelt very strong, and the gas of the
Penny Monster made us belch.  Afterwards we wandered up the dusty
white road to Upper Binfield, the first time I'd been that way, I
believe, and into the beech woods with the carpets of dead leaves
and the great smooth trunks that soar up into the sky so that the
birds in the upper branches look like dots.  You could go wherever
you liked in the woods in those days.  Binfield House, was shut up,
they didn't preserve the pheasants any longer, and at the worst
you'd only meet a carter with a load of wood.  There was a tree
that had been sawn down, and the rings of the trunk looked like a
target, and we had shots at it with stones.  Then the others had
shots at birds with their catapults, and Sid Lovegrove swore he'd
hit a chaffinch and it had stuck in a fork in the tree.  Joe said
he was lying, and they argued and almost fought.  Then we went down
into a chalk hollow full of beds of dead leaves and shouted to hear
the echo.  Someone shouted a dirty word, and then we said over all
the dirty words we knew, and the others jeered at me because I only
knew three.  Sid Lovegrove said he knew how babies were born and it
was just the same as rabbits except that the baby came out of the
woman's navel.  Harry Barnes started to carve the word ---- on a
beech tree, but got fed up with it after the first two letters.
Then we went round by the lodge of Binfield House.  There was a
rumour that somewhere in the grounds there was a pond with enormous
fish in it, but no one ever dared go inside because old Hodges, the
lodge-keeper who acted as a kind of caretaker, was 'down' on boys.
He was digging in his vegetable garden by the lodge when we passed.
We cheeked him over the fence until he chased us off, and then we
went down to the Walton Road and cheeked the carters, keeping on
the other side of the hedge so that they couldn't reach us with
their whips.  Beside the Walton Road there was a place that had
been a quarry and then a rubbish dump, and finally had got
overgrown with blackberry bushes.  There were great mounds of rusty
old tin cans and bicycle frames and saucepans with holes in them
and broken bottles with weeds growing all over them, and we spent
nearly an hour and got ourselves filthy from head to foot routing
out iron fence posts, because Harry Barnes swore that the
blacksmith in Lower Binfield would pay sixpence a hundredweight for
old iron.  Then Joe found a late thrush's nest with half-fledged
chicks in it in a blackberry bush.  After a lot of argument about
what to do with them we took the chicks out, had shots at them with
stones, and finally stamped on them.  There were four of them, and
we each had one to stamp on.  It was getting on towards tea-time
now.  We knew that old Brewer would be as good as his word and
there was a hiding ahead of us, but we were getting too hungry to
stay out much longer.  Finally we trailed home, with one more row
on the way, because when we were passing the allotments we saw a
rat and chased it with sticks, and old Bennet the station-master,
who worked at his allotment every night and was very proud of it,
came after us in a tearing rage because we'd trampled on his onion-
bed.

I'd walked ten miles and I wasn't tired.  All day I'd trailed after
the gang and tried to do everything they did, and they'd called me
'the kid' and snubbed me as much as they could, but I'd more or
less kept my end up.  I had a wonderful feeling inside me, a
feeling you can't know about unless you've had it--but if you're a
man you'll have had it some time.  I knew that I wasn't a kid any
longer, I was a boy at last.  And it's a wonderful thing to be a
boy, to go roaming where grown-ups can't catch you, and to chase
rats and kill birds and shy stones and cheek carters and shout
dirty words.  It's a kind of strong, rank feeling, a feeling of
knowing everything and fearing nothing, and it's all bound up with
breaking rules and killing things.  The white dusty roads, the hot
sweaty feeling of one's clothes, the smell of fennel and wild
peppermint, the dirty words, the sour stink of the rubbish dump,
the taste of fizzy lemonade and the gas that made one belch, the
stamping on the young birds, the feel of the fish straining on the
line--it was all part of it.  Thank God I'm a man, because no woman
ever has that feeling.

Sure enough, old Brewer had sent round and told everybody.  Father
looked very glum, fetched a strap out of the shop, and said he was
going to 'thrash the life out of' Joe.  But Joe struggled and
yelled and kicked, and in the end Father didn't get in more than a
couple of whacks at him.  However, he got a caning from the
headmaster of the Grammar School next day.  I tried to struggle
too, but I was small enough for Mother to get me across her knee,
and she gave me what-for with the strap.  So I'd had three hidings
that day, one from Joe, one from old Brewer, and one from Mother.
Next day the gang decided that I wasn't really a member yet and
that I'd got to go through the 'ordeal' (a word they'd got out of
the Red Indian stories) after all.  They were very strict in
insisting that you had to bite the worm before you swallowed it.
Moreover, because I was the youngest and they were jealous of me
for being the only one to catch anything, they all made out
afterwards that the fish I'd caught wasn't really a big one.  In a
general way the tendency of fish, when people talk about them, is
to get bigger and bigger, but this one got smaller and smaller,
until to hear the others talk you'd have thought it was no bigger
than a minnow.

But it didn't matter.  I'd been fishing.  I'd seen the float dive
under the water and felt the fish tugging at the line, and however
many lies they told they couldn't take that away from me.



4


For the next seven years, from when I was eight to when I was
fifteen, what I chiefly remember is fishing.

Don't think that I did nothing else.  It's only that when you look
back over a long period of time, certain things seem to swell up
till they overshadow everything else.  I left Mother Howlett's and
went to the Grammar School, with a leather satchel and a black cap
with yellow stripes, and got my first bicycle and a long time
afterwards my first long trousers.  My first bike was a fixed-
wheel--free-wheel bikes were very expensive then.  When you went
downhill you put your feet up on the front rests and let the pedals
go whizzing round.  That was one of the characteristic sights of
the early nineteen-hundreds--a boy sailing downhill with his head
back and his feet up in the air.  I went to the Grammar School in
fear and trembling, because of the frightful tales Joe had told me
about old Whiskers (his name was Wicksey) the headmaster, who was
certainly a dreadful-looking little man, with a face just like a
wolf, and at the end of the big schoolroom he had a glass case with
canes in it, which he'd sometimes take out and swish through the
air in a terrifying manner.  But to my surprise I did rather well
at school.  It had never occurred to me that I might be cleverer
than Joe, who was two years older than me and had bullied me ever
since he could walk.  Actually Joe was an utter dunce, got the cane
about once a week, and stayed somewhere near the bottom of the
school till he was sixteen.  My second term I took a prize in
arithmetic and another in some queer stuff that was mostly
concerned with pressed flowers and went by the name of Science, and
by the time I was fourteen Whiskers was talking about scholarships
and Reading University.  Father, who had ambitions for Joe and me
in those days, was very anxious that I should go to 'college'.
There was an idea floating round that I was to be a schoolteacher
and Joe was to be an auctioneer.

But I haven't many memories connected with school.  When I've mixed
with chaps from the upper classes, as I did during the war, I've
been struck by the fact that they never really get over that
frightful drilling they go through at public schools.  Either it
flattens them out into half-wits or they spend the rest of their
lives kicking against it.  It wasn't so with boys of our class, the
sons of shopkeepers and farmers.  You went to the Grammar School
and you stayed there till you were sixteen, just to show that you
weren't a prole, but school was chiefly a place that you wanted to
get away from.  You'd no sentiment of loyalty, no goofy feeling
about the old grey stones (and they WERE old, right enough, the
school had been founded by Cardinal Wolsey), and there was no Old
Boy's tie and not even a school song.  You had your half-holidays
to yourself, because games weren't compulsory and as often as not
you cut them.  We played football in braces, and though it was
considered proper to play cricket in a belt, you wore your ordinary
shirt and trousers.  The only game I really cared about was the
stump cricket we used to play in the gravel yard during the break,
with a bat made out of a bit of packing case and a compo ball.

But I remember the smell of the big schoolroom, a smell of ink and
dust and boots, and the stone in the yard that had been a mounting
block and was used for sharpening knives on, and the little baker's
shop opposite where they sold a kind of Chelsea bun, twice the size
of the Chelsea buns you get nowadays, which were called Lardy
Busters and cost a halfpenny.  I did all the things you do at
school.  I carved my name on a desk and got the cane for it--you
were always caned for it if you were caught, but it was the
etiquette that you had to carve your name.  And I got inky fingers
and bit my nails and made darts out of penholders and played
conkers and passed round dirty stories and learned to masturbate
and cheeked old Blowers, the English master, and bullied the life
out of little Willy Simeon, the undertaker's son, who was half-
witted and believed everything you told him.  Our favourite trick
was to send him to shops to buy things that didn't exist.  All the
old gags--the ha'porth of penny stamps, the rubber hammer, the
left-handed screwdriver, the pot of striped paint--poor Willy fell
for all of them.  We had grand sport one afternoon, putting him in
a tub and telling him to lift himself up by the handles.  He ended
up in an asylum, poor Willy.  But it was in the holidays that one
really lived.

There were good things to do in those days.  In winter we used to
borrow a couple of ferrets--Mother would never let Joe and me keep
them at home, 'nasty smelly things' she called them--and go round
the farms and ask leave to do a bit of ratting.  Sometimes they let
us, sometimes they told us to hook it and said we were more trouble
than the rats.  Later in winter we'd follow the threshing machine
and help kill the rats when they threshed the stacks.  One winter,
1908 it must have been, the Thames flooded and then froze and there
was skating for weeks on end, and Harry Barnes broke his collar-
bone on the ice.  In early spring we went after squirrels with
squailers, and later on we went birdnesting.  We had a theory that
birds can't count and it's all right if you leave one egg, but we
were cruel little beasts and sometimes we'd just knock the nest
down and trample on the eggs or chicks.  There was another game we
had when the toads were spawning.  We used to catch toads, ram the
nozzle of a bicycle pump up their backsides, and blow them up till
they burst.  That's what boys are like, I don't know why.  In
summer we used to bike over the Burford Weir and bathe.  Wally
Lovegrove, Sid's young cousin, was drowned in 1906.  He got tangled
in the weeds at the bottom, and when the drag-hooks brought his
body to the surface his face was jet black.

But fishing was the real thing.  We went many a time to old
Brewer's pool, and took tiny carp and tench out of it, and once a
whopping eel, and there were other cow-ponds that had fish in them
and were within walking distance on Saturday afternoons.  But after
we got bicycles we started fishing in the Thames below Burford
Weir.  It seemed more grown-up than fishing in cow-ponds.  There
were no farmers chasing you away, and there are thumping fish in
the Thames--though, so far as I know, nobody's ever been known to
catch one.

It's queer, the feeling I had for fishing--and still have, really.
I can't call myself a fisherman.  I've never in my life caught a
fish two feet long, and it's thirty years now since I've had a rod
in my hands.  And yet when I look back the whole of my boyhood from
eight to fifteen seems to have revolved round the days when we went
fishing.  Every detail has stuck clear in my memory.  I can
remember individual days and individual fish, there isn't a cow-
pond or a backwater that I can't see a picture of if I shut my eyes
and think.  I could write a book on the technique of fishing.  When
we were kids we didn't have much in the way of tackle, it cost too
much and most of our threepence a week (which was the usual pocket-
money in those days) went on sweets and Lardy Busters.  Very small
kids generally fish with a bent pin, which is too blunt to be much
use, but you can make a pretty good hook (though of course it's got
no barb) by bending a needle in a candle flame with a pair of
pliers.  The farm lads knew how to plait horsehair so that it was
almost as good as gut, and you can take a small fish on a single
horsehair.  Later we got to having two-shilling fishing-rods and
even reels of sorts.  God, what hours I've spent gazing into
Wallace's window!  Even the .410 guns and saloon pistols didn't
thrill me so much as the fishing tackle.  And the copy of Gamage's
catalogue that I picked up somewhere, on a rubbish dump I think,
and studied as though it had been the Bible!  Even now I could give
you all the details about gut-substitute and gimp and Limerick
hooks and priests and disgorgers and Nottingham reels and God knows
how many other technicalities.

Then there were the kinds of bait we used to use.  In our shop
there were always plenty of mealworms, which were good but not very
good.  Gentles were better.  You had to beg them off old Gravitt,
the butcher, and the gang used to draw lots or do enamena-mina-mo
to decide who should go and ask, because Gravitt wasn't usually too
pleasant about it.  He was a big, rough-faced old devil with a
voice like a mastiff, and when he barked, as he generally did when
speaking to boys, all the knives and steels on his blue apron would
give a jingle.  You'd go in with an empty treacle-tin in your hand,
hang round till any customers had disappeared and then say very
humbly:

'Please, Mr Gravitt, y'got any gentles today?'

Generally he'd roar out:  'What!  Gentles!  Gentles in my shop!
Ain't seen such a thing in years.  Think I got blow-flies in my
shop?'

He had, of course.  They were everywhere.  He used to deal with
them with a strip of leather on the end of a stick, with which he
could reach out to enormous distances and smack a fly into paste.
Sometimes you had to go away without any gentles, but as a rule
he'd shout after you just as you were going:

''Ere!  Go round the backyard an' 'ave a look.  P'raps you might
find one or two if you looked careful.'

You used to find them in little clusters everywhere.  Gravitt's
backyard smelt like a battlefield.  Butchers didn't have
refrigerators in those days.  Gentles live longer if you keep them
in sawdust.

Wasp grubs are good, though it's hard to make them stick on the
hook, unless you bake them first.  When someone found a wasps' nest
we'd go out at night and pour turpentine down it and plug up the
hole with mud.  Next day the wasps would all be dead and you could
dig out the nest and take the grubs.  Once something went wrong,
the turps missed the hole or something, and when we took the plug
out the wasps, which had been shut up all night, came out all
together with a zoom.  We weren't very badly stung, but it was a
pity there was no one standing by with a stopwatch.  Grasshoppers
are about the best bait there is, especially for chub.  You stick
them on the hook without any shot and just flick them to and fro on
the surface--'dapping', they call it.  But you can never get more
than two or three grasshoppers at a time.  Greenbottle flies, which
are also damned difficult to catch, are the best bait for dace,
especially on clear days.  You want to put them on the hook alive,
so that they wriggle.  A chub will even take a wasp, but it's a
ticklish job to put a live wasp on the hook.

God knows how many other baits there were.  Bread paste you make by
squeezing water through white bread in a rag.  Then there are
cheese paste and honey paste and paste with aniseed in it.  Boiled
wheat isn't bad for roach.  Redworms are good for gudgeon.  You
find them in very old manure heaps.  And you also find another kind
of worm called a brandling, which is striped and smells like an
earwig, and which is very good bait for perch.  Ordinary earthworms
are good for perch.  You have to put them in moss to keep them
fresh and lively.  If you try to keep them in earth they die.
Those brown flies you find on cowdung are pretty good for roach.
You can take a chub on a cherry, so they say, and I've seen a roach
taken with a currant out of a bun.

In those days, from the sixteenth of June (when the coarse-fishing
season starts) till midwinter I wasn't often without a tin of worms
or gentles in my pocket.  I had some fights with Mother about it,
but in the end she gave in, fishing came off the list of forbidden
things and Father even gave me a two-shilling fishing-rod for
Christmas in 1903.  Joe was barely fifteen when he started going
after girls, and from then on he seldom came out fishing, which he
said was a kid's game.  But there were about half a dozen others
who were as mad on fishing as I was.  Christ, those fishing days!
The hot sticky afternoons in the schoolroom when I've sprawled
across my desk, with old Blowers's voice grating away about
predicates and subjunctives and relative clauses, and all that's in
my mind is the backwater near Burford Weir and the green pool under
the willows with the dace gliding to and fro.  And then the
terrific rush on bicycles after tea, to Chamford Hill and down to
the river to get in an hour's fishing before dark.  The still
summer evening, the faint splash of the weir, the rings on the
water where the fish are rising, the midges eating you alive, the
shoals of dace swarming round your hook and never biting.  And the
kind of passion with which you'd watch the black backs of the fish
swarming round, hoping and praying (yes, literally praying) that
one of them would change his mind and grab your bait before it got
too dark.  And then it was always 'Let's have five minutes more',
and then 'Just five minutes more', until in the end you had to walk
your bike into the town because Towler, the copper, was prowling
round and you could be 'had up' for riding without a light.  And
the times in the summer holidays when we went out to make a day of
it with boiled eggs and bread and butter and a bottle of lemonade,
and fished and bathed and then fished again and did occasionally
catch something.  At night you'd come home with filthy hands so
hungry that you'd eaten what was left of your bread paste, with
three or four smelly dace wrapped up in your handkerchief.  Mother
always refused to cook the fish I brought home.  She would never
allow that river fish were edible, except trout and salmon.  'Nasty
muddy things', she called them.  The fish I remember best of all
are the ones I didn't catch.  Especially the monstrous fish you
always used to see when you went for a walk along the towpath on
Sunday afternoons and hadn't a rod with you.  There was no fishing
on Sundays, even the Thames Conservancy Board didn't allow it.  On
Sundays you had to go for what was called a 'nice walk' in your
thick black suit and the Eton collar that sawed your head off.  It
was on a Sunday that I saw a pike a yard long asleep in shallow
water by the bank and nearly got him with a stone.  And sometimes
in the green pools on the edge of the reeds you'd see a huge Thames
trout go sailing past.  The trout grow to vast sizes in the Thames,
but they're practically never caught.  They say that one of the
real Thames fishermen, the old bottle-nosed blokes that you see
muffled up in overcoats on camp-stools with twenty-foot roach-poles
at all seasons of the year, will willingly give up a year of his
life to catching a Thames trout.  I don't blame them, I see their
point entirely, and still better I saw it then.

Of course other things were happening.  I grew three inches in a
year, got my long trousers, won some prizes at school, went to
Confirmation classes, told dirty stories, took to reading, and had
crazes for white mice, fretwork, and postage stamps.  But it's
always fishing that I remember.  Summer days, and the flat water-
meadows and the blue hills in the distance, and the willows up the
backwater and the pools underneath like a kind of deep green glass.
Summer evenings, the fish breaking the water, the nightjars hawking
round your head, the smell of nightstocks and latakia.  Don't
mistake what I'm talking about.  It's not that I'm trying to put
across any of that poetry of childhood stuff.  I know that's all
baloney.  Old Porteous (a friend of mine, a retired schoolmaster,
I'll tell you about him later) is great on the poetry of childhood.
Sometimes he reads me stuff about it out of books.  Wordsworth.
Lucy Gray.  There was a time when meadow, grove, and all that.
Needless to say he's got no kids of his own.  The truth is that
kids aren't in any way poetic, they're merely savage little
animals, except that no animal is a quarter as selfish.  A boy
isn't interested in meadows, groves, and so forth.  He never looks
at a landscape, doesn't give a damn for flowers, and unless they
affect him in some way, such as being good to eat, he doesn't know
one plant from another.  Killing things--that's about as near to
poetry as a boy gets.  And yet all the while there's that peculiar
intensity, the power of longing for things as you can't long when
you're grown up, and the feeling that time stretches out and out in
front of you and that whatever you're doing you could go on for
ever.

I was rather an ugly little boy, with butter-coloured hair which
was always cropped short except for a quiff in front.  I don't
idealize my childhood, and unlike many people I've no wish to be
young again.  Most of the things I used to care for would leave me
something more than cold.  I don't care if I never see a cricket
ball again, and I wouldn't give you threepence for a hundredweight
of sweets.  But I've still got, I've always had, that peculiar
feeling for fishing.  You'll think it damned silly, no doubt, but
I've actually half a wish to go fishing even now, when I'm fat and
forty-five and got two kids and a house in the suburbs.  Why?
Because in a manner of speaking I AM sentimental about my
childhood--not my own particular childhood, but the civilization
which I grew up in and which is now, I suppose, just about at its
last kick.  And fishing is somehow typical of that civilization.
As soon as you think of fishing you think of things that don't
belong to the modern world.  The very idea of sitting all day under
a willow tree beside a quiet pool--and being able to find a quiet
pool to sit beside--belongs to the time before the war, before the
radio, before aeroplanes, before Hitler.  There's a kind of
peacefulness even in the names of English coarse fish.  Roach,
rudd, dace, bleak, barbel, bream, gudgeon, pike, chub, carp, tench.
They're solid kind of names.  The people who made them up hadn't
heard of machine-guns, they didn't live in terror of the sack or
spend their time eating aspirins, going to the pictures, and
wondering how to keep out of the concentration camp.

Does anyone go fishing nowadays, I wonder?  Anywhere within a
hundred miles of London there are no fish left to catch.  A few
dismal fishing-clubs plant themselves in rows along the banks of
canals, and millionaires go trout-fishing in private waters round
Scotch hotels, a sort of snobbish game of catching hand-reared fish
with artificial flies.  But who fishes in mill-streams or moats or
cow-ponds any longer?  Where are the English coarse fish now?  When
I was a kid every pond and stream had fish in it.  Now all the
ponds are drained, and when the streams aren't poisoned with
chemicals from factories they're full of rusty tins and motor-bike
tyres.

My best fishing-memory is about some fish that I never caught.
That's usual enough, I suppose.

When I was about fourteen Father did a good turn of some kind to
old Hodges, the caretaker at Binfield House.  I forget what it was--
gave him some medicine that cured his fowls of the worms, or
something.  Hodges was a crabby old devil, but he didn't forget a
good turn.  One day a little while afterwards when he'd been down
to the shop to buy chicken-corn he met me outside the door and
stopped me in his surly way.  He had a face like something carved
out of a bit of root, and only two teeth, which were dark brown and
very long.

'Hey, young 'un!  Fisherman, ain't you?'

'Yes.'

'Thought you was.  You listen, then.  If so be you wanted to, you
could bring your line and have a try in that they pool up ahind the
Hall.  There's plenty bream and jack in there.  But don't you tell
no one as I told you.  And don't you go for to bring any of them
other young whelps, or I'll beat the skin off their backs.'

Having said this he hobbled off with his sack of corn over his
shoulder, as though feeling that he'd said too much already.  The
next Saturday afternoon I biked up to Binfield House with my
pockets full of worms and gentles, and looked for old Hodges at the
lodge.  At that time Binfield House had already been empty for ten
or twenty years.  Mr Farrel, the owner, couldn't afford to live in
it and either couldn't or wouldn't let it.  He lived in London on
the rent of his farms and let the house and grounds go to the
devil.  All the fences were green and rotting, the park was a mass
of nettles, the plantations were like a jungle, and even the
gardens had gone back to meadow, with only a few old gnarled rose-
bushes to show you where the beds had been.  But it was a very
beautiful house, especially from a distance.  It was a great white
place with colonnades and long-shaped windows, which had been
built, I suppose, about Queen Anne's time by someone who'd
travelled in Italy.  If I went there now I'd probably get a certain
kick out of wandering round the general desolation and thinking
about the life that used to go on there, and the people who built
such places because they imagined that the good days would last for
ever.  As a boy I didn't give either the house or the grounds a
second look.  I dug out old Hodges, who'd just finished his dinner
and was a bit surly, and got him to show me the way down to the
pool.  It was several hundred yards behind the house and completely
hidden in the beech woods, but it was a good-sized pool, almost a
lake, about a hundred and fifty yards across.  It was astonishing,
and even at that age it astonished me, that there, a dozen miles
from Reading and not fifty from London, you could have such
solitude.  You felt as much alone as if you'd been on the banks of
the Amazon.  The pool was ringed completely round by the enormous
beech trees, which in one place came down to the edge and were
reflected in the water.  On the other side there was a patch of
grass where there was a hollow with beds of wild peppermint, and up
at one end of the pool an old wooden boathouse was rotting among
the bulrushes.

The pool was swarming with bream, small ones, about four to six
inches long.  Every now and again you'd see one of them turn half
over and gleam reddy brown under the water.  There were pike there
too, and they must have been big ones.  You never saw them, but
sometimes one that was basking among the weeds would turn over and
plunge with a splash that was like a brick being bunged into the
water.  It was no use trying to catch them, though of course I
always tried every time I went there.  I tried them with dace and
minnows I'd caught in the Thames and kept alive in a jam-jar, and
even with a spinner made out of a bit of tin.  But they were gorged
with fish and wouldn't bite, and in any case they'd have broken any
tackle I possessed.  I never came back from the pool without at
least a dozen small bream.  Sometimes in the summer holidays I went
there for a whole day, with my fishing-rod and a copy of Chums or
the Union Jack or something, and a hunk of bread and cheese which
Mother had wrapped up for me.  And I've fished for hours and then
lain in the grass hollow and read the Union Jack, and then the
smell of my bread paste and the plop of a fish jumping somewhere
would send me wild again, and I'd go back to the water and have
another go, and so on all through a summer's day.  And the best of
all was to be alone, utterly alone, though the road wasn't a
quarter of a mile away.  I was just old enough to know that it's
good to be alone occasionally.  With the trees all round you it was
as though the pool belonged to you, and nothing ever stirred except
the fish ringing the water and the pigeons passing overhead.  And
yet, in the two years or so that I went fishing there, how many
times did I really go, I wonder?  Not more than a dozen.  It was a
three-mile bike ride from home and took up a whole afternoon at
least.  And sometimes other things turned up, and sometimes when
I'd meant to go it rained.  You know the way things happen.

One afternoon the fish weren't biting and I began to explore at the
end of the pool farthest from Binfield House.  There was a bit of
an overflow of water and the ground was boggy, and you had to fight
your way through a sort of jungle of blackberry bushes and rotten
boughs that had fallen off the trees.  I struggled through it for
about fifty yards, and then suddenly there was a clearing and I
came to another pool which I had never known existed.  It was a
small pool not more than twenty yards wide, and rather dark because
of the boughs that overhung it.  But it was very clear water and
immensely deep.  I could see ten or fifteen feet down into it.  I
hung about for a bit, enjoying the dampness and the rotten boggy
smell, the way a boy does.  And then I saw something that almost
made me jump out of my skin.

It was an enormous fish.  I don't exaggerate when I say it was
enormous.  It was almost the length of my arm.  It glided across
the pool, deep under water, and then became a shadow and
disappeared into the darker water on the other side.  I felt as if
a sword had gone through me.  It was far the biggest fish I'd ever
seen, dead or alive.  I stood there without breathing, and in a
moment another huge thick shape glided through the water, and then
another and then two more close together.  The pool was full of
them.  They were carp, I suppose.  Just possibly they were bream or
tench, but more probably carp.  Bream or tench wouldn't grow so
huge.  I knew what had happened.  At some time this pool had been
connected with the other, and then the stream had dried up and the
woods had closed round the small pool and it had just been
forgotten.  It's a thing that happens occasionally.  A pool gets
forgotten somehow, nobody fishes in it for years and decades and
the fish grow to monstrous sizes.  The brutes that I was watching
might be a hundred years old.  And not a soul in the world knew
about them except me.  Very likely it was twenty years since anyone
had so much as looked at the pool, and probably even old Hodges and
Mr Farrel's bailiff had forgotten its existence.

Well, you can imagine what I felt.  After a bit I couldn't even
bear the tantalization of watching.  I hurried back to the other
pool and got my fishing things together.  It was no use trying for
those colossal brutes with the tackle I had.  They'd snap it as if
it had been a hair.  And I couldn't go on fishing any longer for
the tiny bream.  The sight of the big carp had given me a feeling
in my stomach almost as if I was going to be sick.  I got on to my
bike and whizzed down the hill and home.  It was a wonderful secret
for a boy to have.  There was the dark pool hidden away in the
woods and the monstrous fish sailing round it--fish that had never
been fished for and would grab the first bait you offered them.  It
was only a question of getting hold of a line strong enough to hold
them.  Already I'd made all the arrangements.  I'd buy the tackle
that would hold them if I had to steal the money out of the till.
Somehow, God knew how, I'd get hold of half a crown and buy a
length of silk salmon line and some thick gut or gimp and Number 5
hooks, and come back with cheese and gentles and paste and
mealworms and brandlings and grasshoppers and every mortal bait a
carp might look at.  The very next Saturday afternoon I'd come back
and try for them.

But as it happened I never went back.  One never does go back.  I
never stole the money out of the till or bought the bit of salmon
line or had a try for those carp.  Almost immediately afterwards
something turned up to prevent me, but if it hadn't been that it
would have been something else.  It's the way things happen.

I know, of course, that you think I'm exaggerating about the size
of those fish.  You think, probably, that they were just medium-
sized fish (a foot long, say) and that they've swollen gradually in
my memory.  But it isn't so.  People tell lies about the fish
they've caught and still more about the fish that are hooked and
get away, but I never caught any of these or even tried to catch
them, and I've no motive for lying.  I tell you they were enormous.



5


Fishing!

Here I'll make a confession, or rather two.  The first is that when
I look back through my life I can't honestly say that anything I've
ever done has given me quite such a kick as fishing.  Everything
else has been a bit of a flop in comparison, even women.  I don't
set up to be one of those men that don't care about women.  I've
spent plenty of time chasing them, and I would even now if I had
the chance.  Still, if you gave me the choice of having any woman
you care to name, but I mean ANY woman, or catching a ten-pound
carp, the carp would win every time.  And the other confession is
that after I was sixteen I never fished again.

Why?  Because that's how things happen.  Because in this life we
lead--I don't mean human life in general, I mean life in this
particular age and this particular country--we don't do the things
we want to do.  It isn't because we're always working.  Even a
farm-hand or a Jew tailor isn't always working.  It's because
there's some devil in us that drives us to and fro on everlasting
idiocies.  There's time for everything except the things worth
doing.  Think of something you really care about.  Then add hour to
hour and calculate the fraction of your life that you've actually
spent in doing it.  And then calculate the time you've spent on
things like shaving, riding to and fro on buses, waiting in
railway, junctions, swapping dirty stories, and reading the
newspapers.

After I was sixteen I didn't go fishing again.  There never seemed
to be time.  I was at work, I was chasing girls, I was wearing my
first button boots and my first high collars (and for the collars
of 1909 you needed a neck like a giraffe), I was doing correspondence
courses in salesmanship and accountancy and 'improving my mind'.
The great fish were gliding round in the pool behind Binfield House.
Nobody knew about them except me.  They were stored away in my mind;
some day, some bank holiday perhaps, I'd go back and catch them.
But I never went back.  There was time for everything except that.
Curiously enough, the only time between then and now when I did very
nearly go fishing was during the war.

It was in the autumn of 1916, just before I was wounded.  We'd come
out of trenches to a village behind the line, and though it was
only September we were covered with mud from head to foot.  As
usual we didn't know for certain how long we were going to stay
there or where we were going afterwards.  Luckily the C.O. was a
bit off-colour, a touch of bronchitis or something, and so didn't
bother about driving us through the usual parades, kit-inspections,
football matches, and so forth which were supposed to keep up the
spirits of the troops when they were out of the line.  We spent the
first day sprawling about on piles of chaff in the barns where we
were billeted and scraping the mud off our putties, and in the
evening some of the chaps started queueing up for a couple of
wretched worn-out whores who were established in a house at the end
of the village.  In the morning, although it was against orders to
leave the village, I managed to sneak off and wander round the
ghastly desolation that had once been fields.  It was a damp,
wintry kind of morning.  All round, of course, were the awful muck
and litter of war, the sort of filthy sordid mess that's actually
worse than a battlefield of corpses.  Trees with boughs torn off
them, old shell-holes that had partly filled up again, tin cans,
turds, mud, weeds, clumps of rusty barbed wire with weeds growing
through them.  You know the feeling you had when you came out of
the line.  A stiffened feeling in all your joints, and inside you
a kind of emptiness, a feeling that you'd never again have any
interest in anything.  It was partly fear and exhaustion but mainly
boredom.  At that time no one saw any reason why the war shouldn't
go on for ever.  Today or tomorrow or the day after you were going
back to the line, and maybe next week a shell would blow you to
potted meat, but that wasn't so bad as the ghastly boredom of the
war stretching out for ever.

I was wandering up the side of a hedge when I ran into a chap in
our company whose surname I don't remember but who was nicknamed
Nobby.  He was a dark, slouching, gypsy-looking chap, a chap who
even in uniform always gave the impression that he was carrying a
couple of stolen rabbits.  By trade he was a coster and he was a
real Cockney, but one of those Cockneys that make part of their
living by hop-picking, bird-catching, poaching, and fruit-stealing
in Kent and Essex.  He was a great expert on dogs, ferrets, cage-
birds, fighting-cocks, and that kind of thing.  As soon as he saw
me he beckoned to me with his head.  He had a sly, vicious way of
talking:

''Ere, George!'  (The chaps still called me George--I hadn't got
fat in those days.)  'George!  Ja see that clump of poplars acrost
the field?'

'Yes.'

'Well, there's a pool on t'other side of it, and it's full of
bleeding great fish.'

'Fish?  Garn!'

'I tell you it's bleeding full of 'em.  Perch, they are.  As good
fish as ever I got my thumbs on.  Com'n see f'yerself, then.'

We trudged over the mud together.  Sure enough, Nobby was right.
On the other side of the poplars there was a dirty-looking pool
with sandy banks.  Obviously it had been a quarry and had got
filled up with water.  And it was swarming with perch.  You could
see their dark blue stripy backs gliding everywhere just under
water, and some of them must have weighed a pound.  I suppose in
two years of war they hadn't been disturbed and had had time to
multiply.  Probably you can't imagine what the sight of those perch
had done to me.  It was as though they'd suddenly brought me to
life.  Of course there was only one thought in both our minds--how
to get hold of a rod and line.

'Christ!' I said.  'We'll have some of those.'

'You bet we f-- well will.  C'mon back to the village and let's get
'old of some tackle.'

'O.K.  You want to watch out, though.  If the sergeant gets to know
we'll cop it.'

'Oh, f-- the sergeant.  They can 'ang, drore, and quarter me if
they want to.  I'm going to 'ave some of them bleeding fish.'

You can't know how wild we were to catch those fish.  Or perhaps
you can, if you've ever been at war.  You know the frantic boredom
of war and the way you'll clutch at almost any kind of amusement.
I've seen two chaps in a dugout fight like devils over half a
threepenny magazine.  But there was more to it than that.  It was
the thought of escaping, for perhaps a whole day, right out of the
atmosphere of war.  To be sitting under the poplar trees, fishing
for perch, away from the Company, away from the noise and the stink
and the uniforms and the officers and the saluting and the
sergeant's voice!  Fishing is the opposite of war.  But it wasn't
at all certain that we could bring it off.  That was the thought
that sent us into a kind of fever.  If the sergeant found out he'd
stop us as sure as fate, and so would any of the officers, and the
worst of all was that there was no knowing how long we were going
to stay at the village.  We might stay there a week, we might march
off in two hours.  Meanwhile we'd no fishing tackle of any kind,
not even a pin or a bit of string.  We had to start from scratch.
And the pool was swarming with fish!  The first thing was a rod.
A willow wand is best, but of course there wasn't a willow tree
anywhere this side of the horizon.  Nobby shinned up one of the
poplars and cut off a small bough which wasn't actually good but
was better than nothing.  He trimmed it down with his jack-knife
till it looked something like a fishing-rod, and then we hid it in
the weeds near the bank and managed to sneak back into the village
without being seen.

The next thing was a needle to make a hook.  Nobody had a needle.
One chap had some darning needles, but they were too thick and had
blunt ends.  We daren't let anyone know what we wanted it for, for
fear the sergeant should hear about it.  At last we thought of the
whores at the end of the village.  They were pretty sure to have a
needle.  When we got there--you had to go round to the back door
through a mucky courtyard--the house was shut up and the whores
were having a sleep which they'd no doubt earned.  We stamped and
yelled and banged on the door until after about ten minutes a fat
ugly woman in a wrapper came down and screamed at us in French.
Nobby shouted at her:

'Needle!  Needle!  You got a needle!'

Of course she didn't know what he was talking about.  Then Nobby
tried pidgin English, which he expected her as a foreigner to
understand:

'Wantee needle!  Sewee clothee!  Likee thisee!'

He made gestures which were supposed to represent sewing.  The
whore misunderstood him and opened the door a bit wider to let us
in.  Finally we made her understand and got a needle from her.
By this time it was dinner time.

After dinner the sergeant came round the barn where we were
billeted looking for men for a fatigue.  We managed to dodge him
just in time by getting under a pile of chaff.  When he was gone we
got a candle alight, made the needle red-hot, and managed to bend
it into a kind of hook.  We didn't have any tools except jack-
knives, and we burned our fingers badly.  The next thing was a
line.  Nobody had any string except thick stuff, but at last we
came across a fellow who had a reel of sewing thread.  He didn't
want to part with it and we had to give him a whole packet of fags
for it.  The thread was much too thin, but Nobby cut it into three
lengths, tied them to a nail in the wall, and carefully plaited
them.  Meanwhile after searching all over the village I'd managed
to find a cork, and I cut it in half and stuck a match through it
to make afloat.  By this time it was evening and getting on towards
dark.

We'd got the essentials now, but we could do with some gut.  There
didn't seem much hope of getting any until we thought of the
hospital orderly.  Surgical gut wasn't part of his equipment, but
it was just possible that he might have some.  Sure enough, when we
asked him, we found he'd a whole hank of medical gut in his
haversack.  It had taken his fancy in some hospital or other and
he'd pinched it.  We swapped another packet of fags for ten lengths
of gut.  It was rotten brittle stuff, in pieces about six inches
long.  After dark Nobby soaked them till they were pliable and tied
them end to end.  So now we'd got everything--hook, rod, line,
float, and gut.  We could dig up worms anywhere.  And the pool was
swarming with fish!  Huge great stripy perch crying out to be
caught!  We lay down to kip in such a fever that we didn't even
take our boots off.  Tomorrow!  If we could just have tomorrow!  If
the war would forget about us for just a day!  We made up our minds
that as soon as roll-call was over we'd hook it and stay away all
day, even if they gave us Field Punishment No. 1 for it when we
came back.

Well, I expect you can guess the rest.  At roll-call orders were to
pack all kits and be ready to march in twenty minutes.  We marched
nine miles down the road and then got on to lorries and were off to
another part of the line.  As for the pool under the poplar trees,
I never saw or heard of it again.  I expect it got poisoned with
mustard gas later on.

Since then I've never fished.  I never seemed to get the chance.
There was the rest of the war, and then like everyone else I was
fighting for a job, and then I'd got a job and the job had got me.
I was a promising young fellow in an insurance office--one of those
keen young businessmen with firm jaws and good prospects that you
used to read about in the Clark's College adverts--and then I was
the usual down-trodden five-to-ten-pounds-a-weeker in a semidetached
villa in the inner-outer suburbs.  Such people don't go fishing, any
more than stockbrokers go out picking primroses. It wouldn't be
suitable.  Other recreations are provided for them.

Of course I have my fortnight's holiday every summer.  You know
the kind of holiday.  Margate, Yarmouth, Eastbourne, Hastings,
Bournemouth, Brighton.  There's a slight variation according to
whether or not we're flush that year.  With a woman like Hilda
along, the chief feature of a holiday is endless mental arithmetic
to decide how much the boarding-house keeper is swindling you.
That and telling the kids, No, they can't have a new sandbucket.
A few years back we were at Bournemouth.  One fine afternoon we
loitered down the pier, which must be about half a mile long, and
all the way along it chaps were fishing with stumpy sea-rods with
little bells on the end and their lines stretching fifty yards out
to sea.  It's a dull kind of fishing, and they weren't catching
anything.  Still, they were fishing.  The kids soon got bored and
clamoured to go back to the beach, and Hilda saw a chap sticking a
lobworm on his hook and said it made her feel sick, but I kept
loitering up and down for a little while longer.  And suddenly
there was a tremendous ringing from a bell and a chap was winding
in his line.  Everyone stopped to watch.  And sure enough, in it
came, the wet line and the lump of lead and on the end a great
flat-fish (a flounder, I think) dangling and wriggling.  The chap
dumped it on to the planks of the pier, and it flapped up and down,
all wet and gleaming, with its grey warty back and its white belly
and the fresh salty smell of the sea.  And something kind of moved
inside me.

As we moved off I said casually, just to test Hilda's reaction:

'I've half a mind to do a bit of fishing myself while we're here.'

'What!  YOU go fishing, George?  But you don't even know how, do
you?'

'Oh, I used to be a great fisherman,' I told her.

She was vaguely against it, as usual, but didn't have many ideas
one way or the other, except that if I went fishing she wasn't
coming with me to watch me put those nasty squashy things on the
hook.  Then suddenly she got on to the fact that if I was to go
fishing the set-out-that I'd need, rod and reel and so forth, would
cost round about a quid.  The rod alone would cost ten bob.
Instantly she flew into a temper.  You haven't seen old Hilda when
there's talk of wasting ten bob.  She burst out at me:

'The IDEA of wasting all that money on a thing like that!  Absurd!
And how they DARE charge ten shillings for one of those silly
little fishing-rods!  It's disgraceful.  And fancy you going
fishing at your age!  A great big grown-up man like you.  Don't be
such a BABY, George.'

Then the kids got on to it.  Lorna sidled up to me and asked in
that silly pert way she has, 'Are you a baby, Daddy?' and little
Billy, who at that time didn't speak quite plain, announced to the
world in general, 'Farver's a baby.'  Then suddenly they were both
dancing round me, rattling their sandbuckets and chanting:

'Farver's a baby!  Farver's a baby!'

Unnatural little bastards!



6


And besides fishing there was reading.

I've exaggerated if I've given the impression that fishing was the
ONLY thing I cared about.  Fishing certainly came first, but
reading was a good second.  I must have been either ten or eleven
when I started reading--reading voluntarily, I mean.  At that age
it's like discovering a new world.  I'm a considerable reader even
now, in fact there aren't many weeks in which I don't get through a
couple of novels.  I'm what you might call the typical Boots
Library subscriber, I always fall for the best-seller of the moment
(The Good Companions, Bengal Lancer, Hatter's Castle--I fell for
every one of them), and I've been a member of the Left Book Club
for a year or more.  And in 1918, when I was twenty-five, I had a
sort of debauch of reading that made a certain difference to my
outlook.  But nothing is ever like those first years when you
suddenly discover that you can open a penny weekly paper and plunge
straight into thieves' kitchens and Chinese opium dens and
Polynesian islands and the forests of Brazil.

It was from when I was eleven to when I was about sixteen that I
got my biggest kick out of reading.  At first it was always the
boys' penny weeklies--little thin papers with vile print and an
illustration in three colours on the cover--and a bit later it was
books.  Sherlock Holmes, Dr Nikola, The Iron Pirate, Dracula,
Raffles.  And Nat Gould and Ranger Gull and a chap whose name I
forget who wrote boxing stories almost as rapidly as Nat Gould
wrote racing ones.  I suppose if my parents had been a little
better educated I'd have had 'good' books shoved down my throat,
Dickens and Thackeray and so forth, and in fact they did drive us
through Quentin Durward at school and Uncle Ezekiel sometimes tried
to incite me to read Ruskin and Carlyle.  But there were practically
no books in our house.  Father had never read a book in his life,
except the Bible and Smiles's Self Help, and I didn't of my own
accord read a 'good' book till much later.  I'm not sorry it
happened that way.  I read the things I wanted to read, and I got
more out of them than I ever got out of the stuff they taught me at
school.

The old penny dreadfuls were already going out when I was a kid,
and I can barely remember them, but there was a regular line of
boys' weeklies, some of which still exist.  The Buffalo Bill
stories have gone out, I think, and Nat Gould probably isn't read
any longer, but Nick Carter and Sexton Blake seem to be still the
same as ever.  The Gem and the Magnet, if I'm remembering rightly,
started about 1905.  The B.O.P. was still rather pi in those days,
but Chums, which I think must have started about 1903, was
splendid.  Then there was an encyclopedia--I don't remember its
exact name--which was issued in penny numbers.  It never seemed
quite worth buying, but a boy at school used to give away back
numbers sometimes.  If I now know the length of the Mississippi or
the difference between an octopus and a cuttle-fish or the exact
composition of bell-metal, that's where I learned it from.

Joe never read.  He was one of those boys who can go through years
of schooling and at the end of it are unable to read ten lines
consecutively.  The sight of print made him feel sick.  I've seen
him pick up one of my numbers of Chums, read a paragraph or two and
then turn away with just the same movement of disgust as a horse
when it smells stale hay.  He tried to kick me out of reading, but
Mother and Father, who had decided that I was 'the clever one',
backed me up.  They were rather proud that I showed a taste for
'book-learning', as they called it.  But it was typical of both of
them that they were vaguely upset by my reading things like Chums
and the Union Jack, thought that I ought to read something
'improving' but didn't know enough about books to be sure which
books were 'improving'.  Finally Mother got hold of a second-hand
copy of Foxe's Book of Martyrs, which I didn't read, though the
illustrations weren't half bad.

All through the winter of 1905 I spent a penny on Chums every week.
I was following up their serial story, 'Donovan the Dauntless'.
Donovan the Dauntless was an explorer who was employed by an
American millionaire to fetch incredible things from various
corners of the earth.  Sometimes it was diamonds the size of golf
balls from the craters of volcanoes in Africa, sometimes it was
petrified mammoths' tusks from the frozen forests of Siberia,
sometimes it was buried Inca treasures from the lost cities of
Peru.  Donovan went on a new journey every week, and he always made
good.  My favourite place for reading was the loft behind the yard.
Except when Father was getting out fresh sacks of grain it was the
quietest place in the house.  There were huge piles of sacks to lie
on, and a sort of plastery smell mixed up with the smell of
sainfoin, and bunches of cobwebs in all the corners, and just over
the place where I used to lie there was a hole in the ceiling and a
lath sticking out of the plaster.  I can feel the feeling of it
now.  A winter day, just warm enough to lie still.  I'm lying on my
belly with Chums open in front of me.  A mouse runs up the side of
a sack like a clockwork toy, then suddenly stops dead and watches
me with his little eyes like tiny jet beads.  I'm twelve years old,
but I'm Donovan the Dauntless.  Two thousand miles up the Amazon
I've just pitched my tent, and the roots of the mysterious orchid
that blooms once in a hundred years are safe in the tin box under
my camp bed.  In the forests all round Hopi-Hopi Indians, who paint
their teeth scarlet and skin white men alive, are beating their
war-drums.  I'm watching the mouse and the mouse is watching me,
and I can smell the dust and sainfoin and the cool plastery smell,
and I'm up the Amazon, and it's bliss, pure bliss.



7


That's all, really.

I've tried to tell you something about the world before the war,
the world I got a sniff of when I saw King Zog's name on the
poster, and the chances are that I've told you nothing.  Either you
remember before the war and don't need to be told about it, or you
don't remember, and it's no use telling you.  So far I've only
spoken about the things that happened to me before I was sixteen.
Up to that time things had gone pretty well with the family.  It
was a bit before my sixteenth birthday that I began to get glimpses
of what people call 'real life', meaning unpleasantness.

About three days after I'd seen the big carp at Binfield House,
Father came in to tea looking very worried and even more grey and
mealy than usual.  He ate his way solemnly through his tea and
didn't talk much.  In those days he had a rather preoccupied way of
eating, and his moustache used to work up and down with a sidelong
movement, because he hadn't many back teeth left.  I was just
getting up from table when he called me back.

'Wait a minute, George, my boy.  I got suthing to say to you.  Sit
down jest a minute.  Mother, you heard what I got to say last
night.'

Mother, behind the huge brown teapot, folded her hands in her lap
and looked solemn.  Father went on, speaking very seriously but
rather spoiling the effect by trying to deal with a crumb that
lodged somewhere in what was left of his back teeth:

'George, my boy, I got suthing to say to you.  I been thinking it
over, and it's about time you left school.  'Fraid you'll have to
get to work now and start earning a bit to bring home to your
mother.  I wrote to Mr Wicksey last night and told him as I should
have to take you away.'

Of course this was quite according to precedent--his writing to Mr
Wicksey before telling me, I mean.  Parents in those days, as a
matter of course, always arranged everything over their children's
heads.

Father went on to make some rather mumbling and worried explanations.
He'd 'had bad times lately', things had 'been a bit difficult',
and the upshot was that Joe and I would have to start earning
our living.  At that time I didn't either know or greatly
care whether the business was really in a bad way or not.  I hadn't
even enough commercial instinct to see the reason why things were
'difficult'.  The fact was that Father had been hit by competition.
Sarazins', the big retail seedsmen who had branches all over the
home counties, had stuck a tentacle into Lower Binfield.  Six
months earlier they'd taken the lease of a shop in the market-place
and dolled it up until what with bright green paint, gilt
lettering, gardening tools painted red and green, and huge
advertisements for sweet peas, it hit you in the eye at a hundred
yards' distance.  Sarazins', besides selling flower seeds,
described themselves as 'universal poultry and livestock
providers', and apart from wheat and oats and so forth they went in
for patent poultry mixtures, bird-seed done up in fancy packets,
dog-biscuits of all shapes and colours, medicines, embrocations,
and conditioning powders, and branched off into such things as rat-
traps, dog-chains, incubators, sanitary eggs, bird-nesting, bulbs,
weed-killer, insecticide, and even, in some branches, into what
they called a 'livestock department', meaning rabbits and day-old
chicks.  Father, with his dusty old shop and his refusal to stock
new lines, couldn't compete with that kind of thing and didn't want
to.  The tradesmen with their van-horses, and such of the farmers
as dealt with the retail seedsmen, fought shy of Sarazins', but
in six months they'd gathered in the petty gentry of the
neighbourhood, who in those days had carriages or dogcarts and
therefore horses.  This meant a big loss of trade for Father and
the other corn merchant, Winkle.  I didn't grasp any of this at the
time.  I had a boy's attitude towards it all.  I'd never taken any
interest in the business.  I'd never or hardly ever served in the
shop, and when, as occasionally happened, Father wanted me to run
an errand or give a hand with something, such as hoisting sacks of
grain up to the loft or down again, I'd always dodged it whenever
possible.  Boys in our class aren't such complete babies as public
schoolboys, they know that work is work and sixpence is sixpence,
but it seems natural for a boy to regard his father's business as a
bore.  Up till that time fishing-rods, bicycles, fizzy lemonade,
and so forth had seemed to me a good deal more real than anything
that happened in the grown-up world.

Father had already spoken to old Grimmett, the grocer, who wanted a
smart lad and was willing to take me into the shop immediately.
Meanwhile Father was going to get rid of the errand boy, and Joe
was to come home and help with the shop till he got a regular job.
Joe had left school some time back and had been more or less
loafing ever since.  Father had sometimes talked of 'getting him
into' the accounts department at the brewery, and earlier had even
had thoughts of making him into an auctioneer.  Both were
completely hopeless because Joe, at seventeen, wrote a hand like a
ploughboy and couldn't repeat the multiplication table.  At present
he was supposed to be 'learning the trade' at a big bicycle shop on
the outskirts of Walton.  Tinkering with bicycles suited Joe, who,
like most half-wits, had a slight mechanical turn, but he was quite
incapable of working steadily and spent all his time loafing about
in greasy overalls, smoking Woodbines, getting into fights,
drinking (he's started that already), getting 'talked of' with one
girl after another, and sticking Father for money.  Father was
worried, puzzled, and vaguely resentful.  I can see him yet, with
the meal on his bald head, and the bit of grey hair over his ears,
and his spectacles and his grey moustache.  He couldn't understand
what was happening to him.  For years his profits had gone up,
slowly and steadily, ten pounds this year, twenty pounds that year,
and now suddenly they'd gone down with a bump.  He couldn't
understand it.  He'd inherited the business from his father, he'd
done an honest trade, worked hard, sold sound goods, swindled
nobody--and his profits were going down.  He said a number of
times, between sucking at his teeth to get the crumb out, that
times were very bad, trade seemed very slack, he couldn't think
what had come over people, it wasn't as if the horses didn't have
to eat.  Perhaps it was these here motors, he decided finally.
'Nasty smelly things!' Mother put in.  She was a little worried,
and knew that she ought to be more so.  Once or twice while Father
was talking there was a far-away look in her eyes and I could see
her lips moving.  She was trying to decide whether it should be a
round of beef and carrots tomorrow or another leg of mutton.
Except when there was something in her own line that needed
foresight, such as buying linen or saucepans, she wasn't really
capable of thinking beyond tomorrow's meals.  The shop was giving
trouble and Father was worried--that was about as far as she saw
into it.  None of us had any grasp of what was happening.  Father
had had a bad year and lost money, but was he really frightened by
the future?  I don't think so.  This was 1909, remember.  He didn't
know what was happening to him, he wasn't capable of foreseeing
that these Sarazin people would systematically under-sell him, ruin
him, and eat him up.  How could he?  Things hadn't happened like
that when he was a young man.  All he knew was that times were bad,
trade was very 'slack', very 'slow' (he kept repeating these
phrases), but probably things would 'look up presently'.

It would be nice if I could tell you that I was a great help to my
father in his time of trouble, suddenly proved myself a man, and
developed qualities which no one had suspected in me--and so on and
so forth, like the stuff you used to read in the uplift novels of
thirty years ago.  Or alternatively I'd like to be able to record
that I bitterly resented having to leave school, my eager young
mind, yearning for knowledge and refinement, recoiled from the
soulless mechanical job into which they were thrusting me--and so
on and so forth, like the stuff you read in the uplift novels
today.  Both would be complete bunkum.  The truth is that I was
pleased and excited at the idea of going to work, especially when I
grasped that Old Grimmett was going to pay me real wages, twelve
shillings a week, of which I could keep four for myself.  The big
carp at Binfield House, which had filled my mind for three days
past, faded right out of it.  I'd no objection to leaving school a
few terms early.  It generally happened the same way with boys at
our school.  A boy was always 'going to' go to Reading University,
or study to be an engineer, or 'go into business' in London, or run
away to sea--and then suddenly, at two days' notice, he'd disappear
from school, and a fortnight later you'd meet him on a bicycle,
delivering vegetables.  Within five minutes of Father telling me
that I should have to leave school I was wondering about the new
suit I should wear to go to work in.  I instantly started demanding
a 'grown-up suit', with a kind of coat that was fashionable at that
time, a 'cutaway', I think it was called.  Of course both Mother
and Father were scandalized and said they'd 'never heard of such a
thing'.  For some reason that I've never fully fathomed, parents in
those days always tried to prevent their children wearing grown-up
clothes as long as possible.  In every family there was a stand-up
fight before a boy had his first tall collars or a girl put her
hair up.

So the conversation veered away from Father's business troubles and
degenerated into a long, nagging kind of argument, with Father
gradually getting angry and repeating over and over--dropping an
aitch now and again, as he was apt to do when he got angry--'Well,
you can't 'ave it.  Make up your mind to that--you can't 'ave it.'
So I didn't have my 'cutaway', but went to work for the first time
in a ready-made black suit and a broad collar in which I looked an
overgrown lout.  Any distress I felt over the whole business really
arose from that.  Joe was even more selfish about it.  He was
furious at having to leave the bicycle shop, and for the short time
that he remained at home he merely loafed about, made a nuisance of
himself and was no help to Father whatever.

I worked in old Grimmett's shop for nearly six years.  Grimmett was
a fine, upstanding, white-whiskered old chap, like a rather stouter
version of Uncle Ezekiel, and like Uncle Ezekiel a good Liberal.
But he was less of a firebrand and more respected in the town.
He'd trimmed his sails during the Boer War, he was a bitter enemy
of trade unions and once sacked an assistant for possessing a
photograph of Keir Hardie, and he was 'chapel'--in fact he was a
big noise, literally, in the Baptist Chapel, known locally as the
Tin Tab--whereas my family were 'church' and Uncle Ezekiel was an
infidel at that.  Old Grimmett was a town councillor and an
official at the local Liberal Party.  With his white whiskers, his
canting talk about liberty of conscience and the Grand Old Man, his
thumping bank balance, and the extempore prayers you could
sometimes hear him letting loose when you passed the Tin Tab, he
was a little like a legendary Nonconformist grocer in the story--
you've heard it, I expect:

'James!'

'Yessir?'

'Have you sanded the sugar?'

'Yessir!'

'Have you watered the treacle?'

'Yessir!'

'Then come up to prayers.'

God knows how often I heard that story whispered in the shop.  We
did actually start the day with a prayer before we put up the
shutters.  Not that old Grimmett sanded the sugar.  He knew that
that doesn't pay.  But he was a sharp man in business, he did all
the high-class grocery trade of Lower Binfield and the country
round, and he had three assistants in the shop besides the errand
boy, the van-man, and his own daughter (he was a widower) who acted
as cashier.  I was the errand boy for my first six months.  Then
one of the assistants left to 'set up' in Reading and I moved into
the shop and wore my first white apron.  I learned to tie a parcel,
pack a bag of currants, grind coffee, work the bacon-slicer, carve
ham, put an edge on a knife, sweep the floor, dust eggs without
breaking them, pass off an inferior article as a good one, clean a
window, judge a pound of cheese by eye, open a packing-case, whack
a slab of butter into shape, and--what was a good deal the hardest--
remember where the stock was kept.  I haven't such detailed
memories of grocering as I have of fishing, but I remember a good
deal.  To this day I know the trick of snapping a bit of string in
my fingers.  If you put me in front of a bacon-slicer I could work
it better than I can a typewriter.  I could spin you some pretty
fair technicalities about grades of China tea and what margarine is
made of and the average weight of eggs and the price of paper bags
per thousand.

Well, for more than five years that was me--an alert young chap
with a round, pink, snubby kind of face and butter-coloured hair
(no longer cut short but carefully greased and slicked back in what
people used to call a 'smarm'), hustling about behind the counter
in a white apron with a pencil behind my ear, tying up bags of
coffee like lightning and jockeying the customer along with 'Yes,
ma'am!  Certainly, ma'am!  AND the next order, ma'am!' in a voice
with just a trace of a Cockney accent.  Old Grimmett worked us
pretty hard, it was an eleven-hour day except on Thursdays and
Sundays, and Christmas week was a nightmare.  Yet it's a good time
to look back on.  Don't think that I had no ambitions.  I knew I
wasn't going to remain a grocer's assistant for ever, I was merely
'learning the trade'.  Some time, somehow or other, there'd be
enough money for me to 'set up' on my own.  That was how people
felt in those days.  This was before the war, remember, and before
the slumps and before the dole.  The world was big enough for
everyone.  Anyone could 'set up in trade', there was always room
for another shop.  And time was slipping on.  1909, 1910, 1911.
King Edward died and the papers came out with a black border round
the edge.  Two cinemas opened in Walton.  The cars got commoner on
the roads and cross-country motor-buses began to run.  An
aeroplane--a flimsy, rickety-looking thing with a chap sitting in
the middle on a kind of chair--flew over Lower Binfield and the
whole town rushed out of their houses to yell at it.  People began
to say rather vaguely that this here German Emperor was getting too
big for his boots and 'it' (meaning war with Germany) was 'coming
some time'.  My wages went gradually up, until finally, just before
the war, they were twenty-eight shillings a week.  I paid Mother
ten shillings a week for my board, and later, when times got worse,
fifteen shillings, and even that left me feeling richer than I've
felt since.  I grew another inch, my moustache began to sprout, I
wore button boots and collars three inches high.  In church on
Sundays, in my natty dark grey suit, with my bowler hat and black
dogskin gloves on the pew beside me, I looked the perfect gent, so
that Mother could hardly contain her pride in me.  In between work
and 'walking out' on Thursdays, and thinking about clothes and
girls, I had fits of ambition and saw myself developing into a Big
Business Man like Lever or William Whiteley.  Between sixteen and
eighteen I made serious efforts to 'improve my mind' and train
myself for a business career.  I cured myself of dropping aitches
and got rid of most of my Cockney accent.  (In the Thames Valley
the country accents were going out.  Except for the farm lads,
nearly everyone who was born later than 1890 talked Cockney.)  I
did a correspondence course with Littleburns' Commercial Academy,
learnt bookkeeping and business English, read solemnly through a
book of frightful blah called The Art of Salesmanship, and improved
my arithmetic and even my handwriting.  When I was as old as
seventeen I've sat up late at night with my tongue hanging out of
my mouth, practising copperplate by the little oil-lamp on the
bedroom table.  At times I read enormously, generally crime and
adventure stories, and sometimes paper-covered books which were
furtively passed round by the chaps at the shop and described as
'hot'.  (They were translations of Maupassant and Paul de Kock.)
But when I was eighteen I suddenly turned highbrow, got a ticket
for the County Library, and began to stodge through books by Marie
Corelli and Hall Caine and Anthony Hope.  It was at about that time
that I joined the Lower Binfield Reading Circle, which was run by
the vicar and met one evening a week all through the winter for
what was called 'literary discussion'.  Under pressure from the
vicar I read bits of Sesame and Lilies and even had a go at
Browning.

And time was slipping away.  1910, 1911, 1912.  And Father's
business was going down--not slumping suddenly into the gutter, but
it was going down.  Neither Father nor Mother was ever quite the
same after Joe ran away from home.  This happened not long after I
went to work at Grimmett's.

Joe, at eighteen, had grown into an ugly ruffian.  He was a hefty
chap, much bigger than the rest of the family, with tremendous
shoulders, a big head, and a sulky, lowering kind of face on which
he already had a respectable moustache.  When he wasn't in the tap-
room of the George he was loafing in the shop doorway, with his
hands dug deep into his pockets, scowling at the people who passed,
except when they happened to be girls, as though he'd like to knock
them down.  If anyone came into the shop he'd move aside just
enough to let them pass, and, without taking his hands out of his
pockets, yell over his shoulders 'Da-ad!  Shop!'  This was as near
as he ever got to helping.  Father and Mother said despairingly
that they 'didn't know what to do with him', and he was costing the
devil of a lot with his drinking and endless smoking.  Late one
night he walked out of the house and was never heard of again.
He'd prised open the till and taken all the money that was in it,
luckily not much, about eight pounds.  That was enough to get him a
steerage passage to America.  He'd always wanted to go to America,
and I think he probably did so, though we never knew for certain.
It made a bit of a scandal in the town.  The official theory was
that Joe had bolted because he'd put a girl in the family way.
There was a girl named Sally Chivers who lived in the same street
as the Simmonses and was going to have a baby, and Joe had
certainly been with her, but so had about a dozen others, and
nobody knew whose baby it was.  Mother and Father accepted the baby
theory and even, in private, used it to excuse their 'poor boy' for
stealing the eight pounds and running away.  They weren't capable
of grasping that Joe had cleared out because he couldn't stand a
decent respectable life in a little country town and wanted a life
of loafing, fights, and women.  We never heard of him again.
Perhaps he went utterly to the bad, perhaps he was killed in the
war, perhaps he merely didn't bother to write.  Luckily the baby
was born dead, so there were no complications.  As for the fact
that Joe had stolen the eight pounds, Mother and Father managed to
keep it a secret till they died.  In their eyes it was a much worse
disgrace than Sally Chivers's baby.

The trouble over Joe aged Father a great deal.  To lose Joe was
merely to cut a loss, but it hurt him and made him ashamed.  From
that time forward his moustache was much greyer and he seemed to
have grown a lot smaller.  Perhaps my memory of him as a little
grey man, with a round, lined, anxious face and dusty spectacles,
really dates from that time.  By slow degrees he was getting more
and more involved in money worries and less and less interested in
other things.  He talked less about politics and the Sunday papers,
and more about the badness of trade.  Mother seemed to have shrunk
a little, too.  In my childhood I'd known her as something vast and
overflowing, with her yellow hair and her beaming face and her
enormous bosom, a sort of great opulent creature like the figure-
head of a battleship.  Now she'd got smaller and more anxious and
older than her years.  She was less lordly in the kitchen, went in
more for neck of mutton, worried over the price of coal, and began
to use margarine, a thing which in the old days she'd never have
allowed into the house.  After Joe had gone Father had to hire an
errand boy again, but from then on he employed very young boys whom
he only kept for a year or two and who couldn't lift heavy weights.
I sometimes lent him a hand when I was at home.  I was too selfish
to do it regularly.  I can still see him working his way slowly
across the yard, bent double and almost hidden under an enormous
sack, like a snail under its shell.  The huge, monstrous sack,
weighing a hundred and fifty pounds, I suppose, pressing his neck
and shoulders almost to the ground, and the anxious, spectacled
face looking up from underneath it.  In 1911 he ruptured himself
and had to spend weeks in hospital and hire a temporary manager
for the shop, which ate another hole in his capital.  A small
shopkeeper going down the hill is a dreadful thing to watch, but it
isn't sudden and obvious like the fate of a working man who gets
the sack and promptly finds himself on the dole.  It's just a
gradual chipping away of trade, with little ups and downs, a few
shillings to the bad here, a few sixpences to the good there.
Somebody who's dealt with you for years suddenly deserts and goes
to Sarazins'.  Somebody else buys a dozen hens and gives you a
weekly order for corn.  You can still keep going.  You're still
'your own master', always a little more worried and a little
shabbier, with your capital shrinking all the time.  You can go on
like that for years, for a lifetime if you're lucky.  Uncle Ezekiel
died in 1911, leaving 120 pounds which must have made a lot of
difference to Father.  It wasn't till 1913 that he had to mortgage
his life-insurance policy.  That I didn't hear about at the time,
or I'd have understood what it meant.  As it was I don't think I
ever got further than realizing that Father 'wasn't doing well',
trade was 'slack', there'd be a bit longer to wait before I had the
money to 'set up'.  Like Father himself, I looked on the shop as
something permanent, and I was a bit inclined to be angry with him
for not managing things better.  I wasn't capable of seeing, and
neither was he nor anyone else, that he was being slowly ruined,
that his business would never pick up again and if he lived to be
seventy he'd certainly end in the workhouse.  Many a time I've
passed Sarazins' shop in the market-place and merely thought how
much I preferred their slick window-front to Father's dusty old
shop, with the 'S. Bowling' which you could hardly read, the
chipped white lettering, and the faded packets of bird-seed.  It
didn't occur to me that Sarazins' were tapeworms who were eating
him alive.  Sometimes I used to repeat to him some of the stuff
I'd been reading in my correspondence-course textbooks, about
salesmanship and modern methods.  He never paid much attention.
He'd inherited an old-established business, he'd always worked
hard, done a fair trade, and supplied sound goods, and things would
look up presently.  It's a fact that very few shopkeepers in those
days actually ended in the workhouse.  With any luck you died with
a few pounds still your own.  It was a race between death and
bankruptcy, and, thank God, death got Father first, and Mother too.

1911, 1912, 1913.  I tell you it was a good time to be alive.  It
was late in 1912, through the vicar's Reading Circle, that I first
met Elsie Waters.  Till then, although, like all the rest of the
boys in the town, I'd gone out looking for girls and occasionally
managed to connect up with this girl or that and 'walk out' a few
Sunday afternoons, I'd never really had a girl of my own.  It's a
queer business, that chasing of girls when you're about sixteen.
At some recognized part of the town the boys stroll up and down in
pairs, watching the girls, and the girls stroll up and down in
pairs, pretending not to notice the boys, and presently some kind
of contact is established and instead of twos they're trailing
along in fours, all four utterly speechless.  The chief feature of
those walks--and it was worse the second time, when you went out
with the girl alone--was the ghastly failure to make any kind of
conversation.  But Elsie Waters seemed different.  The truth was
that I was growing up.

I don't want to tell the story of myself and Elsie Waters, even if
there was any story to tell.  It's merely that she's part of the
picture, part of 'before the war'.  Before the war it was always
summer--a delusion, as I've remarked before, but that's how I
remember it.  the white dusty road stretching out between the
chestnut trees, the smell of night-stocks, the green pools under
the willows, the splash of Burford Weir--that's what I see when I
shut my eyes and think of 'before the war', and towards the end
Elsie Waters is part of it.

I don't know whether Elsie would be considered pretty now.  She was
then.  She was tall for a girl, about as tall as I am, with pale
gold, heavy kind of hair which she wore somehow plaited and coiled
round her head, and a delicate, curiously gentle face.  She was one
of those girls that always look their best in black, especially the
very plain black dresses they made them wear in the drapery--she
worked at Lilywhite's, the drapers, though she came originally from
London.  I suppose she would have been two years older than I was.

I'm grateful to Elsie, because she was the first person who taught
me to care about a woman.  I don't mean women in general, I mean an
individual woman.  I'd met her at the Reading Circle and hardly
noticed her, and then one day I went into Lilywhite's during
working hours, a thing I wouldn't normally have been able to do,
but as it happened we'd run out of butter muslin and old Grimmett
sent me to buy some.  You know the atmosphere of a draper's shop.
It's something peculiarly feminine.  There's a hushed feeling, a
subdued light, a cool smell of cloth, and a faint whirring from the
wooden balls of change rolling to and fro.  Elsie was leaning
against the counter, cutting off a length of cloth with the big
scissors.  There was something about her black dress and the curve
of her breast against the counter--I can't describe it, something
curiously soft, curiously feminine.  As soon as you saw her you
knew that you could take her in your arms and do what you wanted
with her.  She was really deeply feminine, very gentle, very
submissive, the kind that would always do what a man told her,
though she wasn't either small or weak.  She wasn't even stupid,
only rather silent and, at times, dreadfully refined.  But in those
days I was rather refined myself.

We were living together for about a year.  Of course in a town like
Lower Binfield you could only live together in a figurative sense.
Officially we were 'walking out', which was a recognized custom and
not quite the same as being engaged.  There was a road that
branched off from the road to Upper Binfield and ran along under
the edge of the hills.  There was a long stretch of it, nearly a
mile, that was quite straight and fringed with enormous horse-
chestnut trees, and on the grass at the side there was a footpath
under the boughs that was known as Lovers' Lane.  We used to go
there on the May evenings, when the chestnuts were in blossom.
Then the short nights came on, and it was light for hours after
we'd left the shop.  You know the feeling of a June evening.  The
kind of blue twilight that goes on and on, and the air brushing
against your face like silk.  Sometimes on Sunday afternoons we
went over Chamford Hill and down to the water-meadows along the
Thames.  1913!  My God!  1913!  The stillness, the green water, the
rushing of the weir!  It'll never come again.  I don't mean that
1913 will never come again.  I mean the feeling inside you, the
feeling of not being in a hurry and not being frightened, the
feeling you've either had and don't need to be told about, or
haven't had and won't ever have the chance to learn.

It wasn't till late summer that we began what's called living
together.  I'd been too shy and clumsy to begin, and too ignorant
to realize that there'd been others before me.  One Sunday
afternoon we went into the beech woods round Upper Binfield.  Up
there you could always be alone.  I wanted her very badly, and I
knew quite well that she was only waiting for me to begin.
Something, I don't know what, put it into my head to go into the
grounds of Binfield House.  Old Hodges, who was past seventy and
getting very crusty, was capable of turning us out, but he'd
probably be asleep on a Sunday afternoon.  We slipped through a gap
in the fence and down the footpath between the beeches to the big
pool.  It was four years or more since I'd been that way.  Nothing
had changed.  Still the utter solitude, the hidden feeling with the
great trees all round you, the old boat-house rotting among the
bulrushes.  We lay down in the little grass hollow beside the wild
peppermint, and we were as much alone as if we'd been in Central
Africa.  I'd kissed her God knows how many times, and then I'd got
up and was wandering about again.  I wanted her very badly, and
wanted to take the plunge, only I was half-frightened.  And
curiously enough there was another thought in my mind at the same
time.  It suddenly struck me that for years I'd meant to come back
here and had never come.  Now I was so near, it seemed a pity not
to go down to the other pool and have a look at the big carp.  I
felt I'd kick myself afterwards if I missed the chance, in fact I
couldn't think why I hadn't been back before.  The carp were stored
away in my mind, nobody knew about them except me, I was going to
catch them some time.  Practically they were MY carp.  I actually
started wandering along the bank in that direction, and then when
I'd gone about ten yards I turned back.  It meant crashing your way
through a kind of jungle of brambles and rotten brushwood, and I
was dressed up in my Sunday best.  Dark-grey suit, bowler hat,
button boots, and a collar that almost cut my ears off.  That was
how people dressed for Sunday afternoon walks in those days.  And I
wanted Elsie very badly.  I went back and stood over her for a
moment.  She was lying on the grass with her arm over her face, and
she didn't stir when she heard me come.  In her black dress she
looked--I don't know how, kind of soft, kind of yielding, as though
her body was a kind of malleable stuff that you could do what you
liked with.  She was mine and I could have her, this minute if I
wanted to.  Suddenly I stopped being frightened, I chucked my hat
on to the grass (it bounced, I remember), knelt down, and took hold
of her.  I can smell the wild peppermint yet.  It was my first
time, but it wasn't hers, and we didn't make such a mess of it as
you might expect.  So that was that.  The big carp faded out of my
mind again, and in fact for years afterwards I hardly thought about
them.

1913.  1914.  The spring of 1914.  First the blackthorn, then the
hawthorn, then the chestnuts in blossom.  Sunday afternoons along
the towpath, and the wind rippling the beds of rushes so that they
swayed all together in great thick masses and looked somehow like a
woman's hair.  The endless June evenings, the path under the
chestnut trees, an owl hooting somewhere and Elsie's body against
me.  It was a hot July that year.  How we sweated in the shop, and
how the cheese and the ground coffee smelt!  And then the cool of
the evening outside, the smell of night-stocks and pipe-tobacco in
the lane behind the allotments, the soft dust underfoot, and the
nightjars hawking after the cockchafers.

Christ!  What's the use of saying that one oughtn't to be sentimental
about 'before the war'?  I AM sentimental about it.  So are you if
you remember it.  It's quite true that if you look back on any
special period of time you tend to remember the pleasant bits.
That's true even of the war.  But it's also true that people then
had something that we haven't got now.

What?  It was simply that they didn't think of the future as
something to be terrified of.  It isn't that life was softer then
than now.  Actually it was harsher.  People on the whole worked
harder, lived less comfortably, and died more painfully.  The farm
hands worked frightful hours for fourteen shillings a week and
ended up as worn-out cripples with a five-shilling old-age pension
and an occasional half-crown from the parish.  And what was called
'respectable' poverty was even worse.  When little Watson, a small
draper at the other end of the High Street, 'failed' after years of
struggling, his personal assets were L2 9s. 6d., and he died almost
immediately of what was called 'gastric trouble', but the doctor
let it out that it was starvation.  Yet he'd clung to his frock
coat to the last.  Old Crimp, the watchmaker's assistant, a skilled
workman who'd been at the job, man and boy, for fifty years, got
cataract and had to go into the workhouse.  His grandchildren were
howling in the street when they took him away.  His wife went out
charing, and by desperate efforts managed to send him a shilling a
week for pocket-money.  You saw ghastly things happening sometimes.
Small businesses sliding down the hill, solid tradesmen turning
gradually into broken-down bankrupts, people dying by inches of
cancer and liver disease, drunken husbands signing the pledge every
Monday and breaking it every Saturday, girls ruined for life by an
illegitimate baby.  The houses had no bathrooms, you broke the ice
in your basin on winter mornings, the back streets stank like the
devil in hot weather, and the churchyard was bang in the middle of
the town, so that you never went a day without remembering how
you'd got to end.  And yet what was it that people had in those
days?  A feeling of security, even when they weren't secure.  More
exactly, it was a feeling of continuity.  All of them knew they'd
got to die, and I suppose a few of them knew they were going to go
bankrupt, but what they didn't know was that the order of things
could change.  Whatever might happen to themselves, things would go
on as they'd known them.  I don't believe it made very much
difference that what's called religious belief was still prevalent
in those days.  It's true that nearly everyone went to church, at
any rate in the country--Elsie and I still went to church as a
matter of course, even when we were living in what the vicar would
have called sin--and if you asked people whether they believed in a
life after death they generally answered that they did.  But I've
never met anyone who gave me the impression of really believing in
a future life.  I think that, at most, people believe in that kind
of thing in the same way as kids believe in Father Christmas.  But
it's precisely in a settled period, a period when civilization
seems to stand on its four legs like an elephant, that such things
as a future life don't matter.  It's easy enough to die if the
things you care about are going to survive.  You've had your life,
you're getting tired, it's time to go underground--that's how
people used to see it.  Individually they were finished, but their
way of life would continue.  Their good and evil would remain good
and evil.  They didn't feel the ground they stood on shifting under
their feet.

Father was failing, and he didn't know it.  It was merely that
times were very bad, trade seemed to dwindle and dwindle, his bills
were harder and harder to meet.  Thank God, he never even knew that
he was ruined, never actually went bankrupt, because he died very
suddenly (it was influenza that turned into pneumonia) at the
beginning of 1915.  To the end he believed that with thrift, hard
work, and fair dealing a man can't go wrong.  There must have been
plenty of small shopkeepers who carried that belief not merely on
to bankrupt deathbeds but even into the workhouse.  Even Lovegrove
the saddler, with cars and motor-vans staring him in the face,
didn't realize that he was as out of date as the rhinoceros.  And
Mother too--Mother never lived to know that the life she'd been
brought up to, the life of a decent God-fearing shopkeeper's
daughter and a decent God-fearing shopkeeper's wife in the reign
of good Queen Vic, was finished for ever.  Times were difficult
and trade was bad, Father was worried and this and that was
'aggravating', but you carried on much the same as usual.  The old
English order of life couldn't change.  For ever and ever decent
God-fearing women would cook Yorkshire pudding and apple dumplings
on enormous coal ranges, wear woollen underclothes and sleep on
feathers, make plum jam in July and pickles in October, and read
Hilda's Home Companion in the afternoons, with the flies buzzing
round, in a sort of cosy little underworld of stewed tea, bad legs,
and happy endings.  I don't say that either Father or Mother was
quite the same to the end.  They were a bit shaken, and sometimes a
little dispirited.  But at least they never lived to know that
everything they'd believed in was just so much junk.  They lived at
the end of an epoch, when everything was dissolving into a sort of
ghastly flux, and they didn't know it.  They thought it was
eternity.  You couldn't blame them.  That was what it felt like.

Then came the end of July, and even Lower Binfield grasped that
things were happening.  For days there was tremendous vague
excitement and endless leading articles in the papers, which Father
actually brought in from the shop to read aloud to Mother.  And
then suddenly the posters everywhere:


GERMAN ULTIMATUM.  FRANCE MOBILIZING


For several days (four days, wasn't it?  I forget the exact dates)
there was a strange stifled feeling, a kind of waiting hush, like
the moment before a thunderstorm breaks, as though the whole of
England was silent and listening.  It was very hot, I remember.  In
the shop it was as though we couldn't work, though already everyone
in the neighbourhood who had five bob to spare was rushing in to
buy quantities of tinned stuff and flour and oatmeal.  It was as if
we were too feverish to work, we only sweated and waited.  In the
evenings people went down to the railway station and fought like
devils over the evening papers which arrived on the London train.
And then one afternoon a boy came rushing down the High Street with
an armful of papers, and people were coming into their doorways to
shout across the street.  Everyone was shouting 'We've come in!
We've come in!'  The boy grabbed a poster from his bundle and stuck
it on the shop-front opposite:


ENGLAND DECLARES WAR ON GERMANY


We rushed out on to the pavement, all three assistants, and
cheered.  Everybody was cheering.  Yes, cheering.  But old
Grimmett, though he'd already done pretty well out of the war-
scare, still held on to a little of his Liberal principles, 'didn't
hold' with the war, and said it would be a bad business.

Two months later I was in the Army.  Seven months later I was in
France.



8


I wasn't wounded till late in 1916.

We'd just come out of the trenches and were marching over a bit of
road a mile or so back which was supposed to be safe, but which the
Germans must have got the range of some time earlier.  Suddenly
they started putting a few shells over--it was heavy H.E. stuff,
and they were only firing about one a minute.  There was the usual
zwee-e-e-e! and then BOOM! in a field somewhere over to the right.
I think it was the third shell that got me.  I knew as soon as I
heard it coming that it had my name written on it.  They say you
always know.  It didn't say what an ordinary shell says.  It said
'I'm after you, you b--, YOU, you b--, YOU!'--all this in the space
of about three seconds.  And the last you was the explosion.

I felt as if an enormous hand made of air were sweeping me along.
And presently I came down with a sort of burst, shattered feeling
among a lot of old tin cans, splinters of wood, rusty barbed wire,
turds, empty cartridge cases, and other muck in the ditch at the
side of the road.  When they'd hauled me out and cleaned some of
the dirt off me they found that I wasn't very badly hurt.  It was
only a lot of small shell-splinters that had lodged in one side of
my bottom and down the backs of my legs.  But luckily I'd broken a
rib in falling, which made it just bad enough to get me back to
England.  I spent that winter in a hospital camp on the downs near
Eastbourne.

Do you remember those war-time hospital camps?  The long rows of
wooden huts like chicken-houses stuck right on top of those beastly
icy downs--the 'south coast', people used to call it, which made me
wonder what the north coast could be like--where the wind seems to
blow at you from all directions at once.  And the droves of blokes
in their pale-blue flannel suits and red ties, wandering up and
down looking for a place out of the wind and never finding one.
Sometimes the kids from the slap-up boys' schools in Eastbourne
used to be led round in crocodiles to hand out fags and peppermint
creams to the 'wounded Tommies', as they called us.  A pink-faced
kid of about eight would walk up to a knot of wounded men sitting
on the grass, split open a packet of Woodbines and solemnly hand
one fag to each man, just like feeding the monkeys at the zoo.
Anyone who was strong enough used to wander for miles over the
downs in hopes of meeting girls.  There were never enough girls to
go round.  In the valley below the camp there was a bit of a
spinney, and long before dusk you'd see a couple glued against
every tree, and sometimes, if it happened to be a thick tree, one
on each side of it.  My chief memory of that time is sitting
against a gorse-bush in the freezing wind, with my fingers so cold
I couldn't bend them and the taste of a peppermint cream in my
mouth.  That's a typical soldier's memory.  But I was getting away
from a Tommy's life, all the same.  The C.O. had sent my name in
for a commission a little before I was wounded.  By this time they
were desperate for officers and anyone who wasn't actually
illiterate could have a commission if he wanted one.  I went
straight from the hospital to an officers' training camp near
Colchester.

It's very strange, the things the war did to people.  It was less
than three years since I'd been a spry young shop-assistant,
bending over the counter in my white apron with 'Yes, madam!
Certainly, madam!  AND the next order, madam?' with a grocer's life
ahead of me and about as much notion of becoming an Army officer as
of getting a knighthood.  And here I was already, swaggering about
in a gorblimey hat and a yellow collar and more or less keeping my
end up among a crowd of other temporary gents and some who weren't
even temporary.  And--this is really the point--not feeling it in
any way strange.  Nothing seemed strange in those days.

It was like an enormous machine that had got hold of you.  You'd no
sense of acting of your own free will, and at the same time no
notion of trying to resist.  If people didn't have some such
feeling as that, no war could last three months.  The armies would
just pack up and go home.  Why had I joined the Army?  Or the
million other idiots who joined up before conscription came in?
Partly for a lark and partly because of England my England and
Britons never never and all that stuff.  But how long did that
last?  Most of the chaps I knew had forgotten all about it long
before they got as far as France.  The men in the trenches weren't
patriotic, didn't hate the Kaiser, didn't care a damn about gallant
little Belgium and the Germans raping nuns on tables (it was always
'on tables', as though that made it worse) in the streets of
Brussels.  On the other hand it didn't occur to them to try and
escape.  The machine had got hold of you and it could do what it
liked with you.  It lifted you up and dumped you down among places
and things you'd never dreamed of, and if it had dumped you down on
the surface of the moon it wouldn't have seemed particularly
strange.  The day I joined the Army the old life was finished.  It
was as though it didn't concern me any longer.  I wonder if you'd
believe that from that day forward I only once went back to Lower
Binfield, and that was to Mother's funeral?  It sounds incredible
now, but it seemed natural enough at the time.  Partly, I admit, it
was on account of Elsie, whom, of course, I'd stopped writing to
after two or three months.  No doubt she'd picked up with someone
else, but I didn't want to meet her.  Otherwise, perhaps, when I
got a bit of leave I'd have gone down and seen Mother, who'd had
fits when I joined the Army but would have been proud of a son in
uniform.

Father died in 1915.  I was in France at the time.  I don't
exaggerate when I say that Father's death hurts me more now than
it did then.  At the time it was just a bit of bad news which I
accepted almost without interest, in the sort of empty-headed
apathetic way in which one accepted everything in the trenches.
I remember crawling into the doorway of the dugout to get enough
light to read the letter, and I remember Mother's tear-stains on
the letter, and the aching feeling in my knees and the smell of
mud.  Father's life-insurance policy had been mortgaged for most of
its value, but there was a little money in the bank and Sarazins'
were going to buy up the stock and even pay some tiny amount for
the good-will.  Anyway, Mother had a bit over two hundred pounds,
besides the furniture.  She went for the time being to lodge with
her cousin, the wife of a small-holder who was doing pretty well
out of the war, near Doxley, a few miles the other side of Walton.
It was only 'for the time being'.  There was a temporary feeling
about everything.  In the old days, which as a matter of fact were
barely a year old, the whole thing would have been an appalling
disaster.  With Father dead, the shop sold and Mother with two
hundred pounds in the world, you'd have seen stretching out in
front of you a kind of fifteen-act tragedy, the last act being a
pauper's funeral.  But now the war and the feeling of not being
one's own master overshadowed everything.  People hardly thought in
terms of things like bankruptcy and the workhouse any longer.  This
was the case even with Mother, who, God knows, had only very dim
notions about the war.  Besides, she was already dying, though
neither of us knew it.

She came across to see me in the hospital at Eastbourne.  It was
over two years since I'd seen her, and her appearance gave me a bit
of a shock.  She seemed to have faded and somehow to have shrunken.
Partly it was because by this time I was grown-up, I'd travelled,
and everything looked smaller to me, but there was no question that
she'd got thinner, and also yellower.  She talked in the old
rambling way about Aunt Martha (that was the cousin she was staying
with), and the changes in Lower Binfield since the war, and all the
boys who'd 'gone' (meaning joined the Army), and her indigestion
which was 'aggravating', and poor Father's tombstone and what a
lovely corpse he made.  It was the old talk, the talk I'd listened
to for years, and yet somehow it was like a ghost talking.  It
didn't concern me any longer.  I'd known her as a great splendid
protecting kind of creature, a bit like a ship's figure-head and a
bit like a broody hen, and after all she was only a little old
woman in a black dress.  Everything was changing and fading.  That
was the last time I saw her alive.  I got the wire saying she was
seriously ill when I was at the training school at Colchester, and
put in for a week's urgent leave immediately.  But it was too late.
She was dead by the time I got to Doxley.  What she and everyone
else had imagined to be indigestion was some kind of internal
growth, and a sudden chill on the stomach put the final touch.
The doctor tried to cheer me up by telling me that the growth was
'benevolent', which struck me as a queer thing to call it, seeing
that it had killed her.

Well, we buried her next to Father, and that was my last glimpse of
Lower Binfield.  It had changed a lot, even in three years.  Some
of the shops were shut, some had different names over them.  Nearly
all the men I'd known as boys were gone, and some of them were
dead.  Sid Lovegrove was dead, killed on the Somme.  Ginger Watson,
the farm lad who'd belonged to the Black Hand years ago, the one
who used to catch rabbits alive, was dead in Egypt.  One of the
chaps who'd worked with me at Grimmett's had lost both legs.  Old
Lovegrove had shut up his shop and was living in a cottage near
Walton on a tiny annuity.  Old Grimmett, on the other hand, was
doing well out of the war and had turned patriotic and was a member
of the local board which tried conscientious objectors.  The thing
which more than anything else gave the town an empty, forlorn kind
of look was that there were practically no horses left.  Every
horse worth taking had been commandeered long ago.  The station fly
still existed, but the brute that pulled it wouldn't have been able
to stand up if it hadn't been for the shafts.  For the hour or so
that I was there before the funeral I wandered round the town,
saying how d'you do to people and showing off my uniform.  Luckily
I didn't run into Elsie.  I saw all the changes, and yet it was as
though I didn't see them.  My mind was on other things, chiefly the
pleasure of being seen in my second-loot's uniform, with my black
armlet (a thing which looks rather smart on khaki) and my new
whipcord breeches.  I distinctly remember that I was still thinking
about those whipcord breeches when we stood at the graveside.  And
then they chucked some earth on to the coffin and I suddenly
realized what it means for your mother to be lying with seven feet
of earth on top of her, and something kind of twitched behind my
eyes and nose, but even then the whipcord breeches weren't
altogether out of my mind.

Don't think I didn't feel for Mother's death.  I did.  I wasn't in
the trenches any longer, I could feel sorry for a death.  But the
thing I didn't care a damn about, didn't even grasp to be
happening, was the passing-away of the old life I'd known.  After
the funeral, Aunt Martha, who was rather proud of having a 'real
officer' for a nephew and would have made a splash of the funeral
if I'd let her, went back to Doxley on the bus and I took the fly
down to the station, to get the train to London and then to
Colchester.  We drove past the shop.  No one had taken it since
Father died.  It was shut up and the window-pane was black with
dust, and they'd burned the 'S. Bowling' off the signboard with a
plumber's blowflame.  Well, there was the house where I'd been a
child and a boy and a young man, where I'd crawled about the
kitchen floor and smelt the sainfoin and read 'Donovan the
Dauntless', where I'd done my homework for the Grammar School,
mixed bread paste, mended bicycle punctures, and tried on my first
high collar.  It had been as permanent to me as the Pyramids, and
now it would be just an accident if I ever set foot in it again.
Father, Mother, Joe, the errand boys, old Nailer the terrier, Spot,
the one that came after Nailer, Jackie the bullfinch, the cats, the
mice in the loft--all gone, nothing left but dust.  And I didn't
care a damn.  I was sorry Mother was dead, I was even sorry Father
was dead, but all the time my mind was on other things.  I was a
bit proud of being seen riding in a cab, a thing I hadn't yet got
used to, and I was thinking of the sit of my new whipcord breeches,
and my nice smooth officer's putties, so different from the gritty
stuff the Tommies had to wear, and of the other chaps at Colchester
and the sixty quid Mother had left and the beanos we'd have with
it.  Also I was thanking God that I hadn't happened to run into
Elsie.

The war did extraordinary things to people.  And what was more
extraordinary than the way it killed people was the way it
sometimes didn't kill them.  It was like a great flood rushing you
along to death, and suddenly it would shoot you up some backwater
where you'd find yourself doing incredible and pointless things and
drawing extra pay for them.  There were labour battalions making
roads across the desert that didn't lead anywhere, there were chaps
marooned on oceanic islands to look out for German cruisers which
had been sunk years earlier, there were Ministries of this and that
with armies of clerks and typists which went on existing years
after their function had ended, by a kind of inertia.  People were
shoved into meaningless jobs and then forgotten by the authorities
for years on end.  This was what happened to myself, or very likely
I wouldn't be here.  The whole sequence of events is rather
interesting.

A little while after I was gazetted there was a call for officers
of the A.S.C.  As soon as the O.C. of the training camp heard that
I knew something about the grocery trade (I didn't let on that I'd
actually been behind the counter) he told me to send my name in.
That went through all right, and I was just about to leave for
another training-school for A.S.C. officers somewhere in the
Midlands when there was a demand for a young officer, with
knowledge of the grocery trade, to act as some kind of secretary to
Sir Joseph Cheam, who was a big noise in the A.S.C.  God knows why
they picked me out, but at any rate they did so.  I've since
thought that they probably mixed my name up with somebody else's.
Three days later I was saluting in Sir Joseph's office.  He was a
lean, upright, rather handsome old boy with grizzled hair and a
grave-looking nose which immediately impressed me.  He looked the
perfect professional soldier, the K.C.M.G., D.S.O. with bar type,
and might have been twin brother to the chap in the De Reszke
advert, though in private life he was chairman of one of the big
chain groceries and famous all over the world for something called
the Cheam Wage-Cut System.  He stopped writing as I came in and
looked me over.

'You a gentleman?'

'No, sir.'

'Good.  Then perhaps we'll get some work done.'

In about three minutes he'd wormed out of me that I had no
secretarial experience, didn't know shorthand, couldn't use a
typewriter, and had worked in a grocery at twenty-eight shillings a
week.  However, he said that I'd do, there were too many gentlemen
in this damned Army and he'd been looking for somebody who could
count beyond ten.  I liked him and looked forward to working for
him, but just at this moment the mysterious powers that seemed to
be running the war drove us apart again.  Something called the West
Coast Defence Force was being formed, or rather was being talked
about, and there was some vague idea of establishing dumps of
rations and other stores at various points along the coast.  Sir
Joseph was supposed to be responsible for the dumps in the south-
west corner of England.  The day after I joined his office he sent
me down to check over the stores at a place called Twelve Mile
Dump, on the North Cornish Coast.  Or rather my job was to find out
whether any stores existed.  Nobody seemed certain about this.  I'd
just got there and discovered that the stores consisted of eleven
tins of bully beef when a wire arrived from the War Office telling
me to take charge of the stores at Twelve Mile Dump and remain
there till further notice.  I wired back 'No stores at Twelve Mile
Dump.'  Too late.  Next day came the official letter informing me
that I was O.C. Twelve Mile Dump.  And that's really the end of the
story.  I remained O.C. Twelve Mile Dump for the rest of the war.

God knows what it was all about.  It's no use asking me what the
West Coast Defence Force was or what it was supposed to do.  Even
at that time nobody pretended to know.  In any case it didn't
exist.  It was just a scheme that had floated through somebody's
mind--following on some vague rumour of a German invasion via
Ireland, I suppose--and the food dumps which were supposed to exist
all along the coast were also imaginary.  The whole thing had
existed for about three days, like a sort of bubble, and then had
been forgotten, and I'd been forgotten with it.  My eleven tins of
bully beef had been left behind by some officers who had been there
earlier on some other mysterious mission.  They'd also left behind
a very deaf old man called Private Lidgebird.  What Lidgebird was
supposed to be doing there I never discovered.  I wonder whether
you'll believe that I remained guarding those eleven tins of bully
beef from half-way through 1917 to the beginning of 1919?  Probably
you won't, but it's the truth.  And at the time even that didn't
seem particularly strange.  By 1918 one had simply got out of the
habit of expecting things to happen in a reasonable manner.

Once a month they sent me an enormous official form calling upon me
to state the number and condition of pick-axes, entrenching tools,
coils of barbed wire, blankets, waterproof groundsheets, first-aid
outfits, sheets of corrugated iron, and tins of plum and apple jam
under my care.  I just entered 'nil' against everything and sent
the form back.  Nothing ever happened.  Up in London someone was
quietly filing the forms, and sending out more forms, and filing
those, and so on.  It was the way things were happening.  The
mysterious higher-ups who were running the war had forgotten my
existence.  I didn't jog their memory.  I was up a backwater that
didn't lead anywhere, and after two years in France I wasn't so
burning with patriotism that I wanted to get out of it.

It was a lonely part of the coast where you never saw a soul except
a few yokels who'd barely heard there was a war on.  A quarter of a
mile away, down a little hill, the sea boomed and surged over
enormous flats of sand.  Nine months of the year it rained, and the
other three a raging wind blew off the Atlantic.  There was nothing
there except Private Lidgebird, myself, two Army huts--one of them
a decentish two-roomed hut which I inhabited--and the eleven tins
of bully beef.  Lidgebird was a surly old devil and I could never
get much out of him except the fact that he'd been a market
gardener before he joined the Army.  It was interesting to see how
rapidly he was reverting to type.  Even before I got to Twelve Mile
Dump he'd dug a patch round one of the huts and started planting
spuds, in the autumn he dug another patch till he'd got about half
an acre under cultivation, at the beginning of 1918 he started
keeping hens which had got to quite a number by the end of the
summer, and towards the end of the year he suddenly produced a pig
from God knows where.  I don't think it crossed his mind to wonder
what the devil we were doing there, or what the West Coast Defence
Force was and whether it actually existed.  It wouldn't surprise me
to hear that he's there still, raising pigs and potatoes on the
spot where Twelve Mile Dump used to be.  I hope he is.  Good luck
to him.

Meanwhile I was doing something I'd never before had the chance to
do as a full-time job--reading.

The officers who'd been there before had left a few books behind,
mostly sevenpenny editions and nearly all of them the kind of tripe
that people were reading in those days.  Ian Hay and Sapper and the
Craig Kennedy stories and so forth.  But at some time or other
somebody had been there who knew what books are worth reading and
what are not.  I myself, at the time, didn't know anything of the
kind.  The only books I'd ever voluntarily read were detective
stories and once in a way a smutty sex book.  God knows I don't set
up to be a highbrow even now, but if you'd asked me THEN for the
name of a 'good' book I'd have answered The Woman Thou Gavest Me,
or (in memory of the vicar) Sesame and Lilies.  In any case a
'good' book was a book one didn't have any intention of reading.
But there I was, in a job where there was less than nothing to do,
with the sea booming on the beach and the rain streaming down the
window-panes--and a whole row of books staring me in the face on
the temporary shelf someone had rigged up against the wall of the
hut.  Naturally I started to read them from end to end, with, at
the beginning, about as much attempt to discriminate as a pig
working its way through a pail of garbage.

But in among them there were three or four books that were
different from the others.  No, you've got it wrong!  Don't run
away with the idea that I suddenly discovered Marcel Proust or
Henry James or somebody.  I wouldn't have read them even if I had.
These books I'm speaking of weren't in the least highbrow.  But now
and again it so happens that you strike a book which is exactly at
the mental level you've reached at the moment, so much so that it
seems to have been written especially for you.  One of them was
H. G. Wells's The History of Mr Polly, in a cheap shilling edition
which was falling to pieces.  I wonder if you can imagine the
effect it had upon me, to be brought up as I'd been brought up, the
son of a shopkeeper in a country town, and then to come across a
book like that?  Another was Compton Mackenzie's Sinister Street.
It had been the scandal of the season a few years back, and I'd
even heard vague rumours of it in Lower Binfield.  Another was
Conrad's Victory, parts of which bored me.  But books like that
started you thinking.  And there was a back number of some magazine
with a blue cover which had a short story of D. H. Lawrence's in
it.  I don't remember the name of it.  It was a story about a
German conscript who shoves his sergeant-major over the edge of a
fortification and then does a bunk and gets caught in his girl's
bedroom.  It puzzled me a lot.  I couldn't make out what it was all
about, and yet it left me with a vague feeling that I'd like to
read some others like it.

Well, for several months I had an appetite for books that was
almost like physical thirst.  It was the first real go-in at
reading that I'd had since my Dick Donovan days.  At the beginning
I had no idea how to set about getting hold of books.  I thought
the only way was to buy them.  That's interesting, I think.  It
shows you the difference upbringing makes.  I suppose the children
of the middle classes, the 500 pounds a year middle classes, know
all about Mudie's and the Times Book Club when they're in their
cradles.  A bit later I learned of the existence of lending
libraries and took out a subscription at Mudie's and another at a
library in Bristol.  And what I read during the next year or so!
Wells, Conrad, Kipling, Galsworthy, Barry Pain, W. W. Jacobs, Pett
Ridge, Oliver Onions, Compton Mackenzie, H. Seton Merriman, Maurice
Baring, Stephen McKenna, May Sinclair, Arnold Bennett, Anthony
Hope, Elinor Glyn, O. Henry, Stephen Leacock, and even Silas
Hocking and Jean Stratton Porter.  How many of the names in that
list are known to you, I wonder?  Half the books that people took
seriously in those days are forgotten now.  But at the beginning I
swallowed them all down like a whale that's got in among a shoal of
shrimps.  I just revelled in them.  After a bit, of course, I grew
more highbrow and began to distinguish between tripe and not-tripe.
I got hold of Lawrence's Sons and Lovers and sort of half-enjoyed
it, and I got a lot of kick out of Oscar Wilde's Dorian Gray and
Stevenson's New Arabian Nights.  Wells was the author who made the
biggest impression on me.  I read George Moore's Esther Waters and
liked it, and I tried several of Hardy's novels and always got
stuck about half-way through.  I even had a go at Ibsen, who left
me with a vague impression that in Norway it's always raining.

It was queer, really.  Even at the time it struck me as queer.  I
was a second-loot with hardly any Cockney accent left, I could
already distinguish between Arnold Bennett and Elinor Glyn, and yet
it was only four years since I'd been slicing cheese behind the
counter in my white apron and looking forward to the days when I'd
be a master-grocer.  If I tot up the account, I suppose I must
admit that the war did me good as well as harm.  At any rate that
year of reading novels was the only real education, in the sense of
book-learning, that I've ever had.  It did certain things to my
mind.  It gave me an attitude, a kind of questioning attitude,
which I probably wouldn't have had if I'd gone through life in a
normal sensible way.  But--I wonder if you can understand this--the
thing that really changed me, really made an impression on me,
wasn't so much the books I read as the rotten meaninglessness of
the life I was leading.

It really was unspeakably meaningless, that time in 1918.  Here I
was, sitting beside the stove in an Army hut, reading novels, and a
few hundred miles away in France the guns were roaring and droves
of wretched children, wetting their bags with fright, were being
driven into the machine-gun barrage like you'd shoot small coke
into a furnace.  I was one of the lucky ones.  The higher-ups had
taken their eye off me, and here I was in a snug little bolt-hole,
drawing pay for a job that didn't exist.  At times I got into a
panic and made sure they'd remember about me and dig me out, but it
never happened.  The official forms, on gritty grey paper, came in
once a month, and I filled them up and sent them back, and more
forms came in, and I filled them up and sent them back, and so it
went on.  The whole thing had about as much sense in it as a
lunatic's dream.  The effect of all this, plus the books I was
reading, was to leave me with a feeling of disbelief in everything.

I wasn't the only one.  The war was full of loose ends and
forgotten corners.  By this time literally millions of people were
stuck up backwaters of one kind and another.  Whole armies were
rotting away on fronts that people had forgotten the names of.
There were huge Ministries with hordes of clerks and typists all
drawing two pounds a week and upwards for piling up mounds of
paper.  Moreover they knew perfectly well that all they were doing
was to pile up mounds of paper.  Nobody believed the atrocity
stories and the gallant little Belgium stuff any longer.  The
soldiers thought the Germans were good fellows and hated the French
like poison.  Every junior officer looked on the General Staff as
mental defectives.  A sort of wave of disbelief was moving across
England, and it even got as far as Twelve Mile Dump.  It would be
an exaggeration to say that the war turned people into highbrows,
but it did turn them into nihilists for the time being.  People who
in a normal way would have gone through life with about as much
tendency to think for themselves as a suet pudding were turned into
Bolshies just by the war.  What should I be now if it hadn't been
for the war?  I don't know, but something different from what I am.
If the war didn't happen to kill you it was bound to start you
thinking.  After that unspeakable idiotic mess you couldn't go on
regarding society as something eternal and unquestionable, like a
pyramid.  You knew it was just a balls-up.



9


The war had jerked me out of the old life I'd known, but in the
queer period that came afterwards I forgot it almost completely.

I know that in a sense one never forgets anything.  You remember
that piece of orange-peel you saw in the gutter thirteen years ago,
and that coloured poster of Torquay that you once got a glimpse of
in a railway waiting-room.  But I'm speaking of a different kind of
memory.  In a sense I remembered the old life in Lower Binfield.
I remembered my fishing-rod and the smell of sainfoin and Mother
behind the brown teapot and Jackie the bullfinch and the horse-
trough in the market-place.  But none of it was alive in my mind
any longer.  It was something far away, something that I'd finished
with.  It would never have occurred to me that some day I might
want to go back to it.

It was a queer time, those years just after the war, almost queerer
than the war itself, though people don't remember it so vividly.
In a rather different form the sense of disbelieving in everything
was stronger than ever.  Millions of men had suddenly been kicked
out of the Army to find that the country they'd fought for didn't
want them, and Lloyd George and his pals were giving the works to
any illusions that still existed.  Bands of ex-service men marched
up and down rattling collection boxes, masked women were singing in
the streets, and chaps in officers' tunics were grinding barrel-
organs.  Everybody in England seemed to be scrambling for jobs,
myself included.  But I came off luckier than most.  I got a small
wound-gratuity, and what with that and the bit of money I'd put
aside during the last year of war (not having had much opportunity
to spend it), I came out of the Army with no less than three
hundred and fifty quid.  It's rather interesting, I think, to
notice my reaction.  Here I was, with quite enough money to do the
thing I'd been brought up to do and the thing I'd dreamed of for
years--that is, start a shop.  I had plenty of capital.  If you
bide your time and keep your eyes open you can run across quite
nice little businesses for three hundred and fifty quid.  And yet,
if you'll believe me, the idea never occurred to me.  I not only
didn't make any move towards starting a shop, but it wasn't till
years later, about 1925 in fact, that it even crossed my mind that
I might have done so.  The fact was that I'd passed right out of
the shopkeeping orbit.  That was what the Army did to you.  It
turned you into an imitation gentleman and gave you a fixed idea
that there'd always be a bit of money coming from somewhere.  If
you'd suggested to me then, in 1919, that I ought to start a shop--
a tobacco and sweet shop, say, or a general store in some god-
forsaken village--I'd just have laughed.  I'd worn pips on my
shoulder, and my social standards had risen.  At the same time I
didn't share the delusion, which was pretty common among ex-
officers, that I could spend the rest of my life drinking pink gin.
I knew I'd got to have a job.  And the job, of course, would be 'in
business'--just what kind of job I didn't know, but something high-
up and important, something with a car and a telephone and if
possible a secretary with a permanent wave.  During the last year
or so of war a lot of us had had visions like that.  The chap who'd
been a shop walker saw himself as a travelling salesman, and the
chap who'd been a travelling salesman saw himself as a managing
director.  It was the effect of Army life, the effect of wearing
pips and having a cheque-book and calling the evening meal dinner.
All the while there'd been an idea floating round--and this applied
to the men in the ranks as well as the officers--that when we came
out of the Army there'd be jobs waiting for us that would bring in
at least as much as our Army pay.  Of course, if ideas like that
didn't circulate, no war would ever be fought.

Well, I didn't get that job.  It seemed that nobody was anxious to
pay me 2,000 pounds a year for sitting among streamlined office
furniture and dictating letters to a platinum blonde.  I was
discovering what three-quarters of the blokes who'd been officers
were discovering--that from a financial point of view we'd been
better off in the Army than we were ever likely to be again.  We'd
suddenly changed from gentlemen holding His Majesty's commission
into miserable out-of-works whom nobody wanted.  My ideas soon sank
from two thousand a year to three or four pounds a week.  But even
jobs of the three or four pounds a week kind didn't seem to exist.
Every mortal job was filled already, either by men who'd been a few
years too old to fight, or by boys who'd been a few months too
young.  The poor bastards who'd happened to be born between 1890
and 1900 were left out in the cold.  And still it never occurred to
me to go back to the grocering business.  Probably I could have got
a job as a grocer's assistant; old Grimmett, if he was still alive
and in business (I wasn't in touch with Lower Binfield and didn't
know), would have given me good refs.  But I'd passed into a
different orbit.  Even if my social ideas hadn't risen, I could
hardly have imagined, after what I'd seen and learned, going back
to the old safe existence behind the counter.  I wanted to be
travelling about and pulling down the big dough.  Chiefly I wanted
to be a travelling salesman, which I knew would suit me.

But there were no jobs for travelling salesmen--that's to say, jobs
with a salary attached.  What there were, however, were on-
commission jobs.  That racket was just beginning on a big, scale.
It's a beautifully simple method of increasing your sales and
advertising your stuff without taking any risks, and it always
flourishes when times are bad.  They keep you on a string by
hinting that perhaps there'll be a salaried job going in three
months' time, and when you get fed up there's always some other
poor devil ready to take over.  Naturally it wasn't long before I
had an on-commission job, in fact I had quite a number in rapid
succession.  Thank God, I never came down to peddling vacuum-
cleaners, or dictionaries.  But I travelled in cutlery, in soap-
powder, in a line of patent corkscrews, tin-openers, and similar
gadgets, and finally in a line of office accessories--paper-clips,
carbon paper, typewriter ribbons, and so forth.  I didn't do so
badly either.  I'm the type that CAN sell things on commission.
I've got the temperament and I've got the manner.  But I never came
anywhere near making a decent living.  You can't, in jobs like
that--and, of course, you aren't meant to.

I had about a year of it altogether.  It was a queer time.  The
cross-country journeys, the godless places you fetched up in,
suburbs of Midland towns that you'd never hear of in a hundred
normal lifetimes.  The ghastly bed-and-breakfast houses where the
sheets always smell faintly of slops and the fried egg at breakfast
has a yolk paler than a lemon.  And the other poor devils of
salesmen that you're always meeting, middle-aged fathers of
families in moth-eaten overcoats and bowler hats, who honestly
believe that sooner or later trade will turn the corner and they'll
jack their earnings up to five quid a week.  And the traipsing from
shop to shop, and the arguments with shopkeepers who don't want to
listen, and the standing back and making yourself small when a
customer comes in.  Don't think that it worried me particularly.
To some chaps that kind of life is torture.  There are chaps who
can't even walk into a shop and open their bag of samples without
screwing themselves up as though they were going over the top.  But
I'm not like that.  I'm tough, I can talk people into buying things
they don't want, and even if they slam the door in my face it
doesn't bother me.  Selling things on commission is actually what I
like doing, provided I can see my way to making a bit of dough out
of it.  I don't know whether I learned much in that year, but I
unlearned a good deal.  It knocked the Army nonsense out of me, and
it drove into the back of my head the notions that I'd picked up
during the idle year when I was reading novels.  I don't think I
read a single book, barring detective stories, all the time I was
on the road.  I wasn't a highbrow any longer.  I was down among the
realities of modern life.  And what are the realities of modern
life?  Well, the chief one is an everlasting, frantic struggle to
sell things.  With most people it takes the form of selling
themselves--that's to say, getting a job and keeping it.  I suppose
there hasn't been a single month since the war, in any trade you
care to name, in which there weren't more men than jobs.  It's
brought a peculiar, ghastly feeling into life.  It's like on a
sinking ship when there are nineteen survivors and fourteen
lifebelts.  But is there anything particularly modern in that, you
say?  Has it anything to do with the war?  Well, it feels as if it
had.  That feeling that you've got to be everlastingly fighting and
hustling, that you'll never get anything unless you grab it from
somebody else, that there's always somebody after your job, the
next month or the month after they'll be reducing staff and it's
you that'll get the bird--THAT, I swear, didn't exist in the old
life before the war.

But meanwhile I wasn't badly off.  I was earning a bit and I'd
still got plenty of money in the bank, nearly two hundred quid, and
I wasn't frightened for the future.  I knew that sooner or later
I'd get a regular job.  And sure enough, after about a year, by a
stroke of luck it happened.  I say by a stroke of luck, but the
fact is that I was bound to fall on my feet.  I'm not the type that
starves.  I'm about as likely to end up in the workhouse as to end
up in the House of Lords.  I'm the middling type, the type that
gravitates by a kind of natural law towards the five-pound-a-week
level.  So long as there are any jobs at all I'll back myself to
get one.

It happened when I was peddling paper-clips and typewriter ribbons.
I'd just dodged into a huge block of offices in Fleet Street, a
building which canvassers weren't allowed into, as a matter of
fact, but I'd managed to give the lift attendant the impression
that my bag of samples was merely an attache case.  I was walking
along one of the corridors looking for the offices of a small
toothpaste firm that I'd been recommended to try, when I saw that
some very big bug was coming down the corridor in the other
direction.  I knew immediately that it was a big bug.  You know how
it is with these big business men, they seem to take up more room
and walk more loudly than any ordinary person, and they give off a
kind of wave of money that you can feel fifty yards away.  When he
got nearly up to me I saw that it was Sir Joseph Cheam.  He was in
civvies, of course, but I had no difficulty in recognizing him.  I
suppose he'd been there for some business conference or other.  A
couple of clerks, or secretaries, or something, were following
after him, not actually holding up his train, because he wasn't
wearing one, but you somehow felt that that was what they were
doing.  Of course I dodged aside instantly.  But curiously enough
he recognized me, though he hadn't seen me for years.  To my
surprise he stopped and spoke to me.

'Hullo, you!  I've seen you somewhere before.  What's your name?
It's on the tip of my tongue.'

'Bowling, sir.  Used to be in the A.S.C.'

'Of course.  The boy that said he wasn't a gentleman.  What are you
doing here?'

I might have told him I was selling typewriter ribbons, and there
perhaps the whole thing would have ended.  But I had one of those
sudden inspirations that you get occasionally--a feeling that I
might make something out of this if I handled it properly.  I said
instead:

'Well, sir, as a matter of fact I'm looking for a job.'

'A job, eh?  Hm.  Not so easy, nowadays.'

He looked me up and down for a second.  The two train-bearers had
kind of wafted themselves a little distance away.  I saw his rather
good-looking old face, with the heavy grey eyebrows and the
intelligent nose, looking me over and realized that he'd decided to
help me.  It's queer, the power of these rich men.  He'd been
marching past me in his power and glory, with his underlings after
him, and then on some whim or other he'd turned aside like an
emperor suddenly chucking a coin to a beggar.

'So you want a job?  What can you do?'

Again the inspiration.  No use, with a bloke like this, cracking up
your own merits.  Stick to the truth.  I said:  'Nothing, sir.  But
I want a job as a travelling salesman.'

'Salesman?  Hm.  Not sure that I've got anything for you at
present.  Let's see.'

He pursed his lips up.  For a moment, half a minute perhaps, he
was thinking quite deeply.  It was curious.  Even at the time I
realized that it was curious.  This important old bloke, who was
probably worth at least half a million, was actually taking thought
on my behalf.  I'd deflected him from his path and wasted at least
three minutes of his time, all because of a chance remark I'd
happened to make years earlier.  I'd stuck in his memory and
therefore he was willing to take the tiny bit of trouble that was
needed to find me a job.  I dare say the same day he gave twenty
clerks the sack.  Finally he said:

'How'd you like to go into an insurance firm?  Always fairly safe,
you know.  People have got to have insurance, same as they've got
to eat.'

Of course I jumped at the idea of going into an insurance firm.
Sir Joseph was 'interested' in the Flying Salamander.  God knows
how many companies he was 'interested' in.  One of the underlings
wafted himself forward with a scribbling-pad, and there and then,
with the gold stylo out of his waistcoat pocket, Sir Joseph
scribbled me a note to some higher-up in the Flying Salamander.
Then I thanked him, and he marched on, and I sneaked off in the
other direction, and we never saw one another again.

Well, I got the job, and, as I said earlier, the job got me.  I've
been with the Flying Salamander close on eighteen years.  I started
off in the office, but now I'm what's known as an Inspector,
or, when there's reason to sound particularly impressive, a
Representative.  A couple of days a week I'm working in the
district office, and the rest of the time I'm travelling around,
interviewing clients whose names have been sent in by the local
agents, making assessments of shops and other property, and now and
again snapping up a few orders on my own account.  I earn round
about seven quid a week.  And properly speaking that's the end of
my story.

When I look back I realize that my active life, if I ever had one,
ended when I was sixteen.  Everything that really matters to me had
happened before that date.  But in a manner of speaking things were
still happening--the war, for instance--up to the time when I got
the job with the Flying Salamander.  After that--well, they say
that happy people have no histories, and neither do the blokes who
work in insurance offices.  From that day forward there was nothing
in my life that you could properly describe as an event, except
that about two and a half years later, at the beginning of '23, I
got married.



10


I was living in a boarding-house in Ealing.  The years were rolling
on, or crawling on.  Lower Binfield had passed almost out of my
memory.  I was the usual young city worker who scoots for the 8.15
and intrigues for the other fellow's job.  I was fairly well
thought of in the firm and pretty satisfied with life.  The post-
war success dope had caught me, more or less.  You remember the
line of talk.  Pep, punch, grit, sand.  Get on or get out.  There's
plenty of room at the top.  You can't keep a good man down.  And
the ads in the magazines about the chap that the boss clapped on
the shoulder, and the keen-jawed executive who's pulling down the
big dough and attributes his success to so and so's correspondence
course.  It's funny how we all swallowed it, even blokes like me to
whom it hadn't the smallest application.  Because I'm neither a go-
getter nor a down-and-out, and I'm by nature incapable of being
either.  But it was the spirit of the time.  Get on!  Make good!
If you see a man down, jump on his guts before he gets up again.
Of course this was in the early twenties, when some of the effects
of the war had worn off and the slump hadn't yet arrived to knock
the stuffing out of us.

I had an 'A' subscription at Boots and went to half-crown dances
and belonged to a local tennis club.  You know those tennis clubs
in the genteel suburbs--little wooden pavilions and high wire-
netting enclosures where young chaps in rather badly cut white
flannels prance up and down, shouting 'Fifteen forty!' and 'Vantage
all!' in voices which are a tolerable imitation of the Upper Crust.
I'd learned to play tennis, didn't dance too badly, and got on well
with the girls.  At nearly thirty I wasn't a bad-looking chap, with
my red face and butter-coloured hair, and in those days it was
still a point in your favour to have fought in the war.  I never,
then or at any other time, succeeded in looking like a gentleman,
but on the other hand you probably wouldn't have taken me for the
son of a small shopkeeper in a country town.  I could keep my end
up in the rather mixed society of a place like Ealing, where the
office-employee class overlaps with the middling-professional
class.  It was at the tennis club that I first met Hilda.

At that time Hilda was twenty-four.  She was a small, slim, rather
timid girl, with dark hair, beautiful movements, and--because of
having very large eyes--a distinct resemblance to a hare.  She was
one of those people who never say much, but remain on the edge of
any conversation that's going on, and give the impression that
they're listening.  If she said anything at all, it was usually
'Oh, yes, I think so too', agreeing with whoever had spoken last.
At tennis she hopped about very gracefully, and didn't play badly,
but somehow had a helpless, childish air.  Her surname was Vincent.

If you're married, there'll have been times when you've said to
yourself 'Why the hell did I do it?' and God knows I've said it
often enough about Hilda.  And once again, looking at it across
fifteen years, why DID I marry Hilda?

Partly, of course, because she was young and in a way very pretty.
Beyond that I can only say that because she came of totally
different origins from myself it was very difficult for me to get
any grasp of what she was really like.  I had to marry her first
and find out about her afterwards, whereas if I'd married say,
Elsie Waters, I'd have known what I was marrying.  Hilda belonged
to a class I only knew by hearsay, the poverty-stricken officer
class.  For generations past her family had been soldiers, sailors,
clergymen, Anglo-Indian officials, and that kind of thing.  They'd
never had any money, but on the other hand none of them had ever
done anything that I should recognize as work.  Say what you will,
there's a kind of snob-appeal in that, if you belong as I do to the
God-fearing shopkeeper class, the low church, and high-tea class.
It wouldn't make any impression on me now, but it did then.  Don't
mistake what I'm saying.  I don't mean that I married Hilda BECAUSE
she belonged to the class I'd once served across the counter, with
some notion of jockeying myself up in the social scale.  It was
merely that I couldn't understand her and therefore was capable of
being goofy about her.  And one thing I certainly didn't grasp was
that the girls in these penniless middle-class families will marry
anything in trousers, just to get away from home.

It wasn't long before Hilda took me home to see her family.  I
hadn't known till then that there was a considerable Anglo-Indian
colony in Ealing.  Talk about discovering a new world!  It was
quite a revelation to me.

Do you know these Anglo-Indian families?  It's almost impossible,
when you get inside these people's houses, to remember that out in
the street it's England and the twentieth century.  As soon as you
set foot inside the front door you're in India in the eighties.
You know the kind of atmosphere.  The carved teak furniture, the
brass trays, the dusty tiger-skulls on the wall, the Trichinopoly
cigars, the red-hot pickles, the yellow photographs of chaps in
sun-helmets, the Hindustani words that you're expected to know the
meaning of, the everlasting anecdotes about tiger-shoots and what
Smith said to Jones in Poona in '87.  It's a sort of little world
of their own that they've created, like a kind of cyst.  To me, of
course, it was all quite new and in some ways rather interesting.
Old Vincent, Hilda's father, had been not only in India but also in
some even more outlandish place, Borneo or Sarawak, I forget which.
He was the usual type, completely bald, almost invisible behind his
moustache, and full of stories about cobras and cummerbunds and
what the district collector said in '93.  Hilda's mother was so
colourless that she was just like one of the faded photos on the
wall.  There was also a son, Harold, who had some official job in
Ceylon and was home on leave at the time when I first met Hilda.
They had a little dark house in one of those buried back-streets
that exist in Ealing.  It smelt perpetually of Trichinopoly cigars
and it was so full of spears, blow-pipes, brass ornaments, and the
heads of wild animals that you could hardly move about in it.

Old Vincent had retired in 1910, and since then he and his wife had
shown about as much activity, mental or physical, as a couple of
shellfish.  But at the time I was vaguely impressed by a family
which had had majors, colonels, and once even an admiral in it.
My attitude towards the Vincents, and theirs towards me, is an
interesting illustration of what fools people can be when they get
outside their own line.  Put me among business people--whether
they're company directors or commercial travellers--and I'm a
fairly good judge of character.  But I had no experience whatever
of the officer-rentier-clergyman class, and I was inclined to kow-
tow to these decayed throw-outs.  I looked on them as my social and
intellectual superiors, while they on the other hand mistook me for
a rising young businessman who before long would be pulling down
the big dough.  To people of that kind, 'business', whether it's
marine insurance or selling peanuts, is just a dark mystery.  All
they know is that it's something rather vulgar out of which you can
make money.  Old Vincent used to talk impressively about my being
'in business'--once, I remember, he had a slip of the tongue and
said 'in trade'--and obviously didn't grasp the difference between
being in business as an employee and being there on your own
account.  He had some vague notion that as I was 'in' the Flying
Salamander I should sooner or later rise to the top of it, by a
process of promotion.  I think it's possible that he also had
pictures of himself touching me for fivers at some future date.
Harold certainly had.  I could see it in his eye.  In fact, even
with my income being what it is, I'd probably be lending money to
Harold at this moment if he were alive.  Luckily he died a few
years after we were married, of enteric or something, and both the
old Vincents are dead too.

Well, Hilda and I were married, and right from the start it was a
flop.  Why did you marry her? you say.  But why did you marry
yours?  These things happen to us.  I wonder whether you'll believe
that during the first two or three years I had serious thoughts of
killing Hilda.  Of course in practice one never does these things,
they're only a kind of fantasy that one enjoys thinking about.
Besides, chaps who murder their wives always get copped.  However
cleverly you've faked the alibi, they know perfectly well that it's
you who did it, and they'll pin it on to you somehow.  When a
woman's bumped off, her husband is always the first suspect--which
gives you a little side-glimpse of what people really think about
marriage.

One gets used to everything in time.  After a year or two I stopped
wanting to kill her and started wondering about her.  Just
wondering.  For hours, sometimes, on Sunday afternoons or in the
evening when I've come home from work, I've lain on my bed with all
my clothes on except my shoes, wondering about women.  Why they're
like that, how they get like that, whether they're doing it on
purpose.  It seems to be a most frightful thing, the suddenness
with which some women go to pieces after they're married.  It's as
if they were strung up to do just that one thing, and the instant
they've done it they wither off like a flower that's set its seed.
What really gets me down is the dreary attitude towards life that
it implies.  If marriage was just an open swindle--if the woman
trapped you into it and then turned round and said, 'Now, you
bastard, I've caught you and you're going to work for me while I
have a good time!'--I wouldn't mind so much.  But not a bit of it.
They don't want to have a good time, they merely want to slump into
middle age as quickly as possible.  After the frightful battle of
getting her man to the altar, the woman kind of relaxes, and all
her youth, looks, energy, and joy of life just vanish overnight.
It was like that with Hilda.  Here was this pretty, delicate girl,
who'd seemed to me--and in fact when I first knew her she WAS--a
finer type of animal than myself, and within only about three years
she'd settled down into a depressed, lifeless, middle-aged frump.
I'm not denying that I was part of the reason.  But whoever she'd
married it would have been much the same.

What Hilda lacks--I discovered this about a week after we were
married--is any kind of joy in life, any kind of interest in things
for their own sake.  The idea of doing things because you enjoy
them is something she can hardly understand.  It was through Hilda
that I first got a notion of what these decayed middle-class
families are really like.  The essential fact about them is that
all their vitality has been drained away by lack of money.  In
families like that, which live on tiny pensions and annuities--
that's to say on incomes which never get bigger and generally get
smaller--there's more sense of poverty, more crust-wiping, and
looking twice at sixpence, than you'd find in any farm-labourer's
family, let alone a family like mine.  Hilda's often told me that
almost the first thing she can remember is a ghastly feeling that
there was never enough money for anything.  Of course, in that kind
of family, the lack of money is always at its worst when the kids
are at the school-age.  Consequently they grow up, especially the
girls, with a fixed idea not only that one always IS hard-up but
that it's one's duty to be miserable about it.

At the beginning we lived in a poky little maisonette and had a job
to get by on my wages.  Later, when I was transferred to the West
Bletchley branch, things were better, but Hilda's attitude didn't
change.  Always that ghastly glooming about money!  The milk bill!
The coal bill!  The rent!  The school fees!  We've lived all our
life together to the tune of 'Next week we'll be in the workhouse.'
It's not that Hilda's mean, in the ordinary sense of the word, and
still less that she's selfish.  Even when there happens to be a bit
of spare cash knocking about I can hardly persuade her to buy
herself any decent clothes.  But she's got this feeling that you
OUGHT to be perpetually working yourself up into a stew about lack
of money.  Just working up an atmosphere of misery from a sense of
duty.  I'm not like that.  I've got more the prole's attitude
towards money.  Life's here to be lived, and if we're going to be
in the soup next week--well, next week is a long way off.  What
really shocks her is the fact that I refuse to worry.  She's always
going for me about it.  'But, George!  You don't seem to REALIZE!
We've simply got no money at all!  It's very SERIOUS!'  She loves
getting into a panic because something or other is 'serious'.  And
of late she's got that trick, when she's glooming about something,
of kind of hunching her shoulders and folding her arms across her
breast.  If you made a list of Hilda's remarks throughout the day,
you'd find three bracketed together at the top--'We can't afford
it', 'It's a great saving', and 'I don't know where the money's to
come from'.  She does everything for negative reasons.  When she
makes a cake she's not thinking about the cake, only about how to
save butter and eggs.  When I'm in bed with her all she thinks
about is how not to have a baby.  If she goes to the pictures she's
all the time writhing with indignation about the price of the
seats.  Her methods of housekeeping, with all the emphasis on
'using things up' and 'making things do', would have given Mother
convulsions.  On the other hand, Hilda isn't in the least a snob.
She's never looked down on me because I'm not a gentleman.  On the
contrary, from her point of view I'm much too lordly in my habits.
We never have a meal in a tea-shop without a frightful row in
whispers because I'm tipping the waitress too much.  And it's a
curious thing that in the last few years she's become much more
definitely lower-middle-class, in outlook and even in appearance,
than I am.  Of course all this 'saving' business has never led to
anything.  It never does.  We live just about as well or as badly
as the other people in Ellesmere Road.  But the everlasting stew
about the gas bill and the milk bill and the awful price of butter
and the kids' boots and school-fees goes on and on.  It's a kind of
game with Hilda.

We moved to West Bletchley in '29 and started buying the house in
Ellesmere Road the next year, a little before Billy was born.
After I was made an Inspector I was more away from home and had
more opportunities with other women.  Of course I was unfaithful--
I won't say all the time, but as often as I got the chance.
Curiously enough, Hilda was jealous.  In a way, considering how
little that kind of thing means to her, I wouldn't have expected
her to mind.  And like all jealous women she'll sometimes show a
cunning you wouldn't think her capable of.  Sometimes the way she's
caught me out would have made me believe in telepathy, if it wasn't
that she's often been equally suspicious when I didn't happen to be
guilty.  I'm more or less permanently under suspicion, though, God
knows, in the last few years--the last five years, anyway--I've
been innocent enough.  You have to be, when you're as fat as I am.

Taking it by and large, I suppose Hilda and I don't get on worse
than about half the couples in Ellesmere Road.  There've been times
when I've thought of separation or divorce, but in our walk of life
you don't do those things.  You can't afford to.  And then time
goes on, and you kind of give up struggling.  When you've lived
with a woman for fifteen years, it's difficult to imagine life
without her.  She's part of the order of things.  I dare say you
might find things to object to in the sun and the moon, but do you
really want to change them?  Besides, there were the kids.  Kids
are a 'link', as they say.  Or a 'tie'.  Not to say a ball and
fetter.

Of late years Hilda has made two great friends called Mrs Wheeler
and Miss Minns.  Mrs Wheeler is a widow, and I gather she's got
very bitter ideas about the male sex.  I can feel her kind of
quivering with disapproval if I so much as come into the room.
She's a faded little woman and gives you a curious impression that
she's the same colour all over, a kind of greyish dust-colour, but
she's full of energy.  She's a bad influence on Hilda, because
she's got the same passion for 'saving' and 'making things do',
though in a slightly different form.  With her it takes the form
of thinking that you can have a good time without paying for it.
She's for ever nosing out bargains and amusements that don't cost
money.  With people like that it doesn't matter a damn whether they
want a thing or not, it's merely a question of whether they can get
it on the cheap.  When the big shops have their remnant sales Mrs
Wheeler's always at the head of the queue, and it's her greatest
pride, after a day's hard fighting round the counter, to come out
without having bought anything.  Miss Minns is quite a different
sort.  She's really a sad case, poor Miss Minns.  She's a tall thin
woman of about thirty-eight, with black patent-leather hair and a
very GOOD, trusting kind of face.  She lives on some kind of tiny
fixed income, an annuity or something, and I fancy she's a left-
over from the old society of West Bletchley, when it was a little
country town, before the suburb grew up.  It's written all over her
that her father was a clergyman and sat on her pretty heavily while
he lived.  They're a special by-product of the middle classes,
these women who turn into withered bags before they even manage to
escape from home.  Poor old Miss Minns, for all her wrinkles, still
looks exactly like a child.  It's still a tremendous adventure to
her not to go to church.  She's always burbling about 'modern
progress' and 'the woman's movement', and she's got a vague
yearning to do something she calls 'developing her mind', only she
doesn't quite know how to start.  I think in the beginning she
cottoned on to Hilda and Mrs Wheeler out of pure loneliness, but
now they take her with them wherever they go.

And the times they've had together, those three!  Sometimes I've
almost envied them.  Mrs Wheeler is the leading spirit.  You
couldn't name a kind of idiocy that she hasn't dragged them into at
one time or another.  Anything from theosophy to cat's-cradle,
provided you can do it on the cheap.  For months they went in for
the food-crank business.  Mrs Wheeler had picked up a second-hand
copy of some book called Radiant Energy which proved that you
should live on lettuces and other things that don't cost money.
Of course this appealed to Hilda, who immediately began starving
herself.  She'd have tried it on me and the kids as well, only I
put my foot down.  Then they had a go at faith-healing.  Then they
thought of tackling Pelmanism, but after a lot of correspondence
they found that they couldn't get the booklets free, which had been
Mrs Wheeler's idea.  Then it was hay-box cookery.  Then it was some
filthy stuff called bee wine, which was supposed to cost nothing at
all because you made it out of water.  They dropped that after
they'd read an article in the paper saying that bee wine gives you
cancer.  Then they nearly joined one of those women's clubs which
go for conducted tours round factories, but after a lot of
arithmetic Mrs Wheeler decided that the free teas the factories
gave you didn't quite equal the subscription.  Then Mrs Wheeler
scraped acquaintance with somebody who gave away free tickets for
plays produced by some stage society or other.  I've known the
three of them sit for hours listening to some highbrow play of
which they didn't even pretend to understand a word--couldn't even
tell you the name of the play afterwards--but they felt that they
were getting something for nothing.  Once they even took up
spiritualism.  Mrs Wheeler had run across some down-and-out medium
who was so desperate that he'd give seances for eighteenpence, so
that the three of them could have a glimpse beyond the veil for a
tanner a time.  I saw him once when he came to give a seance at our
house.  He was a seedy-looking old devil and obviously in mortal
terror of D.T.s.  He was so shaky that when he was taking his
overcoat off in the hall he had a sort of spasm and a hank of
butter-muslin dropped out of his trouser-leg.  I managed to shove
it back to him before the women saw.  Butter-muslin is what they
make the ectoplasm with, so I'm told.  I suppose he was going on to
another seance afterwards.  You don't get manifestations for
eighteen pence.  Mrs Wheeler's biggest find of the last few years
is the Left Book Club.  I think it was in '36 that the news of the
Left Book Club got to West Bletchley.  I joined it soon afterwards,
and it's almost the only time I can remember spending money without
Hilda protesting.  She can see some sense in buying a book when
you're getting it for a third of its proper price.  These women's
attitude is curious, really.  Miss Minns certainly had a try at
reading one or two of the books, but this wouldn't even have
occurred to the other two.  They've never had any direct connexion
with the Left Book Club or any notion what it's all about--in fact
I believe at the beginning Mrs Wheeler thought it had something to
do with books which had been left in railway carriages and were
being sold off cheap.  But they do know that it means seven and
sixpenny books for half a crown, and so they're always saying that
it's 'such a good idea'.  Now and again the local Left Book Club
branch holds meetings and gets people down to speak, and Mrs
Wheeler always takes the others along.  She's a great one for
public meetings of any kind, always provided that it's indoors and
admission free.  The three of them sit there like lumps of pudding.
They don't know what the meeting's about and they don't care, but
they've got a vague feeling, especially Miss Minns, that they're
improving their minds, and it isn't costing them anything.

Well, that's Hilda.  You see what she's like.  Take it by and
large, I suppose she's no worse than I am.  Sometimes when we were
first married I felt I'd like to strangle her, but later I got so
that I didn't care.  And then I got fat and settled down.  It must
have been in 1930 that I got fat.  It happened so suddenly that it
was as if a cannon ball had hit me and got stuck inside.  You know
how it is.  One night you go to bed, still feeling more or less
young, with an eye for the girls and so forth, and next morning you
wake up in the full consciousness that you're just a poor old fatty
with nothing ahead of you this side the grave except sweating your
guts out to buy boots for the kids.

And now it's '38, and in every shipyard in the world they're
riveting up the battleships for another war, and a name I chanced
to see on a poster had stirred up in me a whole lot of stuff which
ought to have been buried God knows how many years ago.




PART III



1


When I came home that evening I was still in doubt as to what I'd
spend my seventeen quid on.

Hilda said she was going to the Left Book Club meeting.  It seemed
that there was a chap coming down from London to lecture, though
needless to say Hilda didn't know what the lecture was going to be
about.  I told her I'd go with her.  In a general way I'm not much
of a one for lectures, but the visions of war I'd had that morning,
starting with the bomber flying over the train, had put me into a
kind of thoughtful mood.  After the usual argument we got the kids
to bed early and cleared off in time for the lecture, which was
billed for eight o'clock.

It was a misty kind of evening, and the hall was cold and not too
well lighted.  It's a little wooden hall with a tin roof, the
property of some Nonconformist sect or other, and you can hire it
for ten bob.  The usual crowd of fifteen or sixteen people had
rolled up.  On the front of the platform there was a yellow placard
announcing that the lecture was on 'The Menace of Fascism'.  This
didn't altogether surprise me.  Mr Witchett, who acts as chairman
of these meetings and who in private life is something in an
architect's office, was taking the lecturer round, introducing him
to everyone as Mr So-and-so (I forget his name) 'the well-known
anti-Fascist', very much as you might call somebody 'the well-known
pianist'.  The lecturer was a little chap of about forty, in a dark
suit, with a bald head which he'd tried rather unsuccessfully to
cover up with wisps of hair.

Meetings of this kind never start on time.  There's always a period
of hanging about on the pretence that perhaps a few more people are
going to turn up.  It was about twenty-five past eight when
Witchett tapped on the table and did his stuff.  Witchett's a mild-
looking chap, with a pink, baby's bottom kind of face that's always
covered in smiles.  I believe he's secretary of the local Liberal
Party, and he's also on the Parish Council and acts as M.C. at the
magic lantern lectures for the Mothers' Union.  He's what you might
call a born chairman.  When he tells you how delighted we all are
to have Mr So-and-so on the platform tonight, you can see that he
believes it.  I never look at him without thinking that he's
probably a virgin.  The little lecturer took out a wad of notes,
chiefly newspaper cuttings, and pinned them down with his glass of
water.  Then he gave a quick lick at his lips and began to shoot.

Do you ever go to lectures, public meetings, and what-not?

When I go to one myself, there's always a moment during the evening
when I find myself thinking the same thought:  Why the hell are we
doing this?  Why is it that people will turn out on a winter night
for this kind of thing?  I looked round the hall.  I was sitting in
the back row.  I don't ever remember going to any kind of public
meeting when I didn't sit in the back row if I could manage it.
Hilda and the others had planked themselves in front, as usual.
It was rather a gloomy little hall.  You know the kind of place.
Pitch-pine walls, corrugated iron roof, and enough draughts to make
you want to keep your overcoat on.  The little knot of us were
sitting in the light round the platform, with about thirty rows of
empty chairs behind us.  And the seats of all the chairs were
dusty.  On the platform behind the lecturer there was a huge square
thing draped in dust-cloths which might have been an enormous
coffin under a pall.  Actually it was a piano.

At the beginning I wasn't exactly listening.  The lecturer was
rather a mean-looking little chap, but a good speaker.  White face,
very mobile mouth, and the rather grating voice that they get from
constant speaking.  Of course he was pitching into Hitler and the
Nazis.  I wasn't particularly keen to hear what he was saying--get
the same stuff in the News Chronicle every morning--but his voice
came across to me as a kind of burr-burr-burr, with now and again a
phrase that struck out and caught my attention.

'Bestial atrocities. . . .  Hideous outbursts of sadism. . . .
Rubber truncheons. . . .  Concentration camps. . . .  Iniquitous
persecution of the Jews. . . .  Back to the Dark Ages. . . .
European civilization. . . .  Act before it is too late. . . .
Indignation of all decent peoples. . . .  Alliance of the
democratic nations. . . .  Firm stand. . . .  Defence of
democracy. . . .  Democracy. . . .  Fascism. . . .  Democracy. . . .
Fascism. . . .  Democracy. . . .'

You know the line of talk.  These chaps can churn it out by the
hour.  Just like a gramophone.  Turn the handle, press the button,
and it starts.  Democracy, Fascism, Democracy.  But somehow it
interested me to watch him.  A rather mean little man, with a white
face and a bald head, standing on a platform, shooting out slogans.
What's he doing?  Quite deliberately, and quite openly, he's
stirring up hatred.  Doing his damnedest to make you hate certain
foreigners called Fascists.  It's a queer thing, I thought, to be
known as 'Mr So-and-so, the well-known anti-Fascist'.  A queer
trade, anti-Fascism.  This fellow, I suppose, makes his living by
writing books against Hitler.  But what did he do before Hitler
came along?  And what'll he do if Hitler ever disappears?  Same
question applies to doctors, detectives, rat-catchers, and so
forth, of course.  But the grating voice went on and on, and
another thought struck me.  He MEANS it.  Not faking at all--feels
every word he's saying.  He's trying to work up hatred in the
audience, but that's nothing to the hatred he feels himself.  Every
slogan's gospel truth to him.  If you cut him open all you'd find
inside would be Democracy-Fascism-Democracy.  Interesting to know a
chap like that in private life.  But does he have a private life?
Or does he only go round from platform to platform, working up
hatred?  Perhaps even his dreams are slogans.

As well as I could from the back row I had a look at the audience.
I suppose, if you come to think of it, we people who'll turn out on
winter nights to sit in draughty halls listening to Left Book Club
lectures (and I consider that I'm entitled to the 'we', seeing that
I'd done it myself on this occasion) have a certain significance.
We're the West Bletchley revolutionaries.  Doesn't look hopeful at
first sight.  It struck me as I looked round the audience that only
about half a dozen of them had really grasped what the lecturer was
talking about, though by this time he'd been pitching into Hitler
and the Nazis for over half an hour.  It's always like that with
meetings of this kind.  Invariably half the people come away
without a notion of what it's all about.  In his chair beside the
table Witchett was watching the lecturer with a delighted smile,
and his face looked a little like a pink geranium.  You could hear
in advance the speech he'd make as soon as the lecturer sat down--
same speech as he makes at the end of the magic lantern lecture in
aid of trousers for the Melanesians:  'Express our thanks--voicing
the opinion of all of us--most interesting--give us all a lot to
think about--most stimulating evening!'  In the front row Miss
Minns was sitting very upright, with her head cocked a little on
one side, like a bird.  The lecturer had taken a sheet of paper
from under the tumbler and was reading out statistics about the
German suicide-rate.  You could see by the look of Miss Minns's
long thin neck that she wasn't feeling happy.  Was this improving
her mind, or wasn't it?  If only she could make out what it was all
about!  The other two were sitting there like lumps of pudding.
Next to them a little woman with red hair was knitting a jumper.
One plain, two purl, drop one, and knit two together.  The lecturer
was describing how the Nazis chop people's heads off for treason
and sometimes the executioner makes a bosh shot.  There was one
other woman in the audience, a girl with dark hair, one of the
teachers at the Council School.  Unlike the other she was really
listening, sitting forward with her big round eyes fixed on the
lecturer and her mouth a little bit open, drinking it all in.

Just behind her two old blokes from the local Labour Party were
sitting.  One had grey hair cropped very short, the other had a
bald head and a droopy moustache.  Both wearing their overcoats.
You know the type.  Been in the Labour Party since the year dot.
Lives given up to the movement.  Twenty years of being blacklisted
by employers, and another ten of badgering the Council to do
something about the slums.  Suddenly everything's changed, the old
Labour Party stuff doesn't matter any longer.  Find themselves
pitchforked into foreign politics--Hitler, Stalin, bombs, machine-
guns, rubber truncheons, Rome-Berlin axis, Popular Front, anti-
Comintern pact.  Can't make head or tail of it.  Immediately in
front of me the local Communist Party branch were sitting.  All
three of them very young.  One of them's got money and is something
in the Hesperides Estate Company, in fact I believe he's old Crum's
nephew.  Another's a clerk at one of the banks.  He cashes cheques
for me occasionally.  A nice boy, with a round, very young, eager
face, blue eyes like a baby, and hair so fair that you'd think he
peroxided it.  He only looks about seventeen, though I suppose he's
twenty.  He was wearing a cheap blue suit and a bright blue tie
that went with his hair.  Next to these three another Communist was
sitting.  But this one, it seems, is a different kind of Communist
and not-quite, because he's what they call a Trotskyist.  The
others have got a down on him.  He's even younger, a very thin,
very dark, nervous-looking boy.  Clever face.  Jew, of course.
These four were taking the lecture quite differently from the
others.  You knew they'd be on their feet the moment question-time
started.  You could see them kind of twitching already.  And the
little Trotskyist working himself from side to side on his bum in
his anxiety to get in ahead of the others.

I'd stopped listening to the actual words of the lecture.  But
there are more ways than one of listening.  I shut my eyes for a
moment.  The effect of that was curious.  I seemed to see the
fellow much better when I could only hear his voice.

It was a voice that sounded as if it could go on for a fortnight
without stopping.  It's a ghastly thing, really, to have a sort of
human barrel-organ shooting propaganda at you by the hour.  The
same thing over and over again.  Hate, hate, hate.  Let's all get
together and have a good hate.  Over and over.  It gives you the
feeling that something has got inside your skull and is hammering
down on your brain.  But for a moment, with my eyes shut, I managed
to turn the tables on him.  I got inside HIS skull.  It was a
peculiar sensation.  For about a second I was inside him, you might
almost say I WAS him.  At any rate, I felt what he was feeling.

I saw the vision that he was seeing.  And it wasn't at all the kind
of vision that can be talked about.  What he's SAYING is merely
that Hitler's after us and we must all get together and have a good
hate.  Doesn't go into details.  Leaves it all respectable.  But
what he's SEEING is something quite different.  It's a picture of
himself smashing people's faces in with a spanner.  Fascist faces,
of course.  I KNOW that's what he was seeing.  It was what I saw
myself for the second or two that I was inside him.  Smash!  Right
in the middle!  The bones cave in like an eggshell and what was a
face a minute ago is just a great big blob of strawberry jam.
Smash!  There goes another!  That's what's in his mind, waking and
sleeping, and the more he thinks of it the more he likes it.  And
it's all O.K. because the smashed faces belong to Fascists.  You
could hear all that in the tone of his voice.

But why?  Likeliest explanation, because he's scared.  Every
thinking person nowadays is stiff with fright.  This is merely a
chap who's got sufficient foresight to be a little more frightened
than the others.  Hitler's after us!  Quick!  Let's all grab a
spanner and get together, and perhaps if we smash in enough faces
they won't smash ours.  Gang up, choose your Leader.  Hitler's
black and Stalin's white.  But it might just as well be the other
way about, because in the little chap's mind both Hitler and Stalin
are the same.  Both mean spanners and smashed faces.

War!  I started thinking about it again.  It's coming soon, that's
certain.  But who's afraid of war?  That's to say, who's afraid of
the bombs and the machine-guns?  'You are', you say.  Yes, I am,
and so's anybody who's ever seen them.  But it isn't the war that
matters, it's the after-war.  The world we're going down into, the
kind of hate-world, slogan-world.  The coloured shirts, the barbed
wire, the rubber truncheons.  The secret cells where the electric
light burns night and day, and the detectives watching you while
you sleep.  And the processions and the posters with enormous
faces, and the crowds of a million people all cheering for the
Leader till they deafen themselves into thinking that they really
worship him, and all the time, underneath, they hate him so that
they want to puke.  It's all going to happen.  Or isn't it?  Some
days I know it's impossible, other days I know it's inevitable.
That night, at any rate, I knew it was going to happen.  It was all
in the sound of the little lecturer's voice.

So perhaps after all there IS a significance in this mingy little
crowd that'll turn out on a winter night to listen to a lecture of
this kind.  Or at any rate in the five or six who can grasp what
it's all about.  They're simply the outposts of an enormous army.
They're the long-sighted ones, the first rats to spot that the ship
is sinking.  Quick, quick!  The Fascists are coming!  Spanners
ready, boys!  Smash others or they'll smash you.  So terrified of
the future that we're jumping straight into it like a rabbit diving
down a boa-constrictor's throat.

And what'll happen to chaps like me when we get Fascism in England?
The truth is it probably won't make the slightest difference.  As
for the lecturer and those four Communists in the audience, yes,
it'll make plenty of difference to them.  They'll be smashing
faces, or having their own smashed, according to who's winning.
But the ordinary middling chaps like me will be carrying on just as
usual.  And yet it frightens me--I tell you it frightens me.  I'd
just started to wonder why when the lecturer stopped and sat down.

There was the usual hollow little sound of clapping that you get
when there are only about fifteen people in the audience, and then
old Witchett said his piece, and before you could say Jack Robinson
the four Communists were on their feet together.  They had a good
dog-fight that went on for about ten minutes, full of a lot of
stuff that nobody else understood, such as dialectical materialism
and the destiny of the proletariat and what Lenin said in 1918.
Then the lecturer, who'd had a drink of water, stood up and gave a
summing-up that made the Trotskyist wriggle about on his chair but
pleased the other three, and the dog-fight went on unofficially for
a bit longer.  Nobody else did any talking.  Hilda and the others
had cleared off the moment the lecture ended.  Probably they were
afraid there was going to be a collection to pay for the hire of
the hall.  The little woman with red hair was staying to finish her
row.  You could hear her counting her stitches in a whisper while
the others argued.  And Witchett sat and beamed at whoever happened
to be speaking, and you could see him thinking how interesting it
all was and making mental notes, and the girl with black hair
looked from one to the other with her mouth a little open, and the
old Labour man, looking rather like a seal with his droopy
moustache and his overcoat up to his ears, sat looking up at them,
wondering what the hell it was all about.  And finally I got up and
began to put on my overcoat.

The dog-fight had turned into a private row between the little
Trotskyist and the boy with fair hair.  They were arguing about
whether you ought to join the Army if war broke out.  As I edged
my way along the row of chairs to get out, the fair-haired one
appealed to me.

'Mr Bowling!  Look here.  If war broke out and we had the chance to
smash Fascism once and for all, wouldn't you fight?  If you were
young, I mean.'

I suppose he thinks I'm about sixty.

'You bet I wouldn't,' I said.  'I had enough to go on with last
time.'

'But to smash Fascism!'

'Oh, b-- Fascism!  There's been enough smashing done already, if
you ask me.'

The little Trotskyist chips in with social-patriotism and betrayal
of the workers, but the others cut him short:

'But you're thinking of 1914.  That was just an ordinary imperialist
war.  This time it's different.  Look here.  When you hear about
what's going on in Germany, and the concentration camps and the
Nazis beating people up with rubber truncheons and making the Jews
spit in each other's faces--doesn't it make your blood boil?'

They're always going on about your blood boiling.  Just the same
phrase during the war, I remember.

'I went off the boil in 1916,' I told him.  'And so'll you when you
know what a trench smells like.'

And then all of a sudden I seemed to see him.  It was as if I
hadn't properly seen him till that moment.

A very young eager face, might have belonged to a good-looking
schoolboy, with blue eyes and tow-coloured hair, gazing into mine,
and for a moment actually he'd got tears in his eyes!  Felt as
strongly as all that about the German Jews!  But as a matter of
fact I knew just what he felt.  He's a hefty lad, probably plays
rugger for the bank.  Got brains, too.  And here he is, a bank
clerk in a godless suburb, sitting behind the frosted window,
entering figures in a ledger, counting piles of notes, bumsucking
to the manager.  Feels his life rotting away.  And all the while,
over in Europe, the big stuff's happening.  Shells bursting over
the trenches and waves of infantry charging through the drifts of
smoke.  Probably some of his pals are fighting in Spain.  Of course
he's spoiling for a war.  How can you blame him?  For a moment I
had a peculiar feeling that he was my son, which in point of years
he might have been.  And I thought of that sweltering hot day in
August when the newsboy stuck up the poster ENGLAND DECLARES WAR ON
GERMANY, and we all rushed out on to the pavement in our white
aprons and cheered.

'Listen son,' I said, 'you've got it all wrong.  In 1914 WE thought
it was going to be a glorious business.  Well, it wasn't.  It was
just a bloody mess.  If it comes again, you keep out of it.  Why
should you get your body plugged full of lead?  Keep it for some
girl.  You think war's all heroism and V.C. charges, but I tell you
it isn't like that.  You don't have bayonet-charges nowadays, and
when you do it isn't like you imagine.  You don't feel like a hero.
All you know is that you've had no sleep for three days, and stink
like a polecat, you're pissing your bags with fright, and your
hands are so cold you can't hold your rifle.  But that doesn't
matter a damn, either.  It's the things that happen afterwards.'

Makes no impression of course.  They just think you're out of date.
Might as well stand at the door of a knocking-shop handing out
tracts.

The people were beginning to clear off.  Witchett was taking the
lecturer home.  The three Communists and the little Jew went up the
road together, and they were going at it again with proletarian
solidarity and dialectic of the dialectic and what Trotsky said in
1917.  They're all the same, really.  It was a damp, still, very
black night.  The lamps seemed to hang in the darkness like stars
and didn't light the road.  In the distance you could hear the
trains booming along the High Street.  I wanted a drink, but it was
nearly ten and the nearest pub was half a mile away.  Besides, I
wanted somebody to talk to, the way you can't talk in a pub.  It
was funny how my brain had been on the go all day.  Partly the
result of not working, of course, and partly of the new false
teeth, which had kind of freshened me up.  All day I'd been
brooding on the future and the past.  I wanted to talk about the
bad time that's either coming or isn't coming, the slogans and the
coloured shirts and the streamlined men from eastern Europe who are
going to knock old England cock-eyed.  Hopeless trying to talk to
Hilda.  Suddenly it occurred to me to go and look up old Porteous,
who's a pal of mine and keeps late hours.

Porteous is a retired public-school master.  He lives in rooms,
which luckily are in the lower half of the house, in the old part
of the town, near the church.  He's a bachelor, of course.  You
can't imagine that kind married.  Lives all alone with his books
and his pipe and has a woman in to do for him.  He's a learned kind
of chap, with his Greek and Latin and poetry and all that.  I
suppose that if the local Left Book Club branch represents
Progress, old Porteous stands for Culture.  Neither of them cuts
much ice in West Bletchley.

The light was burning in the little room where old Porteous sits
reading till all hours of the night.  As I tapped on the front door
he came strolling out as usual, with his pipe between his teeth and
his fingers in a book to keep the place.  He's rather a striking
looking chap, very tall, with curly grey hair and a thin, dreamy
kind of face that's a bit discoloured but might almost belong to a
boy, though he must be nearly sixty.  It's funny how some of these
public-school and university chaps manage to look like boys till
their dying day.  It's something in their movements.  Old Porteous
has got a way of strolling up and down, with that handsome head of
his, with the grey curls, held a little back that makes you feel
that all the while he's dreaming about some poem or other and isn't
conscious of what's going on round him.  You can't look at him
without seeing the way he's lived written all over him.  Public
School, Oxford, and then back to his old school as a master.  Whole
life lived in an atmosphere of Latin, Greek, and cricket.  He's got
all the mannerisms.  Always wears an old Harris tweed jacket and
old grey flannel bags which he likes you to call 'disgraceful',
smokes a pipe and looks down on cigarettes, and though he sits up
half the night I bet he has a cold bath every morning.  I suppose
from his point of view I'm a bit of a bounder.  I haven't been to a
public school, I don't know any Latin and don't even want to.  He
tells me sometimes that it's a pity I'm 'insensible to beauty',
which I suppose is a polite way of saying that I've got no
education.  All the same I like him.  He's very hospitable in the
right kind of way, always ready to have you in and talk at all
hours, and always got drinks handy.  When you live in a house like
ours, more or less infested by women and kids, it does you good to
get out of it sometimes into a bachelor atmosphere, a kind of book-
pipe-fire atmosphere.  And the classy Oxford feeling of nothing
mattering except books and poetry and Greek statues, and nothing
worth mentioning having happened since the Goths sacked Rome--
sometimes that's a comfort too.

He shoved me into the old leather armchair by the fire and dished
out whisky and soda.  I've never seen his sitting-room when it
wasn't dim with pipe-smoke.  The ceiling is almost black.  It's a
smallish room and, except for the door and the window and the space
over the fireplace, the walls are covered with books from the floor
right up to the ceiling.  On the mantelpiece there are all the
things you'd expect.  A row of old briar pipes, all filthy, a few
Greek silver coins, a tobacco jar with the arms of old Porteous's
college on it, and a little earthenware lamp which he told me he
dug up on some mountain in Sicily.  Over the mantelpiece there are
photos of Greek statues.  There's a big one in the middle, of a
woman with wings and no head who looks as if she was stepping out
to catch a bus.  I remember how shocked old Porteous was when the
first time I saw it, not knowing any better, I asked him why they
didn't stick a head on it.

Porteous started refilling his pipe from the jar on the
mantelpiece.

'That intolerable woman upstairs has purchased a wireless set,' he
said.  'I had been hoping to live the rest of my life out of the
sound of those things.  I suppose there is nothing one can do?  Do
you happen to know the legal position?'

I told him there was nothing one could do.  I rather like the
Oxfordy way he says 'intolerable', and it tickles me, in 1938, to
find someone objecting to having a radio in the house.  Porteous
was strolling up and down in his usual dreamy way, with his hands
in his coat pockets and his pipe between his teeth, and almost
instantly he'd begun talking about some law against musical
instruments that was passed in Athens in the time of Pericles.
It's always that way with old Porteous.  All his talk is about
things that happened centuries ago.  Whatever you start off with it
always comes back to statues and poetry and the Greeks and Romans.
If you mention the Queen Mary he'd start telling you about
Phoenician triremes.  He never reads a modern book, refuses to know
their names, never looks at any newspaper except The Times, and
takes a pride in telling you that he's never been to the pictures.
Except for a few poets like Keats and Wordsworth he thinks the
modern world--and from his point of view the modern world is the
last two thousand years--just oughtn't to have happened.

I'm part of the modern world myself, but I like to hear him talk.
He'll stroll round the shelves and haul out first one book and then
another, and now and again he'll read you a piece between little
puffs of smoke, generally having to translate it from the Latin or
something as he goes.  It's all kind of peaceful, kind of mellow.
All a little like a school-master, and yet it soothes you, somehow.
While you listen you aren't in the same world as trains and gas
bills and insurance companies.  It's all temples and olive trees,
and peacocks and elephants, and chaps in the arena with their nets
and tridents, and winged lions and eunuchs and galleys and
catapults, and generals in brass armour galloping their horses over
the soldiers' shields.  It's funny that he ever cottoned on to a
chap like me.  But it's one of the advantages of being fat that you
can fit into almost any society.  Besides we meet on common ground
when it comes to dirty stories.  They're the one modern thing he
cares about, though, as he's always reminding me, they aren't
modern.  He's rather old-maidish about it, always tells a story in
a veiled kind of way.  Sometimes he'll pick out some Latin poet and
translate a smutty rhyme, leaving a lot to your imagination, or
he'll drop hints about the private lives of the Roman emperors and
the things that went on in the temples of Ashtaroth.  They seem to
have been a bad lot, those Greeks and Romans.  Old Porteous has got
photographs of wall-paintings somewhere in Italy that would make
your hair curl.

When I'm fed up with business and home life it's often done me a
lot of good to go and have a talk with Porteous.  But tonight it
didn't seem to.  My mind was still running on the same lines as it
had been all day.  Just as I'd done with the Left Book Club
lecturer, I didn't exactly listen to what Porreous was saying, only
to the sound of his voice.  But whereas the lecturer's voice had
got under my skin, old Porteous's didn't.  It was too peaceful, too
Oxfordy.  Finally, when he was in the middle of saying something, I
chipped in and said:

'Tell me, Porteous, what do you think of Hitler?'

Old Porteous was leaning in his lanky, graceful kind of way with
his elbows on the mantelpiece and a foot on the fender.  He was so
surprised that he almost took his pipe out of his mouth.

'Hitler?  This German person?  My dear fellow!  I DON'T think of
him.'

'But the trouble is he's going to bloody well make us think about
him before he's finished.'

Old Porteous shies a bit at the world 'bloody', which he doesn't
like, though of course it's part of his pose never to be shocked.
He begins walking up and down again, puffing out smoke.

'I see no reason for paying any attention to him.  A mere
adventurer.  These people come and go.  Ephemeral, purely
ephemeral.'

I'm not certain what the word 'ephemeral' means, but I stick to my
point:

'I think you've got it wrong.  Old Hitler's something different.
So's Joe Stalin.  They aren't like these chaps in the old days who
crucified people and chopped their heads off and so forth, just for
the fun of it.  They're after something quite new--something that's
never been heard of before.'

'My dear fellow!  There is nothing new under the sun.'

Of course that's a favourite saying of old Porteous's.  He won't
hear of the existence of anything new.  As soon as you tell him
about anything that's happening nowadays he says that exactly the
same thing happened in the reign of King So-and-so.  Even if you
bring up things like aeroplanes he tells you that they probably had
them in Crete, or Mycenae, or wherever it was.  I tried to explain
to him what I'd felt while the little bloke was lecturing and the
kind of vision I'd had of the bad time that's coming, but he
wouldn't listen.  Merely repeated that there's nothing new under
the sun.  Finally he hauls a book out of the shelves and reads me a
passage about some Greek tyrant back in the B.C.s who certainly
might have been Hitler's twin brother.

The argument went on for a bit.  All day I'd been wanting to talk
to somebody about this business.  It's funny.  I'm not a fool, but
I'm not a highbrow either, and God knows at normal times I don't
have many interests that you wouldn't expect a middle-aged seven-
pound-a-weeker with two kids to have.  And yet I've enough sense to
see that the old life we're used to is being sawn off at the roots.
I can feel it happening.  I can see the war that's coming and I can
see the after-war, the food-queues and the secret police and the
loudspeakers telling you what to think.  And I'm not even
exceptional in this.  There are millions of others like me.
Ordinary chaps that I meet everywhere, chaps I run across in pubs,
bus drivers, and travelling salesmen for hardware firms, have got a
feeling that the world's gone wrong.  They can feel things cracking
and collapsing under their feet.  And yet here's this learned chap,
who's lived all his life with books and soaked himself in history
till it's running out of his pores, and he can't even see that
things are changing.  Doesn't think Hitler matters.  Refuses to
believe there's another war coming.  In any case, as he didn't
fight in the last war, it doesn't enter much into his thoughts--he
thinks it was a poor show compared with the siege of Troy.  Doesn't
see why one should bother about the slogans and the loudspeakers
and the coloured shirts.  What intelligent person would pay any
attention to such things? he always says.  Hitler and Stalin will
pass away, but something which old Porteous calls 'the eternal
verities' won't pass away.  This, of course, is simply another way
of saying that things will always go on exactly as he's known them.
For ever and ever, cultivated Oxford blokes will stroll up and down
studies full of books, quoting Latin tags and smoking good tobacco
out of jars with coats of arms on them.  Really it was no use
talking to him.  I'd have got more change out of the lad with tow-
coloured hair.  By degrees the conversation twisted off, as it
always does, to things that happened B.C.  Then it worked round to
poetry.  Finally old Porteous drags another book out of the shelves
and begins reading Keat's 'Ode to a Nightingale' (or maybe it was a
skylark--I forget).

So far as I'm concerned a little poetry goes a long way.  But it's
a curious fact that I rather like hearing old Porteous reading it
aloud.  There's no question that he reads well.  He's got the
habit, of course--used to reading to classes of boys.  He'll lean
up against something in his lounging way, with his pipe between his
teeth and little jets of smoke coming out, and his voice goes kind
of solemn and rises and falls with the line.  You can see that it
moves him in some way.  I don't know what poetry is or what it's
supposed to do.  I imagine it has a kind of nervous effect on some
people like music has on others.  When he's reading I don't
actually listen, that's to say I don't take in the words, but
sometimes the sound of it brings a kind of peaceful feeling into my
mind.  On the whole I like it.  But somehow tonight it didn't work.
It was as if a cold draught had blown into the room.  I just felt
that this was all bunk.  Poetry!  What is it?  Just a voice, a bit
of an eddy in the air.  And Gosh! what use would that be against
machine-guns?

I watched him leaning up against the bookshelf.  Funny, these
public-school chaps.  Schoolboys all their days.  Whole life
revolving round the old school and their bits of Latin and Greek
and poetry.  And suddenly I remembered that almost the first time I
was here with Porteous he'd read me the very same poem.  Read it in
just the same way, and his voice quivered when he got to the same
bit--the bit about magic casements, or something.  And a curious
thought struck me.  HE'S DEAD.  He's a ghost.  All people like that
are dead.

It struck me that perhaps a lot of the people you see walking about
are dead.  We say that a man's dead when his heart stops and not
before.  It seems a bit arbitrary.  After all, parts of your body
don't stop working--hair goes on growing for years, for instance.
Perhaps a man really dies when his brain stops, when he loses the
power to take in a new idea.  Old Porteous is like that.
Wonderfully learned, wonderfully good taste--but he's not capable
of change.  Just says the same things and thinks the same thoughts
over and over again.  There are a lot of people like that.  Dead
minds, stopped inside.  Just keep moving backwards and forwards on
the same little track, getting fainter all the time, like ghosts.

Old Porteous's mind, I thought, probably stopped working at about
the time of the Russo-Japanese War.  And it's a ghastly thing that
nearly all the decent people, the people who DON'T want to go round
smashing faces in with spanners, are like that.  They're decent,
but their minds have stopped.  They can't defend themselves against
what's coming to them, because they can't see it, even when it's
under their noses.  They think that England will never change and
that England's the whole world.  Can't grasp that it's just a left-
over, a tiny corner that the bombs happen to have missed.  But what
about the new kind of men from eastern Europe, the streamlined men
who think in slogans and talk in bullets?  They're on our track.
Not long before they catch up with us.  No Marquess of Queensbury
rules for those boys.  And all the decent people are paralysed.
Dead men and live gorillas.  Doesn't seem to be anything between.

I cleared out about half an hour later, having completely failed to
convince old Porteous that Hitler matters.  I was still thinking
the same thoughts as I walked home through the shivery streets.
The trains had stopped running.  The house was all dark and Hilda
was asleep.  I dropped my false teeth into the glass of water in
the bathroom, got into my pyjamas, and prised Hilda over to the
other side of the bed.  She rolled over without waking, and the
kind of hump between her shoulders was towards me.  It's funny, the
tremendous gloom that sometimes gets hold of you late at night.  At
that moment the destiny of Europe seemed to me more important than
the rent and the kids' school-bills and the work I'd have to do
tomorrow.  For anyone who has to earn his living such thoughts are
just plain foolishness.  But they didn't move out of my mind.
Still the vision of the coloured shirts and the machine-guns
rattling.  The last thing I remember wondering before I fell asleep
was why the hell a chap like me should care.



2


The primroses had started.  I suppose it was some time in March.

I'd driven through Westerham and was making for Pudley.  I'd got to
do an assessment of an ironmonger's shop, and then, if I could get
hold of him, to interview a life-insurance case who was wavering in
the balance.  His name had been sent in by our local agent, but at
the last moment he'd taken fright and begun to doubt whether he
could afford it.  I'm pretty good at talking people round.  It's
being fat that does it.  It puts people in a cheery kind of mood,
makes 'em feel that signing a cheque is almost a pleasure.  Of
course there are different ways of tackling different people.  With
some it's better to lay all the stress on the bonuses, others you
can scare in a subtle way with hints about what'll happen to their
wives if they die uninsured.

The old car switchbacked up and down the curly little hills.  And
by God, what a day!  You know the kind of day that generally comes
some time in March when winter suddenly seems to give up fighting.
For days past we'd been having the kind of beastly weather that
people call 'bright' weather, when the sky's a cold hard blue and
the wind scrapes you like a blunt razor-blade.  Then suddenly the
wind had dropped and the sun got a chance.  You know the kind of
day.  Pale yellow sunshine, not a leaf stirring, a touch of mist in
the far distance where you could see the sheep scattered over the
hillsides like lumps of chalk.  And down in the valleys fires were
burning, and the smoke twisted slowly upwards and melted into the
mist.  I'd got the road to myself.  It was so warm you could almost
have taken your clothes off.

I got to a spot where the grass beside the road was smothered in
primroses.  A patch of clayey soil, perhaps.  Twenty yards farther
on I slowed down and stopped.  The weather was too good to miss.  I
felt I'd got to get out and have a smell at the spring air, and
perhaps even pick a few primroses if there was nobody coming.  I
even had some vague notion of picking a bunch of them to take home
to Hilda.

I switched the engine off and got out.  I never like leaving the
old car running in neutral, I'm always half afraid she'll shake her
mudguards off or something.  She's a 1927 model, and she's done a
biggish mileage.  When you lift the bonnet and look at the engine
it reminds you of the old Austrian Empire, all tied together with
bits of string but somehow keeps plugging along.  You wouldn't
believe any machine could vibrate in so many directions at once.
It's like the motion of the earth, which has twenty-two different
kinds of wobble, or so I remember reading.  If you look at her from
behind when she's running in neutral it's for all the world like
watching one of those Hawaiian girls dancing the hula-hula.

There was a five-barred gate beside the road.  I strolled over and
leaned across it.  Not a soul in sight.  I hitched my hat back a
bit to get the kind of balmy feeling of the air against my
forehead.  The grass under the hedge was full of primroses.  Just
inside the gate a tramp or somebody had left the remains of a fire.
A little pile of white embers and a wisp of smoke still oozing out
of them.  Farther along there was a little bit of a pool, covered
over with duck-weed.  The field was winter wheat.  It sloped up
sharply, and then there was a fall of chalk and a little beech
spinney.  A kind of mist of young leaves on the trees.  And utter
stillness everywhere.  Not even enough wind to stir the ashes of
the fire.  A lark singing somewhere, otherwise not a sound, not
even an aeroplane.

I stayed there for a bit, leaning over the gate.  I was alone,
quite alone.  I was looking at the field, and the field was looking
at me.  I felt--I wonder whether you'll understand.

What I felt was something that's so unusual nowadays that to say it
sounds like foolishness.  I felt HAPPY.  I felt that though I
shan't live for ever, I'd be quite ready to.  If you like you can
say that that was merely because it was the first day of spring.
Seasonal effect on the sex-glands, or something.  But there was
more to it than that.  Curiously enough, the thing that had
suddenly convinced me that life was worth living, more than the
primroses or the young buds on the hedge, was that bit of fire near
the gate.  You know the look of a wood fire on a still day.  The
sticks that have gone all to white ash and still keep the shape of
sticks, and under the ash the kind of vivid red that you can see
into.  It's curious that a red ember looks more alive, gives you
more of a feeling of life than any living thing.  There's something
about it, a kind of intensity, a vibration--I can't think of the
exact words.  But it lets you know that you're alive yourself.
It's the spot on the picture that makes you notice everything else.

I bent down to pick a primrose.  Couldn't reach it--too much belly.
I squatted down on my haunches and picked a little bunch of them.
Lucky there was no one to see me.  The leaves were kind of crinkly
and shaped like rabbits' ears.  I stood up and put my bunch of
primroses on the gatepost.  Then on an impulse I slid my false
teeth out of my mouth and had a look at them.

If I'd had a mirror I'd have looked at the whole of myself, though,
as a matter of fact, I knew what I looked like already.  A fat man
of forty-five, in a grey herring-bone suit a bit the worse for wear
and a bowler hat.  Wife, two kids, and a house in the suburbs
written all over me.  Red face and boiled blue eyes.  I know, you
don't have to tell me.  But the thing that struck me, as I gave my
dental plate the once-over before slipping it back into my mouth,
was that IT DOESN'T MATTER.  Even false teeth don't matter.  I'm
fat--yes.  I look like a bookie's unsuccessful brother--yes.  No
woman will ever go to bed with me again unless she's paid to.  I
know all that.  But I tell you I don't care.  I don't want the
women, I don't even want to be young again.  I only want to be
alive.  And I was alive that moment when I stood looking at the
primroses and the red embers under the hedge.  It's a feeling
inside you, a kind of peaceful feeling, and yet it's like a flame.

Farther down the hedge the pool was covered with duck-weed, so like
a carpet that if you didn't know what duck-weed was you might think
it was solid and step on it.  I wondered why it is that we're all
such bloody fools.  Why don't people, instead of the idiocies they
do spend their time on, just walk round LOOKING at things?  That
pool, for instance--all the stuff that's in it.  Newts, water-
snails, water-beetles, caddis-flies, leeches, and God knows how
many other things that you can only see with a microscope.  The
mystery of their lives, down there under water.  You could spend a
lifetime watching them, ten lifetimes, and still you wouldn't have
got to the end even of that one pool.  And all the while the sort
of feeling of wonder, the peculiar flame inside you.  It's the only
thing worth having, and we don't want it.

But I do want it.  At least I thought so at that moment.  And don't
mistake what I'm saying.  To begin with, unlike most Cockneys, I'm
not soppy about 'the country'.  I was brought up a damn sight too
near to it for that.  I don't want to stop people living in towns,
or in suburbs for that matter.  Let 'em live where they like.  And
I'm not suggesting that the whole of humanity could spend the whole
of their lives wandering round picking primroses and so forth.
I know perfectly well that we've got to work.  It's only because
chaps are coughing their lungs out in mines and girls are hammering
at typewriters that anyone ever has time to pick a flower.
Besides, if you hadn't a full belly and a warm house you wouldn't
want to pick flowers.  But that's not the point.  Here's this
feeling that I get inside me--not often, I admit, but now and
again.  I know it's a good feeling to have.  What's more, so does
everybody else, or nearly everybody.  It's just round the corner
all the time, and we all know it's there.  Stop firing that
machine-gun!  Stop chasing whatever you're chasing!  Calm down, get
your breath back, let a bit of peace seep into your bones.  No use.
We don't do it.  Just keep on with the same bloody fooleries.

And the next war coming over the horizon, 1941, they say.  Three
more circles of the sun, and then we whizz straight into it.  The
bombs diving down on you like black cigars, and the streamlined
bullets streaming from the Bren machine-guns.  Not that that
worries me particularly.  I'm too old to fight.  There'll be air-
raids, of course, but they won't hit everybody.  Besides, even if
that kind of danger exists, it doesn't really enter into one's
thoughts beforehand.  As I've said several times already, I'm not
frightened of the war, only the after-war.  And even that isn't
likely to affect me personally.  Because who'd bother about a chap
like me?  I'm too fat to be a political suspect.  No one would bump
me off or cosh me with a rubber truncheon.  I'm the ordinary
middling kind that moves on when the policeman tells him.  As for
Hilda and the kids, they'd probably never notice the difference.
And yet it frightens me.  The barbed wire!  The slogans!  The
enormous faces!  The cork-lined cellars where the executioner plugs
you from behind!  For that matter it frightens other chaps who are
intellectually a good deal dumber than I am.  But why!  Because it
means good-bye to this thing I've been telling you about, this
special feeling inside you.  Call it peace, if you like.  But when
I say peace I don't mean absence of war, I mean peace, a feeling in
your guts.  And it's gone for ever if the rubber truncheon boys get
hold of us.

I picked up my bunch of primroses and had a smell at them.  I was
thinking of Lower Binfield.  It was funny how for two months past
it had been in and out of my mind all the time, after twenty years
during which I'd practically forgotten it.  And just at this moment
there was the zoom of a car coming up the road.

It brought me up with a kind of jolt.  I suddenly realized what I
was doing--wandering round picking primroses when I ought to have
been going through the inventory at that ironmonger's shop in
Pudley.  What was more, it suddenly struck me what I'd look like if
those people in the car saw me.  A fat man in a bowler hat holding
a bunch of primroses!  It wouldn't look right at all.  Fat men
mustn't pick primroses, at any rate in public.  I just had time to
chuck them over the hedge before the car came in sight.  It was a
good job I'd done so.  The car was full of young fools of about
twenty.  How they'd have sniggered if they'd seen me!  They were
all looking at me--you know how people look at you when they're in
a car coming towards you--and the thought struck me that even now
they might somehow guess what I'd been doing.  Better let 'em think
it was something else.  Why should a chap get out of his car at the
side of a country road?  Obvious!  As the car went past I pretended
to be doing up a fly-button.

I cranked up the car (the self-starter doesn't work any longer) and
got in.  Curiously enough, in the very moment when I was doing up
the fly-button, when my mind was about three-quarters full of those
young fools in the other car, a wonderful idea had occurred to me.

I'd go back to Lower Binfield!

Why not? I thought as I jammed her into top gear.  Why shouldn't I?
What was to stop me?  And why the hell hadn't I thought of it
before?  A quiet holiday in Lower Binfield--just the thing I
wanted.

Don't imagine that I had any ideas of going back to LIVE in Lower
Binfield.  I wasn't planning to desert Hilda and the kids and start
life under a different name.  That kind of thing only happens in
books.  But what was to stop me slipping down to Lower Binfield and
having a week there all by myself, on the Q.T.?

I seemed to have it all planned out in my mind already.  It was all
right as far as the money went.  There was still twelve quid left
in that secret pile of mine, and you can have a very comfortable
week on twelve quid.  I get a fortnight's holiday a year, generally
in August or September.  But if I made up some suitable story--
relative dying of incurable disease, or something--I could probably
get the firm to give me my holiday in two separate halves.  Then I
could have a week all to myself before Hilda knew what was
happening.  A week in Lower Binfield, with no Hilda, no kids, no
Flying Salamander, no Ellesmere Road, no rumpus about the hire-
purchase payments, no noise of traffic driving you silly--just a
week of loafing round and listening to the quietness?

But why did I want to go back to Lower Binfield? you say.  Why
Lower Binfield in particular?  What did I mean to do when I got
there?

I didn't mean to do anything.  That was part of the point.  I
wanted peace and quiet.  Peace!  We had it once, in Lower Binfield.
I've told you something about our old life there, before the war.
I'm not pretending it was perfect.  I dare say it was a dull,
sluggish, vegetable kind of life.  You can say we were like
turnips, if you like.  But turnips don't live in terror of the
boss, they don't lie awake at night thinking about the next slump
and the next war.  We had peace inside us.  Of course I knew that
even in Lower Binfield life would have changed.  But the place
itself wouldn't have.  There'd still be the beech woods round
Binfield House, and the towpath down by Burford Weir, and the
horse-trough in the market-place.  I wanted to get back there, just
for a week, and let the feeling of it soak into me.  It was a bit
like one of these Eastern sages retiring into a desert.  And I
should think, the way things are going, there'll be a good many
people retiring into the desert during the next few years.  It'll
be like the time in ancient Rome that old Porteous was telling me
about, when there were so many hermits that there was a waiting
list for every cave.

But it wasn't that I wanted to watch my navel.  I only wanted to
get my nerve back before the bad times begin.  Because does anyone
who isn't dead from the neck up doubt that there's a bad time
coming?  We don't even know what it'll be, and yet we know it's
coming.  Perhaps a war, perhaps a slump--no knowing, except that
it'll be something bad.  Wherever we're going, we're going
downwards.  Into the grave, into the cesspool--no knowing.  And you
can't face that kind of thing unless you've got the right feeling
inside you.  There's something that's gone out of us in these
twenty years since the war.  It's a kind of vital juice that we've
squirted away until there's nothing left.  All this rushing to and
fro!  Everlasting scramble for a bit of cash.  Everlasting din of
buses, bombs, radios, telephone bells.  Nerves worn all to bits,
empty places in our bones where the marrow ought to be.

I shoved my foot down on the accelerator.  The very thought of
going back to Lower Binfield had done me good already.  You know
the feeling I had.  Coming up for air!  Like the big sea-turtles
when they come paddling up to the surface, stick their noses out
and fill their lungs with a great gulp before they sink down again
among the seaweed and the octopuses.  We're all stifling at the
bottom of a dustbin, but I'd found the way to the top.  Back to
Lower Binfield!  I kept my foot on the accelerator until the old
car worked up to her maximum speed of nearly forty miles an hour.
She was rattling like a tin tray full of crockery, and under cover
of the noise I nearly started singing.

Of course the fly in the milk-jug was Hilda.  That thought pulled
me up a bit.  I slowed down to about twenty to think it over.

There wasn't much doubt Hilda would find out sooner or later.  As
to getting only a week's holiday in August, I might be able to pass
that off all right.  I could tell her the firm were only giving me
a week this year.  Probably she wouldn't ask too many questions
about that, because she'd jump at the chance of cutting down the
holiday expenses.  The kids, in any case, always stay at the
seaside for a month.  Where the difficulty came in was finding an
alibi for that week in May.  I couldn't just clear off without
notice.  Best thing, I thought, would be to tell her a good while
ahead that I was being sent on some special job to Nottingham, or
Derby, or Bristol, or some other place a good long way away.  If
I told her about it two months ahead it would look as if I hadn't
anything to hide.

But of course she'd find out sooner or later.  Trust Hilda!  She'd
start off by pretending to believe it, and then, in that quiet,
obstinate way she has, she'd nose out the fact that I'd never been
to Nottingham or Derby or Bristol or wherever it might be.  It's
astonishing how she does it.  Such perseverance!  She lies low
till she's found out all the weak points in your alibi, and then
suddenly, when you've put your foot in it by some careless remark,
she starts on you.  Suddenly comes out with the whole dossier of
the case.  'Where did you spend Saturday night?  That's a lie!
You've been off with a woman.  Look at these hairs I found when
I was brushing your waistcoat.  Look at them!  Is my hair that
colour?'  And then the fun begins.  Lord knows how many times it's
happened.  Sometimes she's been right about the woman and sometimes
she's been wrong, but the after-effects are always the same.
Nagging for weeks on end!  Never a meal without a row--and the kids
can't make out what it's all about.  The one completely hopeless
thing would be to tell her just where I'd spent that week, and why.
If I explained till the Day of Judgment she'd never believe that.

But, hell!  I thought, why bother?  It was a long way off.  You
know how different these things seem before and after.  I shoved my
foot down on the accelerator again.  I'd had another idea, almost
bigger than the first.  I wouldn't go in May.  I'd go in the second
half of June, when the coarse-fishing season had started, and I'd
go fishing!

Why not, after all?  I wanted peace, and fishing is peace.  And
then the biggest idea of all came into my head and very nearly made
me swing the car off the road.

I'd go and catch those big carp in the pool at Binfield House!

And once again, why not?  Isn't it queer how we go through life,
always thinking that the things we want to do are the things that
can't be done?  Why shouldn't I catch those carp?  And yet, as soon
as the idea's mentioned, doesn't it sound to you like something
impossible, something that just couldn't happen?  It seemed so to
me, even at that moment.  It seemed to me a kind of dope-dream,
like the ones you have of sleeping with film stars or winning the
heavyweight championship.  And yet it wasn't in the least
impossible, it wasn't even improbable.  Fishing can be rented.
Whoever owned Binfield House now would probably let the pool if
they got enough for it.  And Gosh!  I'd be glad to pay five pounds
for a day's fishing in that pool.  For that matter it was quite
likely that the house was still empty and nobody even knew that the
pool existed.

I thought of it in the dark place among the trees, waiting for me
all those years.  And the huge black fish still gliding round it.
Jesus!  If they were that size thirty years ago, what would they be
like now?



3


It was June the seventeenth, Friday, the second day of the coarse-
fishing season.

I hadn't had any difficulty in fixing things with the firm.  As for
Hilda, I'd fitted her up with a story that was all shipshape and
watertight.  I'd fixed on Birmingham for my alibi, and at the last
moment I'd even told her the name of the hotel I was going to stay
at, Rowbottom's Family and Commercial.  I happened to know the
address because I'd stayed there some years earlier.  At the same
time I didn't want her writing to me at Birmingham, which she might
do if I was away as long as a week.  After thinking it over I took
young Saunders, who travels for Glisso Floor Polish, partly into my
confidence.  He'd happened to mention that he'd be passing through
Birmingham on the eighteenth of June, and I got him to promise that
he'd stop on his way and post a letter from me to Hilda, addressed
from Rowbottom's.  This was to tell her that I might be called away
and she'd better not write.  Saunders understood, or thought he
did.  He gave me a wink and said I was wonderful for my age.  So
that settled Hilda.  She hadn't asked any questions, and even if
she turned suspicious later, an alibi like that would take some
breaking.

I drove through Westerham.  It was a wonderful June morning.  A
faint breeze blowing, and the elm tops swaying in the sun, little
white clouds streaming across the sky like a flock of sheep, and
the shadows chasing each other across the fields.  Outside
Westerham a Walls' Ice Cream lad, with cheeks like apples, came
tearing towards me on his bike, whistling so that it went through
your head.  It suddenly reminded me of the time when I'd been an
errand boy myself (though in those days we didn't have free-wheel
bikes) and I very nearly stopped him and took one.  They'd cut the
hay in places, but they hadn't got it in yet.  It lay drying in
long shiny rows, and the smell of it drifted across the road and
got mixed up with the petrol.

I drove along at a gentle fifteen.  The morning had a kind of
peaceful, dreamy feeling.  The ducks floated about on the ponds as
if they felt too satisfied to eat.  In Nettlefield, the village
beyond Westerham, a little man in a white apron, with grey hair and
a huge grey moustache, darted across the green, planted himself in
the middle of the road and began doing physical jerks to attract my
attention.  My car's known all along this road, of course.  I
pulled up.  It's only Mr Weaver, who keeps the village general
shop.  No, he doesn't want to insure his life, nor his shop either.
He's merely run out of change and wants to know whether I've got a
quid's worth of 'large silver'.  They never have any change in
Nettlefield, not even at the pub.

I drove on.  The wheat would have been as tall as your waist.  It
went undulating up and down the hills like a great green carpet,
with the wind rippling it a little, kind of thick and silky-
looking.  It's like a woman, I thought.  It makes you want to lie
on it.  And a bit ahead of me I saw the sign-post where the road
forks right for Pudley and left for Oxford.

I was still on my usual beat, inside the boundary of my own
'district', as the firm calls it.  The natural thing, as I was
going westward, would have been to leave London along the Uxbridge
Road.  But by a kind of instinct I'd followed my usual route.  The
fact was I was feeling guilty about the whole business.  I wanted
to get well away before I headed for Oxfordshire.  And in spite of
the fact that I'd fixed things so neatly with Hilda and the firm,
in spite of the twelve quid in my pocket-book and the suitcase in
the back of the car, as I got nearer the crossroads I actually felt
a temptation--I knew I wasn't going to succumb to it, and yet it
was a temptation--to chuck the whole thing up.  I had a sort of
feeling that so long as I was driving along my normal beat I was
still inside the law.  It's not too late, I thought.  There's still
time to do the respectable thing.  I could run into Pudley, for
instance, see the manager of Barclay's Bank (he's our agent at
Pudley) and find out if any new business had come in.  For that
matter I could even turn round, go back to Hilda, and make a clean
breast of the plot.

I slowed down as I got to the corner.  Should I or shouldn't I?
For about a second I was really tempted.  But no!  I tooted the
klaxon and swung the car westward, on to the Oxford road.

Well, I'd done it.  I was on the forbidden ground.  It was true
that five miles farther on, if I wanted to, I could turn to the
left again and get back to Westerham.  But for the moment I was
headed westward.  Strictly speaking I was in flight.  And what was
curious, I was no sooner on the Oxford road than I felt perfectly
certain that THEY knew all about it.  When I say THEY I mean all
the people who wouldn't approve of a trip of this kind and who'd
have stopped me if they could--which, I suppose, would include
pretty well everybody.

What was more, I actually had a feeling that they were after me
already.  The whole lot of them!  All the people who couldn't
understand why a middle-aged man with false teeth should sneak away
for a quiet week in the place where he spent his boyhood.  And all
the mean-minded bastards who COULD understand only too well, and
who'd raise heaven and earth to prevent it.  They were all on my
track.  It was as if a huge army were streaming up the road behind
me.  I seemed to see them in my mind's eye.  Hilda was in front, of
course, with the kids tagging after her, and Mrs Wheeler driving
her forward with a grim, vindictive expression, and Miss Minns
rushing along in the rear, with her pince-nez slipping down and a
look of distress on her face, like the hen that gets left behind
when the others have got hold of the bacon rind.  And Sir Herbert
Crum and the higher-ups of the Flying Salamander in their Rolls-
Royces and Hispano-Suizas.  And all the chaps at the office, and
all the poor down-trodden pen-pushers from Ellesmere Road and from
all such other roads, some of them wheeling prams and mowing-
machines and concrete garden-rollers, some of them chugging along
in little Austin Sevens.  And all the soul-savers and Nosey
Parkers, the people whom you've never seen but who rule your
destiny all the same, the Home Secretary, Scotland Yard, the
Temperance League, the Bank of England, Lord Beaverbrook, Hitler
and Stalin on a tandem bicycle, the bench of Bishops, Mussolini,
the Pope--they were all of them after me.  I could almost hear them
shouting:

'There's a chap who thinks he's going to escape!  There's a chap
who says he won't be streamlined!  He's going back to Lower
Binfield!  After him!  Stop him!'

It's queer.  The impression was so strong that I actually took a
peep through the little window at the back of the car to make sure
I wasn't being followed.  Guilty conscience, I suppose.  But there
was nobody.  Only the dusty white road and the long line of the
elms dwindling out behind me.

I trod on the gas and the old car rattled into the thirties.  A few
minutes later I was past the Westerham turning.  So that was that.
I'd burnt my boats.  This was the idea which, in a dim sort of way,
had begun to form itself in my mind the day I got my new false
teeth.




PART IV



1


I came towards Lower Binfield over Chamford Hill.  There are four
roads into Lower Binfield, and it would have been more direct to go
through Walton.  But I'd wanted to come over Chamford Hill, the way
we used to go when we biked home from fishing in the Thames.  When
you get just past the crown of the hill the trees open out and you
can see Lower Binfield lying in the valley below you.

It's a queer experience to go over a bit of country you haven't
seen in twenty years.  You remember it in great detail, and you
remember it all wrong.  All the distances are different, and the
landmarks seem to have moved about.  You keep feeling, surely this
hill used to be a lot steeper--surely that turning was on the other
side of the road?  And on the other hand you'll have memories which
are perfectly accurate, but which only belong to one particular
occasion.  You'll remember, for instance, a corner of a field, on a
wet day in winter, with the grass so green that it's almost blue,
and a rotten gatepost covered with lichen and a cow standing in the
grass and looking at you.  And you'll go back after twenty years
and be surprised because the cow isn't standing in the same place
and looking at you with the same expression.

As I drove up Chamford Hill I realized that the picture I'd had of
it in my mind was almost entirely imaginary.  But it was a fact
that certain things had changed.  The road was tarmac, whereas in
the old days it used to be macadam (I remember the bumpy feeling of
it under the bike), and it seemed to have got a lot wider.  And
there were far less trees.  In the old days there used to be huge
beeches growing in the hedgerows, and in places their boughs met
across the road and made a kind of arch.  Now they were all gone.
I'd nearly got to the top of the hill when I came on something
which was certainly new.  To the right of the road there was a
whole lot of fake-picturesque houses, with overhanging eaves and
rose pergolas and what-not.  You know the kind of houses that are
just a little too high-class to stand in a row, and so they're
dotted about in a kind of colony, with private roads leading up to
them.  And at the entrance to one of the private roads there was a
huge white board which said:


THE KENNELS

PEDIGREE SEALYHAM PUPS

DOGS BOARDED


Surely THAT usen't to be there?

I thought for a moment.  Yes, I remembered!  Where those houses
stood there used to be a little oak plantation, and the trees grew
too close together, so that they were very tall and thin, and in
spring the ground underneath them used to be smothered in anemones.
Certainly there were never any houses as far out of the town as
this.

I got to the top of the hill.  Another minute and Lower Binfield
would be in sight.  Lower Binfield!  Why should I pretend I wasn't
excited?  At the very thought of seeing it again an extraordinary
feeling that started in my guts crept upwards and did something to
my heart.  Five seconds more and I'd be seeing it.  Yes, here we
are!  I declutched, trod on the foot-brake, and--Jesus!

Oh, yes, I know you knew what was coming.  But _I_ didn't.  You can
say I was a bloody fool not to expect it, and so I was.  But it
hadn't even occurred to me.

The first question was, where WAS Lower Binfield?

I don't mean that it had been demolished.  It had merely been
swallowed.  The thing I was looking down at was a good-sized
manufacturing town.  I remember--Gosh, how I remember! and in this
case I don't think my memory is far out--what Lower Binfield used
to look like from the top of Chamford Hill.  I suppose the High
Street was about a quarter of a mile long, and except for a few
outlying houses the town was roughly the shape of a cross.  The
chief landmarks were the church tower and the chimney of the
brewery.  At this moment I couldn't distinguish either of them.
All I could see was an enormous river of brand-new houses which
flowed along the valley in both directions and half-way up the
hills on either side.  Over to the right there were what looked
like several acres of bright red roofs all exactly alike.  A big
Council housing estate, by the look of it.

But where was Lower Binfield?  Where was the town I used to know?
It might have been anywhere.  All I knew was that it was buried
somewhere in the middle of that sea of bricks.  Of the five or six
factory chimneys that I could see, I couldn't even make a guess at
which belonged to the brewery.  Towards the eastern end of the town
there were two enormous factories of glass and concrete.  That
accounts for the growth of the town, I thought, as I began to take
it in.  It occurred to me that the population of this place (it
used to be about two thousand in the old days) must be a good
twenty-five thousand.  The only thing that hadn't changed,
seemingly, was Binfield House.  It wasn't much more than a dot at
that distance, but you could see it on the hillside opposite, with
the beech trees round it, and the town hadn't climbed that high.
As I looked a fleet of black bombing planes came over the hill and
zoomed across the town.

I shoved the clutch in and started slowly down the hill.  The
houses had climbed half-way up it.  You know those very cheap small
houses which run up a hillside in one continuous row, with the
roofs rising one above the other like a flight of steps, all
exactly the same.  But a little before I got to the houses I
stopped again.  On the left of the road there was something else
that was quite new.  The cemetery.  I stopped opposite the lych-
gate to have a look at it.

It was enormous, twenty acres, I should think.  There's always a
kind of jumped-up unhomelike look about a new cemetery, with its
raw gravel paths and its rough green sods, and the machine-made
marble angels that look like something off a wedding-cake.  But
what chiefly struck me at the moment was that in the old days this
place hadn't existed.  There was no separate cemetery then, only
the churchyard.  I could vaguely remember the farmer these fields
used to belong to--Blackett, his name was, and he was a dairy-
farmer.  And somehow the raw look of the place brought it home to
me how things have changed.  It wasn't only that the town had grown
so vast that they needed twenty acres to dump their corpses in.  It
was their putting the cemetery out here, on the edge of the town.
Have you noticed that they always do that nowadays?  Every new town
puts its cemetery on the outskirts.  Shove it away--keep it out of
sight!  Can't bear to be reminded of death.  Even the tombstones
tell you the same story.  They never say that the chap underneath
them 'died', it's always 'passed away' or 'fell asleep'.  It wasn't
so in the old days.  We had our churchyard plumb in the middle of
the town, you passed it every day, you saw the spot where your
grandfather was lying and where some day you were going to lie
yourself.  We didn't mind looking at the dead.  In hot weather, I
admit, we also had to smell them, because some of the family vaults
weren't too well sealed.

I let the car run down the hill slowly.  Queer!  You can't imagine
how queer!  All the way down the hill I was seeing ghosts, chiefly
the ghosts of hedges and trees and cows.  It was as if I was
looking at two worlds at once, a kind of thin bubble of the thing
that used to be, with the thing that actually existed shining
through it.  There's the field where the bull chased Ginger
Rodgers!  And there's the place where the horse-mushrooms used to
grow!  But there weren't any fields or any bulls or any mushrooms.
It was houses, houses everywhere, little raw red houses with their
grubby window-curtains and their scraps of back-garden that hadn't
anything in them except a patch of rank grass or a few larkspurs
struggling among the weeds.  And blokes walking up and down, and
women shaking out mats, and snotty-nosed kids playing along the
pavement.  All strangers!  They'd all come crowding in while my
back was turned.  And yet it was they who'd have looked on me as a
stranger, they didn't know anything about the old Lower Binfield,
they'd never heard of Shooter and Wetherall, or Mr Grimmett and
Uncle Ezekiel, and cared less, you bet.

It's funny how quickly one adjusts.  I suppose it was five minutes
since I'd halted at the top of the hill, actually a bit out of
breath at the thought of seeing Lower Binfield again.  And already
I'd got used to the idea that Lower Binfield had been swallowed up
and buried like the lost cities of Peru.  I braced up and faced it.
After all, what else do you expect?  Towns have got to grow, people
have got to live somewhere.  Besides, the old town hadn't been
annihilated.  Somewhere or other it still existed, though it had
houses round it instead of fields.  In a few minutes I'd be seeing
it again, the church and the brewery chimney and Father's shop-
window and the horse-trough in the market-place.  I got to the
bottom of the hill, and the road forked.  I took the left-hand
turning, and a minute later I was lost.

I could remember nothing.  I couldn't even remember whether it was
hereabouts that the town used to begin.  All I knew was that in the
old days this street hadn't existed.  For hundreds of yards I was
running along it--a rather mean, shabby kind of street, with the
houses giving straight on the pavement and here and there a corner
grocery or a dingy little pub--and wondering where the hell it led
to.  Finally I pulled up beside a woman in a dirty apron and no hat
who was walking down the pavement.  I stuck my head out of the
window.

'Beg pardon--can you tell me the way to the market-place?'

She 'couldn't tell'.  Answered in an accent you could cut with a
spade.  Lancashire.  There's lots of them in the south of England
now.  Overflow from the distressed areas.  Then I saw a bloke in
overalls with a bag of tools coming along and tried again.  This
time I got the answer in Cockney, but he had to think for a moment.

'Market-place?  Market-place?  Lessee, now.  Oh--you mean the OLE
Market?'

I supposed I did mean the Old Market.

'Oh, well--you take the right 'and turning--'

It was a long way.  Miles, it seemed to me, though really it wasn't
a mile.  Houses, shops, cinemas, chapels, football grounds--new,
all new.  Again I had that feeling of a kind of enemy invasion
having happened behind my back.  All these people flooding in from
Lancashire and the London suburbs, planting themselves down in this
beastly chaos, not even bothering to know the chief landmarks of
the town by name.  But I grasped presently why what we used to call
the market-place was now known as the Old Market.  There was a big
square, though you couldn't properly call it a square, because it
was no particular shape, in the middle of the new town, with
traffic-lights and a huge bronze statue of a lion worrying an
eagle--the war-memorial, I suppose.  And the newness of everything!
The raw, mean look!  Do you know the look of these new towns that
have suddenly swelled up like balloons in the last few years,
Hayes, Slough, Dagenham, and so forth?  The kind of chilliness, the
bright red brick everywhere, the temporary-looking shop-windows
full of cut-price chocolates and radio parts.  It was just like
that.  But suddenly I swung into a street with older houses.  Gosh!
The High Street!

After all my memory hadn't played tricks on me.  I knew every inch
of it now.  Another couple of hundred yards and I'd be in the
market-place.  The old shop was down the other end of the High
Street.  I'd go there after lunch--I was going to put up at the
George.  And every inch a memory!  I knew all the shops, though all
the names had changed, and the stuff they dealt in had mostly
changed as well.  There's Lovegrove's!  And there's Todd's!  And a
big dark shop with beams and dormer windows.  Used to be Lilywhite's
the draper's, where Elsie used to work.  And Grimmett's!  Still a
grocer's apparently.  Now for the horse-trough in the market-place.
There was another car ahead of me and I couldn't see.

It turned aside as we got into the market-place.  The horse-trough
was gone.

There was an A.A. man on traffic-duty where it used to stand.  He
gave a glance at the car, saw that it hadn't the A.A. sign, and
decided not to salute.

I turned the corner and ran down to the George.  The horse-trough
being gone had thrown me out to such an extent that I hadn't even
looked to see whether the brewery chimney was still standing.  The
George had altered too, all except the name.  The front had been
dolled up till it looked like one of those riverside hotels, and
the sign was different.  It was curious that although till that
moment I hadn't thought of it once in twenty years, I suddenly
found that I could remember every detail of the old sign, which had
swung there ever since I could remember.  It was a crude kind of
picture, with St George on a very thin horse trampling on a very
fat dragon, and in the corner, though it was cracked and faded,
you could read the little signature, 'Wm. Sandford, Painter &
Carpenter'.  The new sign was kind of artistic-looking.  You could
see it had been painted by a real artist.  St George looked a
regular pansy.  The cobbled yard, where the farmers' traps used to
stand and the drunks used to puke on Saturday nights, had been
enlarged to about three times its size and concreted over, with
garages all round it.  I backed the car into one of the garages and
got out.

One thing I've noticed about the human mind is that it goes in
jerks.  There's no emotion that stays by you for any length of
time.  During the last quarter of an hour I'd had what you could
fairly describe as a shock.  I'd felt it almost like a sock in the
guts when I stopped at the top of Chamford Hill and suddenly
realized that Lower Binfield had vanished, and there'd been another
little stab when I saw the horse-trough was gone.  I'd driven
through the streets with a gloomy, Ichabod kind of feeling.  But as
I stepped out of the car and hitched my trilby hat on to my head I
suddenly felt that it didn't matter a damn.  It was such a lovely
sunny day, and the hotel yard had a kind of summery look, with its
flowers in green tubs and what-not.  Besides, I was hungry and
looking forward to a spot of lunch.

I strolled into the hotel with a consequential kind of air, with
the boots, who'd already nipped out to meet me, following with the
suitcase.  I felt pretty prosperous, and probably I looked it.  A
solid business man, you'd have said, at any rate if you hadn't seen
the car.  I was glad I'd come in my new suit--blue flannel with a
thin white stripe, which suits my style.  It has what the tailor
calls a 'reducing effect'.  I believe that day I could have passed
for a stockbroker.  And say what you like it's a very pleasant
thing, on a June day when the sun's shining on the pink geraniums
in the window-boxes, to walk into a nice country hotel with roast
lamb and mint sauce ahead of you.  Not that it's any treat to me to
stay in hotels, Lord knows I see all too much of them--but ninety-
nine times out of a hundred it's those godless 'family and
commercial' hotels, like Rowbottom's, where I was supposed to be
staying at present, the kind of places where you pay five bob for
bed and breakfast, and the sheets are always damp and the bath taps
never work.  The George had got so smart I wouldn't have known it.
In the old days it had hardly been a hotel, only a pub, though it
had a room or two to let and used to do a farmers' lunch (roast
beef and Yorkshire, suet dumpling and Stilton cheese) on market
days.  It all seemed different except for the public bar, which I
got a glimpse of as I went past, and which looked the same as ever.
I went up a passage with a soft carpet, and hunting prints and
copper warming-pans and such-like junk hanging on the walls.  And
dimly I could remember the passage as it used to be, the hollowed-
out flags underfoot, and the smell of plaster mixed up with the
smell of beer.  A smart-looking young woman, with frizzed hair and
a black dress, who I suppose was the clerk or something, took my
name at the office.

'You wish for a room, sir?  Certainly, sir.  What name shall I put
down, sir?'

I paused.  After all, this was my big moment.  She'd be pretty sure
to know the name.  It isn't common, and there are a lot of us in
the churchyard.  We were one of the old Lower Binfield families,
the Bowlings of Lower Binfield.  And though in a way it's painful
to be recognized, I'd been rather looking forward to it.

'Bowling,' I said very distinctly.  'Mr George Bowling.'

'Bowling, sir.  B-O-A--oh!  B-O-W?  Yes, sir.  And you are coming
from London, sir?'

No response.  Nothing registered.  She'd never heard of me.  Never
heard of George Bowling, son of Samuel Bowling--Samuel Bowling who,
damn it! had had his half-pint in this same pub every Saturday for
over thirty years.



2


The dining-room had changed, too.

I could remember the old room, though I'd never had a meal there,
with its brown mantelpiece and its bronzy-yellow wallpaper--I never
knew whether it was meant to be that colour, or had just got like
that from age and smoke--and the oil-painting, also by Wm.
Sandford, Painter & Carpenter, of the battle of Tel-el-Kebir.
Now they'd got the place up in a kind of medieval style.  Brick
fireplace with inglenooks, a huge beam across the ceiling, oak
panelling on the walls, and every bit of it a fake that you could
have spotted fifty yards away.  The beam was genuine oak, came out
of some old sailing-ship, probably, but it didn't hold anything up,
and I had my suspicions of the panels as soon as I set eyes on
them.  As I sat down at my table, and the slick young waiter came
towards me fiddling with his napkin, I tapped the wall behind me.
Yes!  Thought so!  Not even wood.  They fake it up with some kind
of composition and then paint it over.

But the lunch wasn't bad.  I had my lamb and mint sauce, and I had
a bottle of some white wine or other with a French name which made
me belch a bit but made me feel happy.  There was one other person
lunching there, a woman of about thirty with fair hair, looked like
a widow.  I wondered whether she was staying at the George, and
made vague plans to get off with her.  It's funny how your feelings
get mixed up.  Half the time I was seeing ghosts.  The past was
sticking out into the present, Market day, and the great solid
farmers throwing their legs under the long table, with their
hobnails grating on the stone floor, and working their way through
a quantity of beef and dumpling you wouldn't believe the human
frame could hold.  And then the little tables with their shiny
white cloths and wine-glasses and folded napkins, and the faked-up
decorations and the general expensiveness would blot it out again.
And I'd think, 'I've got twelve quid and a new suit.  I'm little
Georgie Bowling, and who'd have believed I'd ever come back to
Lower Binfield in my own motorcar?'  And then the wine would send a
kind of warm feeling upwards from my stomach, and I'd run an eye
over the woman with fair hair and mentally take her clothes off.

It was the same in the afternoon as I lay about in the lounge--
fake-medieval again, but it had streamlined leather armchairs and
glass-topped tables--with some brandy and a cigar.  I was seeing
ghosts, but on the whole I was enjoying it.  As a matter of fact
I was a tiny bit boozed and hoping that the woman with fair hair
would come in so that I could scrape acquaintance.  She never
showed up, however.  It wasn't till nearly tea-time that I went
out.

I strolled up to the market-place and turned to the left.  The
shop!  It was funny.  Twenty-one years ago, the day of Mother's
funeral, I'd passed it in the station fly, and seen it all shut up
and dusty, with the sign burnt off with a plumber's blowflame, and
I hadn't cared a damn.  And now, when I was so much further away
from it, when there were actually details about the inside of the
house that I couldn't remember, the thought of seeing it again did
things to my heart and guts.  I passed the barber's shop.  Still a
barber's, though the name was different.  A warm, soapy, almondy
smell came out of the door.  Not quite so good as the old smell of
bay rum and latakia.  The shop--our shop--was twenty yards farther
down.  Ah!

An arty-looking sign--painted by the same chap as did the one at
the George, I shouldn't wonder--hanging out over the pavement:


WENDY'S TEASHOP

MORNING COFFEE

HOME-MADE CAKES


A tea-shop!

I suppose if it had been a butcher's or an ironmonger's, or
anything else except a seedsman's, it would have given me the same
kind of jolt.  It's absurd that because you happen to have been
born in a certain house you should feel that you've got rights over
it for the rest of your life, but so you do.  The place lived up to
its name, all right.  Blue curtains in the window, and a cake or
two standing about, the kind of cake that's covered with chocolate
and has just one walnut stuck somewhere on the top.  I went in.
I didn't really want any tea, but I had to see the inside.

They'd evidently turned both the shop and what used to be the
parlour into tea-rooms.  As for the yard at the back where the
dustbin used to stand and Father's little patch of weeds used to
grow, they'd paved it all over and dolled it up with rustic tables
and hydrangeas and things.  I went through into the parlour.  More
ghosts!  The piano and the texts on the wall, and the two lumpy old
red armchairs where Father and Mother used to sit on opposite sides
of the fireplace, reading the People and the News of the World on
Sunday afternoons!  They'd got the place up in an even more antique
style than the George, with gateleg tables and a hammered-iron
chandelier and pewter plates hanging on the wall and what-not.  Do
you notice how dark they always manage to make it in these arty
tea-rooms?  It's part of the antiqueness, I suppose.  And instead
of an ordinary waitress there was a young woman in a kind of print
wrapper who met me with a sour expression.  I asked her for tea,
and she was ten minutes getting it.  You know the kind of tea--
China tea, so weak that you could think it's water till you put the
milk in.  I was sitting almost exactly where Father's armchair used
to stand.  I could almost hear his voice, reading out a 'piece', as
he used to call it, from the People, about the new flying machines,
or the chap who was swallowed by a whale, or something.  It gave me
a most peculiar feeling that I was there on false pretences and
they could kick me out if they discovered who I was, and yet
simultaneously I had a kind of longing to tell somebody that I'd
been born here, that I belonged to this house, or rather (what I
really felt) that the house belonged to me.  There was nobody else
having tea.  The girl in the print wrapper was hanging about by the
window, and I could see that if I hadn't been there she'd have been
picking her teeth.  I bit into one of the slices of cake she'd
brought me.  Home-made cakes!  You bet they were.  Home-made with
margarine and egg-substitute.  But in the end I had to speak.
I said:

'Have you been in Lower Binfield long?'

She started, looked surprised, and didn't answer.  I tried again:

'I used to live in Lower Binfleld myself, a good while ago.'

Again no answer, or only something that I couldn't hear.  She gave
me a kind of frigid look and then gazed out of the window again.  I
saw how it was.  Too much of a lady to go in for back-chat with
customers.  Besides, she probably thought I was trying to get off
with her.  What was the good of telling her I'd been born in the
house?  Even if she believed it, it wouldn't interest her.  She'd
never heard of Samuel Bowling, Corn & Seed Merchant.  I paid the
bill and cleared out.

I wandered up to the church.  One thing that I'd been half afraid
of, and half looking forward to, was being recognized by people I
used to know.  But I needn't have worried, there wasn't a face I
knew anywhere in the streets.  It seemed as if the whole town had
got a new population.

When I got to the church I saw why they'd had to have a new
cemetery.  The churchyard was full to the brim, and half the graves
had names on them that I didn't know.  But the names I did know
were easy enough to find.  I wandered round among the graves.  The
sexton had just scythed the grass and there was a smell of summer
even there.  They were all alone, all the older folks I'd known.
Gravitt the butcher, and Winkle the other seedsman, and Trew, who
used to keep the George, and Mrs Wheeler from the sweet-shop--they
were all lying there.  Shooter and Wetherall were opposite one
another on either side of the path, just as if they were still
singing at each other across the aisle.  So Wetherall hadn't got
his hundred after all.  Born in '43 and 'departed his life' in
1928.  But he'd beaten Shooter, as usual.  Shooter died in '26.
What a time old Wetherall must have had those last two years when
there was nobody to sing against him!  And old Grimmett under a
huge marble thing shaped rather like a veal-and-ham pie, with an
iron railing round it, and in the corner a whole batch of Simmonses
under cheap little crosses.  All gone to dust.  Old Hodges with his
tobacco-coloured teeth, and Lovegrove with his big brown beard, and
Lady Rampling with the coachman and the tiger, and Harry Barnes's
aunt who had a glass eye, and Brewer of the Mill Farm with his
wicked old face like something carved out of a nut--nothing left of
any of them except a slab of stone and God knows what underneath.

I found Mother's grave, and Father's beside it.  Both of them in
pretty good repair.  The sexton had kept the grass clipped.  Uncle
Ezekiel's was a little way away.  They'd levelled a lot of the
older graves, and the old wooden head-pieces, the ones that used to
look like the end of a bedstead, had all been cleared away.  What
do you feel when you see your parents' graves after twenty years?
I don't know what you ought to feel, but I'll tell you what I did
feel, and that was nothing.  Father and Mother have never faded out
of my mind.  It's as if they existed somewhere or other in a kind
of eternity, Mother behind the brown teapot, Father with his bald
head a little mealy, and his spectacles and his grey moustache,
fixed for ever like people in a picture, and yet in some way alive.
Those boxes of bones lying in the ground there didn't seem to have
anything to do with them.  Merely, as I stood there, I began to
wonder what you feel like when you're underground, whether you care
much and how soon you cease to care, when suddenly a heavy shadow
swept across me and gave me a bit of a start.

I looked over my shoulder.  It was only a bombing plane which had
flown between me and the sun.  The place seemed to be creeping with
them.

I strolled into the church.  For almost the first time since I got
back to Lower Binfield I didn't have the ghostly feeling, or rather
I had it in a different form.  Because nothing had changed.
Nothing, except that all the people were gone.  Even the hassocks
looked the same.  The same dusty, sweetish corpse-smell.  And by
God! the same hole in the window, though, as it was evening and the
sun was round the other side, the spot of light wasn't creeping up
the aisle.  They'd still got pews--hadn't changed over to chairs.
There was our pew, and there was the one in front where Wetherall
used to bellow against Shooter.  Sihon king of the Amorites and Og
the king of Bashan!  And the worn stones in the aisle where you
could still half-read the epitaphs of the blokes who lay beneath
them.  I squatted down to have a look at the one opposite our pew.
I still knew the readable bits of it by heart.  Even the pattern
they made seemed to have stuck in my memory.  Lord knows how often
I'd read them during the sermon.


Here..................fon,   Gent.,
of this parif h..........his juft &
  upright..........................
..................................
To his........manifold private bene
volences he added a diligent.......
...................................
.......................beloved wife
Amelia, by..............iffue feven
daughters..........................


I remembered how the long S's used to puzzle me as a kid.  Used to
wonder whether in the old days they pronounced their S's as F's,
and if so, why.

There was a step behind me.  I looked up.  A chap in a cassock was
standing over me.  It was the vicar.

But I mean THE vicar!  It was old Betterton, who'd been vicar in
the old days--not, as a matter of fact, ever since I could
remember, but since 1904 or thereabouts.  I recognized him at once,
though his hair was quite white.

He didn't recognize me.  I was only a fat tripper in a blue suit
doing a bit of sightseeing.  He said good evening and promptly
started on the usual line of talk--was I interested in architecture,
remarkable old building this, foundations go back to Saxon times and
so on and so forth.  And soon he was doddering round, showing me the
sights, such as they were--Norman arch leading into the vestry,
brass effigy of Sir Roderick Bone who was killed at the Battle of
Newbury.  And I followed him with the kind of whipped-dog air that
middle-aged businessmen always have when they're being shown round a
church or a picture-gallery.  But did I tell him that I knew it all
already?  Did I tell him that I was Georgie Bowling, son of Samuel
Bowling--he'd have remembered my father even if he didn't remember
me--and that I'd not only listened to his sermons for ten years and
gone to his Confirmation classes, but even belonged to the Lower
Binfield Reading Circle and had a go at Sesame and Lilies just to
please him?  No, I didn't.  I merely followed him round, making the
kind of mumble that you make when somebody tells you that this or
that is five hundred years old and you can't think what the hell to
say except that it doesn't look it.  From the moment that I set eyes
on him I'd decided to let him think I was a stranger.  As soon as I
decently could I dropped sixpence in the Church Expenses box and
bunked.

But why?  Why not make contact, now that at last I'd found somebody
I knew?

Because the change in his appearance after twenty years had
actually frightened me.  I suppose you think I mean that he looked
older.  But he didn't!  He looked YOUNGER.  And it suddenly taught
me something about the passage of time.

I suppose old Betterton would be about sixty-five now, so that when
I last saw him he'd have been about forty-five--my own present age.
His hair was white now, and the day he buried Mother it was a kind
of streaky grey, like a shaving-brush.  And yet as soon as I saw
him the first thing that struck me was that he looked younger.  I'd
thought of him as an old, old man, and after all he wasn't so very
old.  As a boy, it occurred to me, all people over forty had seemed
to me just worn-out old wrecks, so old that there was hardly any
difference between them.  A man of forty-five had seemed to me
older than this old dodderer of sixty-five seemed now.  And Christ!
I was forty-five myself.  It frightened me.

So that's what I look like to chaps of twenty, I thought as I made
off between the graves.  Just a poor old hulk.  Finished.  It was
curious.  As a rule I don't care a damn about my age.  Why should
I?  I'm fat, but I'm strong and healthy.  I can do everything I
want to do.  A rose smells the same to me now as it did when I was
twenty.  Ah, but do I smell the same to the rose?  Like an answer a
girl, might have been eighteen, came up the churchyard lane.  She
had to pass within a yard or two of me.  I saw the look she gave
me, just a tiny momentary look.  No, not frightened, nor hostile.
Only kind of wild, remote, like a wild animal when you catch its
eye.  She'd been born and grown up in those twenty years while I
was away from Lower Binfield.  All my memories would have been
meaningless to her.  Living in a different world from me, like an
animal.

I went back to the George.  I wanted a drink, but the bar didn't
open for another half-hour.  I hung about for a bit, reading a
Sporting and Dramatic of the year before, and presently the fair-
haired dame, the one I thought might be a widow, came in.  I had a
sudden desperate yearning to get off with her.  Wanted to show
myself that there's life in the old dog yet, even if the old dog
does have to wear false teeth.  After all, I thought, if she's
thirty and I'm forty-five, that's fair enough.  I was standing in
front of the empty fireplace, making believe to warm my bum, the
way you do on a summer day.  In my blue suit I didn't look so bad.
A bit fat, no doubt, but distingue.  A man of the world.  I could
pass for a stockbroker.  I put on my toniest accent and said
casually:

'Wonderful June weather we're having.'

It was a pretty harmless remark, wasn't it?  Nor in the same class
as 'Haven't I met you somewhere before?'

But it wasn't a success.  She didn't answer, merely lowered for
about half a second the paper she was reading and gave me a look
that would have cracked a window.  It was awful.  She had one of
those blue eyes that go into you like a bullet.  In that split
second I saw how hopelessly I'd got her wrong.  She wasn't the kind
of widow with dyed hair who likes being taken out to dance-halls.
She was upper-middle-class, probably an admiral's daughter, and
been to one of those good schools where they play hockey.  And I'd
got myself wrong too.  New suit or no new suit, I COULDN'T pass for
a stockbroker.  Merely looked like a commercial traveller who'd
happened to get hold of a bit of dough.  I sneaked off to the
private bar to have a pint or two before dinner.

The beer wasn't the same.  I remember the old beer, the good Thames
Valley beer that used to have a bit of taste in it because it was
made out of chalky water.  I asked the barmaid:

'Have Bessemers' still got the brewery?'

'Bessemers?  Oo, NO, sir!  They've gorn.  Oo, years ago--long
before we come 'ere.'

She was a friendly sort, what I call the elder-sister type of
barmaid, thirty-fivish, with a mild kind of face and the fat arms
they develop from working the beer-handle.  She told me the name of
the combine that had taken over the brewery.  I could have guessed
it from the taste, as a matter of fact.  The different bars ran
round in a circle with compartments in between.  Across in the
public bar two chaps were playing a game of darts, and in the Jug
and Bottle there was a chap I couldn't see who occasionally put in
a remark in a sepulchral kind of voice.  The barmaid leaned her fat
elbows on the bar and had a talk with me.  I ran over the names of
the people I used to know, and there wasn't a single one of them
that she'd heard of.  She said she'd only been in Lower Binfield
five years.  She hadn't even heard of old Trew, who used to have
the George in the old days.

'I used to live in Lower Binfield myself,' I told her.  'A good
while back, it was, before the war.'

'Before the war?  Well, now!  You don't look that old.'

'See some changes, I dessay,' said the chap in the Jug and Bottle.

'The town's grown,' I said.  'It's the factories, I suppose.'

'Well, of course they mostly work at the factories.  There's the
gramophone works, and then there's Truefitt Stockings.  But of
course they're making bombs nowadays.'

I didn't altogether see why it was of course, but she began telling
me about a young fellow who worked at Truefitt's factory and
sometimes came to the George, and he'd told her that they were
making bombs as well as stockings, the two, for some reason I
didn't understand, being easy to combine.  And then she told me
about the big military aerodrome near Walton--that accounted for
the bombing planes I kept seeing--and the next moment we'd started
talking about the war, as usual.  Funny.  It was exactly to escape
the thought of war that I'd come here.  But how can you, anyway?
It's in the air you breathe.

I said it was coming in 1941.  The chap in the Jug and Bottle said
he reckoned it was a bad job.  The barmaid said it gave her the
creeps.  She said:

'It doesn't seem to do much good, does it, after all said and done?
And sometimes I lie awake at night and hear one of those great
things going overhead, and think to myself, "Well, now, suppose
that was to drop a bomb right down on top of me!"  And all this
A.R.P., and Miss Todgers, she's the Air Warden, telling you it'll
be all right if you keep your head and stuff the windows up with
newspaper, and they say they're going to dig a shelter under the
Town Hall.  But the way I look at it is, how could you put a gas-
mask on a baby?'

The chap in the Jug and Bottle said he'd read in the paper that you
ought to get into a hot bath till it was all over.  The chaps in
the public bar overheard this and there was a bit of a by-play on
the subject of how many people could get into the same bath, and
both of them asked the barmaid if they could share her bath with
her.  She told them not to get saucy, and then she went up the
other end of the bar and hauled them out a couple more pints of old
and mild.  I took a suck at my beer.  It was poor stuff.  Bitter,
they call it.  And it was bitter, right enough, too bitter, a kind
of sulphurous taste.  Chemicals.  They say no English hops ever go
into beer nowadays, they're all made into chemicals.  Chemicals, on
the other hand, are made into beer.  I found myself thinking about
Uncle Ezekiel, what he'd have said to beer like this, and what he'd
have said about A.R.P. and the buckets of sand you're supposed to
put the thermite bombs out with.  As the barmaid came back to my
side of the bar I said:

'By the way, who's got the Hall nowadays?'

We always used to call it the Hall, though its name was Binfield
House.  For a moment she didn't seem to understand.

'The Hall, sir?'

''E means Binfield 'Ouse,' said the chap in the Jug and Bottle.

'Oh, Binfield House!  Oo, I thought you meant the Memorial Hall.
It's Dr Merrall's got Binfield House now.'

'Dr Merrall?'

'Yes, sir.  He's got more than sixty patients up there, they say.'

'Patients?  Have they turned it into a hospital, or something?'

'Well--it's not what you'd call an ordinary hospital.  More of a
sanatorium.  It's mental patients, reely.  What they call a Mental
Home.'

A loony-bin!

But after all, what else could you expect?



3


I crawled out of bed with a bad taste in my mouth and my bones
creaking.

The fact was that, what with a bottle of wine at lunch and another
at dinner, and several pints in between, besides a brandy or two,
I'd had a bit too much to drink the day before.  For several
minutes I stood in the middle of the carpet, gazing at nothing in
particular and too done-in to make a move.  You know that god-awful
feeling you get sometimes in the early morning.  It's a feeling
chiefly in your legs, but it says to you clearer than any words
could do, 'Why the hell do you go on with it?  Chuck it up, old
chap!  Stick your head in the gas oven!'

Then I shoved my teeth in and went to the window.  A lovely June
day, again, and the sun was just beginning to slant over the roofs
and hit the house-fronts on the other side of the street.  The pink
geraniums in the window-boxes didn't look half bad.  Although it
was only about half past eight and this was only a side-street off
the market-place there was quite a crowd of people coming and
going.  A stream of clerkly-looking chaps in dark suits with
dispatch-cases were hurrying along, all in the same direction, just
as if this had been a London suburb and they were scooting for the
Tube, and the schoolkids were straggling up towards the market-
place in twos and threes.  I had the same feeling that I'd had the
day before when I saw the jungle of red houses that had swallowed
Chamford Hill.  Bloody interlopers!  Twenty thousand gate-crashers
who didn't even know my name.  And here was all this new life
swarming to and fro, and here was I, a poor old fatty with false
teeth, watching them from a window and mumbling stuff that nobody
wanted to listen to about things that happened thirty and forty
years ago.  Christ! I thought, I was wrong to think that I was
seeing ghosts.  I'm the ghost myself.  I'm dead and they're alive.

But after breakfast--haddock, grilled kidneys, toast and marmalade,
and a pot of coffee--I felt better.  The frozen dame wasn't
breakfasting in the dining-room, there was a nice summery feeling
in the air, and I couldn't get rid of the feeling that in that blue
flannel suit of mine I looked just a little bit distingue.  By God!
I thought, if I'm a ghost, I'll BE a ghost!  I'll walk.  I'll haunt
the old places.  And maybe I can work a bit of black magic on some
of these bastards who've stolen my home town from me.

I started out, but I'd got no farther than the market-place when I
was pulled up by something I hadn't expected to see.  A procession
of about fifty school-kids was marching down the street in column
of fours--quite military, they looked--with a grim-looking woman
marching alongside of them like a sergeant-major.  The leading four
were carrying a banner with a red, white, and blue border and
BRITONS PREPARE on it in huge letters.  The barber on the corner
had come out on to his doorstep to have a look at them.  I spoke to
him.  He was a chap with shiny black hair and a dull kind of face.

'What are those kids doing?'

'It's this here air-raid practice,' he said vaguely.  'This here
A.R.P.  Kind of practising, like.  That's Miss Todgers, that is.'

I might have guessed it was Miss Todgers.  You could see it in her
eye.  You know the kind of tough old devil with grey hair and a
kippered face that's always put in charge of Girl Guide
detachments, Y.W.C.A. hostels, and whatnot.  She had on a coat and
skirt that somehow looked like a uniform and gave you a strong
impression that she was wearing a Sam Browne belt, though actually
she wasn't.  I knew her type.  Been in the W.A.A.C.s in the war,
and never had a day's fun since.  This A.R.P. was jam to her.  As
the kids swung past I heard her letting out at them with the real
sergeant-major yell, 'Monica!  Lift your feet up!' and I saw that
the rear four had another banner with a red, white, and blue
border, and in the middle


WE ARE READY.  ARE YOU?


'What do they want to march them up and down for?' I said to the
barber.

'I dunno.  I s'pose it's kind of propaganda, like.'

I knew, of course.  Get the kids war-minded.  Give us all the
feeling that there's no way out of it, the bombers are coming as
sure as Christmas, so down to the cellar you go and don't argue.
Two of the great black planes from Walton were zooming over the
eastern end of the town.  Christ! I thought, when it starts it
won't surprise us any more than a shower of rain.  Already we're
listening for the first bomb.  The barber went on to tell me that
thanks to Miss Todgers's efforts the school-kids had been served
with their gas-masks already.

Well, I started to explore the town.  Two days I spent just
wandering round the old landmarks, such of them as I could
identify.  And all that time I never ran across a soul that knew
me.  I was a ghost, and if I wasn't actually invisible, I felt like
it.

It was queer, queerer than I can tell you.  Did you ever read a
story of H.G. Wells's about a chap who was in two places at once--
that's to say, he was really in his own home, but he had a kind of
hallucination that he was at the bottom of the sea?  He'd been
walking round his room, but instead of the tables and chairs he'd
see the wavy waterweed and the great crabs and cuttlefish reaching
out to get him.  Well, it was just like that.  For hours on end I'd
be walking through a world that wasn't there.  I'd count my paces
as I went down the pavement and think, 'Yes, here's where so-and-
so's field begins.  The hedge runs across the street and slap
through that house.  That petrol pump is really an elm tree.  And
here's the edge of the allotments.  And this street (it was a
dismal little row of semi-detached houses called Cumberledge Road,
I remember) is the lane where we used to go with Katie Simmons, and
the nut-bushes grew on both sides.'  No doubt I got the distances
wrong, but the general directions were right.  I don't believe
anyone who hadn't happened to be born here would have believed that
these streets were fields as little as twenty years ago.  It was as
though the countryside had been buried by a kind of volcanic
eruption from the outer suburbs.  Nearly the whole of what used to
be old Brewer's land had been swallowed up in the Council housing
estate.  The Mill Farm had vanished, the cow-pond where I caught my
first fish had been drained and filled up and built over, so that I
couldn't even say exactly where it used to stand.  It was all
houses, houses, little red cubes of houses all alike, with privet
hedges and asphalt paths leading up to the front door.  Beyond the
Council Estate the town thinned out a bit, but the jerry-builders
were doing their best.  And there were little knots of houses
dumped here and there, wherever anybody had been able to buy a plot
of land, and the makeshift roads leading up to the houses, and
empty lots with builders' boards, and bits of ruined fields covered
with thistles and tin cans.

In the centre of the old town, on the other hand, things hadn't
changed much, so far as buildings went.  A lot of the shops were
still doing the same line of trade, although the names were
different.  Lillywhite's was still a draper's, but it didn't look
too prosperous.  What used to be Gravitt's, the butcher's, was now
a shop that sold radio parts.  Mother Wheeler's little window had
been bricked over.  Grimmett's was still a grocer's, but it had
been taken over by the International.  It gives you an idea of the
power of these big combines that they could even swallow up a cute
old skinflint like Grimmett.  But from what I know of him--not to
mention that slap-up tombstone in the churchyard--I bet he got out
while the going was good and had ten to fifteen thousand quid to
take to heaven with him.  The only shop that was still in the same
hands was Sarazins', the people who'd ruined Father.  They'd
swollen to enormous dimensions, and they had another huge branch in
the new part of the town.  But they'd turned into a kind of general
store and sold furniture, drugs, hardware, and ironmongery as well
as the old garden stuff.

For the best part of two days I was wandering round, not actually
groaning and rattling a chain, but sometimes feeling that I'd like
to.  Also I was drinking more than was good for me.  Almost as soon
as I got to Lower Binfield I'd started on the booze, and after that
the pubs never seemed to open quite early enough.  My tongue was
always hanging out of my mouth for the last half-hour before
opening time.

Mind you, I wasn't in the same mood all the time.  Sometimes it
seemed to me that it didn't matter a damn if Lower Binfield had
been obliterated.  After all, what had I come here for, except to
get away from the family?  There was no reason why I shouldn't do
all the things I wanted to do, even go fishing if I felt like it.
On the Saturday afternoon I even went to the fishing-tackle shop in
the High Street and bought a split-cane rod (I'd always pined for a
split-cane rod as a boy--it's a little bit dearer than a green-
heart) and hooks and gut and so forth.  The atmosphere of the shop
cheered me up.  Whatever else changes, fishing-tackle doesn't--
because, of course, fish don't change either.  And the shopman
didn't see anything funny in a fat middle-aged man buying a
fishing-rod.  On the contrary, we had a little talk about the
fishing in the Thames and the big chub somebody had landed the year
before last on a paste made of brown bread, honey, and minced
boiled rabbit.  I even--though I didn't tell him what I wanted them
for, and hardly even admitted it to myself--bought the strongest
salmon trace he'd got, and some No. 5 roach-hooks, with an eye to
those big carp at Binfield House, in case they still existed.

Most of Sunday morning I was kind of debating it in my mind--should
I go fishing, or shouldn't I?  One moment I'd think, why the hell
not, and the next moment it would seem to me that it was just one
of those things that you dream about and don't ever do.  But in the
afternoon I got the car out and drove down to Burford Weir.  I
thought I'd just have a look at the river, and tomorrow, if the
weather was right, maybe I'd take my new fishing-rod and put on the
old coat and grey flannel bags I had in my suitcase, and have a
good day's fishing.  Three or four days, if I felt like it.

I drove over Chamford Hill.  Down at the bottom the road turns off
and runs parallel to the towpath.  I got out of the car and walked.
Ah!  A knot of little red and white bungalows had sprung up beside
the road.  Might have expected it, of course.  And there seemed to
be a lot of cars standing about.  As I got nearer the river I came
into the sound--yes, plonk-tiddle-tiddle-plonk!--yes, the sound of
gramphones.

I rounded the bend and came in sight of the towpath.  Christ!
Another jolt.  The place was black with people.  And where the
water-meadows used to be--tea-houses, penny-in-the-slot machines,
sweet kiosks, and chaps selling Walls' Ice-Cream.  Might as well
have been at Margate.  I remember the old towpath.  You could walk
along it for miles, and except for the chaps at the lock gates, and
now and again a bargeman mooching along behind his horse, you'd
meet never a soul.  When we went fishing we always had the place to
ourselves.  Often I've sat there a whole afternoon, and a heron
might be standing in the shallow water fifty yards up the bank, and
for three or four hours on end there wouldn't be anyone passing to
scare him away.  But where had I got the idea that grown-up men
don't go fishing?  Up and down the bank, as far as I could see in
both directions, there was a continuous chain of men fishing, one
every five yards.  I wondered how the hell they could all have got
there until it struck me that they must be some fishing-club or
other.  And the river was crammed with boats--rowing-boats, canoes,
punts, motor-launches, full of young fools with next to nothing on,
all of them screaming and shouting and most of them with a
gramphone aboard as well.  The floats of the poor devils who were
trying to fish rocked up and down on the wash of the motor-boats.

I walked a little way.  Dirty, choppy water, in spite of the fine
day.  Nobody was catching anything, not even minnows.  I wondered
whether they expected to.  A crowd like that would be enough to
scare every fish in creation.  But actually, as I watched the
floats rocking up and down among the ice-cream tubs and the paper
bags, I doubted whether there were any fish to catch.  Are there
still fish in the Thames?  I suppose there must be.  And yet I'll
swear the Thames water isn't the same as it used to be.  Its colour
is quite different.  Of course you think that's merely my
imagination, but I can tell you it isn't so.  I know the water has
changed.  I remember the Thames water as it used to be, a kind of
luminous green that you could see deep into, and the shoals of dace
cruising round the reeds.  You couldn't see three inches into the
water now.  It's all brown and dirty, with a film of oil in it from
the motor-boats, not to mention the fag-ends and the paper bags.

After a bit I turned back.  Couldn't stand the noise of the
gramophones any longer.  Of course it's Sunday, I thought.
Mightn't be so bad on a week-day.  But after all, I knew I'd never
come back.  God rot them, let 'em keep their bloody river.
Wherever I go fishing it won't be in the Thames.

The crowds swarmed past me.  Crowds of bloody aliens, and nearly
all of them young.  Boys and girls larking along in couples.  A
troop of girls came past, wearing bell-bottomed trousers and white
caps like the ones they wear in the American Navy, with slogans
printed on them.  One of them, seventeen she might have been, had
PLEASE KISS ME.  I wouldn't have minded.  On an impulse I suddenly
turned aside and weighed myself on one of the penny-in-the-slot
machines.  There was a clicking noise somewhere inside it--you know
those machines that tell your fortune as well as your weight--and a
typewritten card came sliding out.

'You are the possessor of exceptional gifts,' I read, 'but owing to
excessive modesty you have never received your reward.  Those about
you underrate your abilities.  You are too fond of standing aside
and allowing others to take the credit for what you have done
yourself .  You are sensitive, affectionate, and always loyal to
your friends.  You are deeply attractive to the opposite sex.  Your
worst fault is generosity.  Persevere, for you will rise high!

'Weight: 14 stone 11 pounds.'

I'd put on four pounds in the last three days, I noticed.  Must
have been the booze.



4


I drove back to the George, dumped the car in the garage, and had a
late cup of tea.  As it was Sunday the bar wouldn't open for
another hour or two.  In the cool of the evening I went out and
strolled up in the direction of the church.

I was just crossing the market-place when I noticed a woman walking
a little way ahead of me.  As soon as I set eyes on her I had a
most peculiar feeling that I'd seen her somewhere before.  You know
that feeling.  I couldn't see her face, of course, and so far as
her back view went there was nothing I could identify and yet I
could have sworn I knew her.

She went up the High Street and turned down one of the side-streets
to the right, the one where Uncle Ezekiel used to have his shop.  I
followed.  I don't quite know why--partly curiosity, perhaps, and
partly as a kind of precaution.  My first thought had been that
here at last was one of the people I'd known in the old days in
Lower Binfield, but almost at the same moment it struck me that it
was just as likely that she was someone from West Bletchley.  In
that case I'd have to watch my step, because if she found out I was
here she'd probably split to Hilda.  So I followed cautiously,
keeping at a safe distance and examining her back view as well as I
could.  There was nothing striking about it.  She was a tallish,
fattish woman, might have been forty or fifty, in a rather shabby
black dress.  She'd no hat on, as though she'd just slipped out of
her house for a moment, and the way she walked gave you the
impression that her shoes were down at heel.  All in all, she
looked a bit of a slut.  And yet there was nothing to identify,
only that vague something which I knew I'd seen before.  It was
something in her movements, perhaps.  Presently she got to a little
sweet and paper shop, the kind of little shop that always keeps
open on a Sunday.  The woman who kept it was standing in the
doorway, doing something to a stand of postcards.  My woman stopped
to pass the time of day.

I stopped too, as soon as I could find a shop window which I could
pretend to be looking into.  It was a plumber's and decorator's,
full of samples of wallpaper and bathroom fittings and things.  By
this time I wasn't fifteen yards away from the other two.  I could
hear their voices cooing away in one of those meaningless
conversations that women have when they're just passing the time of
day.  'Yes, that's jest about it.  That's jest where it is.  I said
to him myself, I said, "Well, what else do you expect?" I said.  It
don't seem right, do it?  But what's the use, you might as well
talk to a stone.  It's a shame!' and so on and so forth.  I was
getting warmer.  Obviously my woman was a small shopkeeper's wife,
like the other.  I was just wondering whether she mightn't be one
of the people I'd known in Lower Binfield after all, when she
turned almost towards me and I saw three-quarters of her face.
And Jesus Christ!  It was Elsie!

Yes, it was Elsie.  No chance of mistake.  Elsie!  That fat hag!

It gave me such a shock--not, mind you, seeing Elsie, but seeing
what she'd grown to be like--that for a moment things swam in front
of my eyes.  The brass taps and ballstops and porcelain sinks and
things seemed to fade away into the distance, so that I both saw
them and didn't see them.  Also for a moment I was in a deadly funk
that she might recognize me.  But she'd looked bang in my face and
hadn't made any sign.  A moment more, and she turned and went on.
Again I followed.  It was dangerous, she might spot I was following
her, and that might start her wondering who I was, but I just had
to have another look at her.  The fact was that she exercised a
kind of horrible fascination on me.  In a manner of speaking I'd
been watching her before, but I watched her with quite different
eyes now.

It was horrible, and yet I got a kind of scientific kick out of
studying her back view.  It's frightening, the things that twenty-
four years can do to a woman.  Only twenty-four years, and the girl
I'd known, with her milky-white skin and red mouth and kind of
dull-gold hair, had turned into this great round-shouldered hag,
shambling along on twisted heels.  It made me feel downright glad
I'm a man.  No man ever goes to pieces quite so completely as that.
I'm fat, I grant you.  I'm the wrong shape, if you like.  But at
least I'm A shape.  Elsie wasn't even particularly fat, she was
merely shapeless.  Ghastly things had happened to her hips.  As for
her waist, it had vanished.  She was just a kind of soft lumpy
cylinder, like a bag of meal.

I followed her a long way, out of the old town and through a lot of
mean little streets I didn't know.  Finally she turned in at the
doorway of another shop.  By the way she went in, it was obviously
her own.  I stopped for a moment outside the window.  'G. Cookson,
Confectioner and Tobacconist.'  So Elsie was Mrs Cookson.  It was
a mangy little shop, much like the other one where she'd stopped
before, but smaller and a lot more flyblown.  Didn't seem to sell
anything except tobacco and the cheapest kinds of sweets.  I
wondered what I could buy that would take a minute or two.  Then I
saw a rack of cheap pipes in the window, and I went in.  I had to
brace my nerve up a little before I did it, because there'd need to
be some hard lying if by any chance she recognized me.

She'd disappeared into the room behind the shop, but she came back
as I tapped on the counter.  So we were face to face.  Ah! no sign.
Didn't recognize me.  Just looked at me the way they do.  You know
the way small shopkeepers look at their customers--utter lack of
interest.

It was the first time I'd seen her full face, and though I half
expected what I saw, it gave me almost as big a shock as that first
moment when I'd recognized her.  I suppose when you look at the
face of someone young, even of a child, you ought to be able to
foresee what it'll look like when it's old.  It's all a question of
the shape of the bones.  But if it had ever occurred to me, when I
was twenty and she was twenty-two, to wonder what Elsie would look
like at forty-seven, it wouldn't have crossed my mind that she
could ever look like THAT.  The whole face had kind of sagged, as
if it had somehow been drawn downwards.  Do you know that type of
middle-aged woman that has a face just like a bulldog?  Great
underhung jaw, mouth turned down at the corners, eyes sunken, with
pouches underneath.  Exactly like a bulldog.  And yet it was the
same face, I'd have known it in a million.  Her hair wasn't
completely grey, it was a kind of dirty colour, and there was much
less of it than there used to be.  She didn't know me from Adam.
I was just a customer, a stranger, an uninteresting fat man.  It's
queer what an inch or two of fat can do.  I wondered whether I'd
changed even more than she had, or whether it was merely that she
wasn't expecting to see me, or whether--what was the likeliest of
all--she's simply forgotten my existence.

'Devening,' she said, in that listless way they have.

'I want a pipe,' I said flatly.  'A briar pipe.'

'A pipe.  Now jest lemme see.  I know we gossome pipes somewhere.
Now where did I--ah!  'Ere we are.'

She took a cardboard box full of pipes from somewhere under the
counter.  How bad her accent had got!  Or maybe I was just
imagining that, because my own standards had changed?  But no, she
used to be so 'superior', all the girls at Lilywhite's were so
'superior', and she'd been a member of the vicar's Reading Circle.
I swear she never used to drop her aitches.  It's queer how these
women go to pieces once they're married.  I fiddled among the pipes
for a moment and pretended to look them over.  Finally I said I'd
like one with an amber mouthpiece.

'Amber?  I don't know as we got any--' she turned towards the back
of the shop and called:  'Ge-orge!'

So the other bloke's name was George too.  A noise that sounded
something like 'Ur!' came from the back of the shop.

'Ge-orge!  Where ju put that other box of pipes?'

George came in.  He was a small stoutish chap, in shirtsleeves,
with a bald head and a big gingery-coloured soupstrainer moustache.
His jaw was working in a ruminative kind of way.  Obviously he'd
been interrupted in the middle of his tea.  The two of them started
poking round in search of the other box of pipes.  It was about
five minutes before they ran it to earth behind some bottles of
sweets.  It's wonderful, the amount of litter they manage to
accumulate in these frowsy little shops where the whole stock is
worth about fifty quid.

I watched old Elsie poking about among the litter and mumbling to
herself.  Do you know the kind of shuffling, round-shouldered
movements of an old woman who's lost something?  No use trying to
describe to you what I felt.  A kind of cold, deadly desolate
feeling.  You can't conceive it unless you've had it.  All I can
say is, if there was a girl you used to care about twenty-five
years ago, go and have a look at her now.  Then perhaps you'll know
what I felt.

But as a matter of fact, the thought that was chiefly in my mind
was how differently things turn out from what you expect.  The
times I'd had with Elsie!  The July nights under the chestnut
trees!  Wouldn't you think it would leave some kind of after-effect
behind?  Who'd have thought the time would ever come when there
would be just no feeling whatever between us?  Here was I and here
was she, our bodies might be a yard apart, and we were just as much
strangers as though we'd never met.  As for her, she didn't even
recognize me.  If I told her who I was, very likely she wouldn't
remember.  And if she did remember, what would she feel?  Just
nothing.  Probably wouldn't even be angry because I'd done the
dirty on her.  It was as if the whole thing had never happened.

And on the other hand, who'd ever have foreseen that Elsie would
end up like this?  She'd seemed the kind of girl who's bound to go
to the devil.  I know there'd been at least one other man before I
had met her, and it's safe to bet there were others between me and
the second George.  It wouldn't surprise me to learn that she'd had
a dozen altogether.  I treated her badly, there's no question about
that, and many a time it had given me a bad half-hour.  She'll end
up on the streets, I used to think, or stick her head in the gas
oven.  And sometimes I felt I'd been a bit of a bastard, but other
times I reflected (what was true enough) that if it hadn't been me
it would have been somebody else.  But you see the way things
happen, the kind of dull pointless way.  How many women really end
up on the streets?  A damn sight more end up at the mangle.  She
hadn't gone to the bad, or to the good either.  Just ended up like
everybody else, a fat old woman muddling about a frowsy little
shop, with a gingery-moustached George to call her own.  Probably
got a string of kids as well.  Mrs George Cookson.  Lived respected
and died lamented--and might die this side of the bankruptcy-court,
if she was lucky.

They'd found the box of pipes.  Of course there weren't any with
amber mouthpieces among them.

'I don't know as we got any amber ones just at present, sir.  Not
amber.  We gossome nice vulcanite ones.'

'I wanted an amber one,' I said.

'We gossome nice pipes 'ere.'  She held one out.  'That's a nice
pipe, now.  'Alf a crown, that one is.'

I took it.  Our fingers touched.  No kick, no reaction.  The body
doesn't remember.  And I suppose you think I bought the pipe, just
for old sake's sake, to put half a crown in Elsie's pocket.  But
not a bit of it.  I didn't want the thing.  I don't smoke a pipe.
I'd merely been making a pretext to come into the shop.  I turned
it over in my fingers and then put it down on the counter.

'Doesn't matter, I'll leave it,' I said.  'Give me a small
Players'.'

Had to buy something, after all that fuss.  George the second, or
maybe the third or fourth, routed out a packet of Players', still
munching away beneath his moustache.  I could see he was sulky
because I'd dragged him away from his tea for nothing.  But it
seemed too damn silly to waste half a crown.  I cleared out and
that was the last I ever saw of Elsie.

I went back to the George and had dinner.  Afterwards I went out
with some vague idea of going to the pictures, if they were open,
but instead I landed up in one of the big noisy pubs in the new
part of the town.  There I ran into a couple of chaps from
Staffordshire who were travelling in hardware, and we got talking
about the state of trade, and playing darts and drinking Guinness.
By closing time they were both so boozed that I had to take them
home in a taxi, and I was a bit under the weather myself, and the
next morning I woke up with a worse head than ever.



5


But I had to see the pool at Binfield House.

I felt really bad that morning.  The fact was that ever since I
struck Lower Binfield I'd been drinking almost continuously from
every opening time to every closing time.  The reason, though it
hadn't occurred to me till this minute, was that really there'd
been nothing else to do.  That was all my trip had amounted to so
far--three days on the booze.

The same as the other morning, I crawled over to the window and
watched the bowler hats and school caps hustling to and fro.  My
enemies, I thought.  The conquering army that's sacked the town and
covered the ruins with fag-ends and paper bags.  I wondered why I
cared.  You think, I dare say, that if it had given me a jolt to
find Lower Binfield swollen into a kind of Dagenham, it was merely
because I don't like to see the earth getting fuller and country
turning into town.  But it isn't that at all.  I don't mind towns
growing, so long as they do grow and don't merely spread like gravy
over a tablecloth.  I know that people have got to have somewhere
to live, and that if a factory isn't in one place it'll be in
another.  As for the picturesqueness, the sham countrified stuff,
the oak panels and pewter dishes and copper warming-pans and what-
not, it merely gives me the sick.  Whatever we were in the old
days, we weren't picturesque.  Mother would never have seen any
sense in the antiques that Wendy had filled our house with.  She
didn't like gateleg tables--she said they 'caught your legs'.  As
for pewter, she wouldn't have it in the house.  'Nasty greasy
stuff', she called it.  And yet, say what you like, there was
something that we had in those days and haven't got now, something
that you probably can't have in a streamlined milk-bar with the
radio playing.  I'd come back to look for it, and I hadn't found
it.  And yet somehow I half believe in it even now, when I hadn't
yet got my teeth in and my belly was crying out for an aspirin and
a cup of tea.

And that started me thinking again about the pool at Binfield
House.  After seeing what they'd done to the town, I'd had a
feeling you could only describe as fear about going to see whether
the pool still existed.  And yet it might, there was no knowing.
The town was smothered under red brick, our house was full of Wendy
and her junk, the Thames was poisoned with motor-oil and paper
bags.  But maybe the pool was still there, with the great black
fish still cruising round it.  Maybe, even, it was still hidden in
the woods and from that day to this no one had discovered it
existed.  It was quite possible.  It was a very thick bit of wood,
full of brambles and rotten brushwood (the beech trees gave way to
oaks round about there, which made the undergrowth thicker), the
kind of place most people don't care to penetrate.  Queerer things
have happened.

I didn't start out till late afternoon.  It must have been about
half past four when I took the car out and drove on to the Upper
Binfield road.  Half-way up the hill the houses thinned out and
stopped and the beech trees began.  The road forks about there and
I took the right-hand fork, meaning to make a detour round and come
back to Binfield House on the road.  But presently I stopped to
have a look at the copse I was driving through.  The beech trees
seemed just the same.  Lord, how they were the same!  I backed the
car on to a bit of grass beside the road, under a fall of chalk,
and got out and walked.  Just the same.  The same stillness, the
same great beds of rustling leaves that seem to go on from year to
year without rotting.  Not a creature stirring except the small
birds in the tree-tops which you couldn't see.  It wasn't easy to
believe that that great noisy mess of a town was barely three miles
away.  I began to make my way through the little copse, in the
direction of Binfield House.  I could vaguely remember how the
paths went.  And Lord!  Yes!  The same chalk hollow where the Black
Hand went and had catapult shots, and Sid Lovegrove told us how
babies were born, the day I caught my first fish, pretty near forty
years ago!

As the trees thinned out again you could see the other road and the
wall of Binfield House.  The old rotting wooden fence was gone, of
course, and they'd put up a high brick wall with spikes on top,
such as you'd expect to see round a loony-bin.  I'd puzzled for
some time about how to get into Binfield House until finally it had
struck me that I'd only to tell them my wife was mad and I was
looking for somewhere to put her.  After that they'd be quite ready
to show me round the grounds.  In my new suit I probably looked
prosperous enough to have a wife in a private asylum.  It wasn't
till I was actually at the gate that it occurred to me to wonder
whether the pool was still inside the grounds.

The old grounds of Binfield House had covered fifty acres, I
suppose, and the grounds of the loony-bin weren't likely to be more
than five or ten.  They wouldn't want a great pool of water for the
loonies to drown themselves in.  The lodge, where old Hodges used
to live, was the same as ever, but the yellow brick wall and the
huge iron gates were new.  From the glimpse I got through the gates
I wouldn't have known the place.  Gravel walks, flower-beds, lawns,
and a few aimless-looking types wandering about--loonies, I
suppose.  I strolled up the road to the right.  The pool--the big
pool, the one where I used to fish--was a couple of hundred yards
behind the house.  It might have been a hundred yards before I got
to the corner of the wall.  So the pool was outside the grounds.
The trees seemed to have got much thinner.  I could hear children's
voices.  And Gosh! there was the pool.

I stood for a moment, wondering what had happened to it.  Then I
saw what it was--all the trees were gone from round its edge.  It
looked all bare and different, in fact it looked extraordinarily
like the Round Pond in Kensington Gardens.  Kids were playing all
round the edge, sailing boats and paddling, and a few rather older
kids were rushing about in those little canoes which you work by
turning a handle.  Over to the left, where the old rotting boat-
house used to stand among the reeds, there was a sort of pavilion
and a sweet kiosk, and a huge white notice saying UPPER BINFIELD
MODEL YACHT CLUB.

I looked over to the right.  It was all houses, houses, houses.
One might as well have been in the outer suburbs.  All the woods
that used to grow beyond the pool, and grew so thick that they were
like a kind of tropical jungle, had been shaved flat.  Only a few
clumps of trees still standing round the houses.  There were arty-
looking houses, another of those sham-Tudor colonies like the one
I'd seen the first day at the top of Chamford Hill, only more so.
What a fool I'd been to imagine that these woods were still the
same!  I saw how it was.  There was just the one tiny bit of copse,
half a dozen acres perhaps, that hadn't been cut down, and it was
pure chance that I'd walked through it on my way here.  Upper
Binfield, which had been merely a name in the old days, had grown
into a decent-sized town.  In fact it was merely an outlying chunk
of Lower Binfield.

I wandered up to the edge of the pool.  The kids were splashing
about and making the devil of a noise.  There seemed to be swarms
of them.  The water looked kind of dead.  No fish in it now.  There
was a chap standing watching the kids.  He was an oldish chap with
a bald head and a few tufts of white hair, and pince-nez and very
sunburnt face.  There was something vaguely queer about his
appearance.  He was wearing shorts and sandals and one of those
celanese shirts open at the neck, I noticed, but what really struck
me was the look in his eye.  He had very blue eyes that kind of
twinkled at you from behind his spectacles.  I could see that he
was one of those old men who've never grown up.  They're always
either health-food cranks or else they have something to do with
the Boy Scouts--in either case they're great ones for Nature and
the open air.  He was looking at me as if he'd like to speak.

'Upper Binfield's grown a great deal,' I said.

He twinkled at me.

'Grown!  My dear sir, we never allow Upper Binfield to grow.  We
pride ourselves on being rather exceptional people up here, you
know.  Just a little colony of us all by ourselves.  No
interlopers--te-hee!'

'I mean compared with before the war,' I said.  'I used to live
here as a boy.'

'Oh-ah.  No doubt.  That was before my time, of course.  But the
Upper Binfield Estate is something rather special in the way of
building estates, you know.  Quite a little world of its own.  All
designed by young Edward Watkin, the architect.  You've heard of
him, of course.  We live in the midst of Nature up here.  No
connexion with the town down there'--he waved a hand in the
direction of Lower Binfield--'the dark satanic mills--te-hee!'

He had a benevolent old chuckle, and a way of wrinkling his face
up, like a rabbit.  Immediately, as though I'd asked him, he began
telling me all about the Upper Binfield Estate and young Edward
Watkin, the architect, who had such a feeling for the Tudor, and
was such a wonderful fellow at finding genuine Elizabethan beams in
old farmhouses and buying them at ridiculous prices.  And such an
interesting young fellow, quite the life and soul of the nudist
parties.  He repeated a number of times that they were very
exceptional people in Upper Binfield, quite different from Lower
Binfield, they were determined to enrich the countryside instead of
defiling it (I'm using his own phrase), and there weren't any
public houses on the estate.

'They talk of their Garden Cities.  But we call Upper Binfield the
Woodland City--te-hee!  Nature!'  He waved a hand at what was left
of the trees.  'The primeval forest brooding round us.  Our young
people grow up amid surroundings of natural beauty.  We are nearly
all of us enlightened people, of course.  Would you credit that
three-quarters of us up here are vegetarians?  The local butchers
don't like us at all--te-hee!  And some quite eminent people live
here.  Miss Helena Thurloe, the novelist--you've heard of her, of
course.  And Professor Woad, the psychic research worker.  Such a
poetic character!  He goes wandering out into the woods and the
family can't find him at mealtimes.  He says he's walking among the
fairies.  Do you believe in fairies?  I admit--te-hee!--I am just a
wee bit sceptical.  But his photographs are most convincing.'

I began to wonder whether he was someone who'd escaped from
Binfield House.  But no, he was sane enough, after a fashion.  I
knew the type.  Vegetarianism, simple life, poetry, nature-worship,
roll in the dew before breakfast.  I'd met a few of them years ago
in Ealing.  He began to show me round the estate.  There was
nothing left of the woods.  It was all houses, houses--and what
houses!  Do you know these faked-up Tudor houses with the curly
roofs and the buttresses that don't buttress anything, and the
rock-gardens with concrete bird-baths and those red plaster elves
you can buy at the florists'?  You could see in your mind's eye the
awful gang of food-cranks and spook-hunters and simple-lifers with
1,000 pounds a year that lived there.  Even the pavements were
crazy.  I didn't let him take me far.  Some of the houses made me
wish I'd got a hand-grenade in my pocket.  I tried to damp him down
by asking whether people didn't object to living so near the
lunatic asylum, but it didn't have much effect.  Finally I stopped
and said:

'There used to be another pool, besides the big one.  It can't be
far from here.'

'Another pool?  Oh, surely not.  I don't think there was ever
another pool.'

'They may have drained it off,' I said.  'It was a pretty deep
pool.  It would leave a big pit behind.'

For the first time he looked a bit uneasy.  He rubbed his nose.

'Oh-ah.  Of course, you must understand our life up here is in some
ways primitive.  The simple life, you know.  We prefer it so.  But
being so far from the town has its inconveniences, of course.  Some
of our sanitary arrangements are not altogether satisfactory.  The
dust-cart only calls once a month, I believe.'

'You mean they've turned the pool into a rubbish-dump?'

'Well, there IS something in the nature of a--' he shied at the
word rubbish-dump.  'We have to dispose of tins and so forth, of
course.  Over there, behind that clump of trees.'

We went across there.  They'd left a few trees to hid it.  But yes,
there it was.  It was my pool, all right.  They'd drained the water
off.  It made a great round hole, like an enormous well, twenty or
thirty feet deep.  Already it was half full of tin cans.

I stood looking at the tin cans.

'It's a pity they drained it,' I said.  'There used to be some big
fish in that pool.'

'Fish?  Oh, I never heard anything about that.  Of course we could
hardly have a pool of water here among the houses.  The mosquitoes,
you know.  But it was before my time.'

'I suppose these houses have been built a good long time?' I said.

'Oh--ten or fifteen years, I think.'

'I used to know this place before the war,' I said.  'It was all
woods then.  There weren't any houses except Binfield House.  But
that little bit of copse over there hasn't changed.  I walked
through it on my way here.'

'Ah, that!  That is sacrosanct.  We have decided never to build in
it.  It is sacred to the young people.  Nature, you know.'  He
twinkled at me, a kind of roguish look, as if he was letting me
into a little secret:  'We call it the Pixy Glen.'

The Pixy Glen.  I got rid of him, went back to the car and drove
down to Lower Binfield.  The Pixy Glen.  And they'd filled my pool
up with tin cans.  God rot them and bust them!  Say what you like--
call it silly, childish, anything--but doesn't it make you puke
sometimes to see what they're doing to England, with their bird-
baths and their plaster gnomes, and their pixies and tin cans,
where the beech woods used to be?

Sentimental, you say?  Anti-social?  Oughtn't to prefer trees to
men?  I say it depends what trees and what men.  Not that there's
anything one can do about it, except to wish them the pox in their
guts.

One thing, I thought as I drove down the hill, I'm finished with
this notion of getting back into the past.  What's the good of
trying to revisit the scenes of your boyhood?  They don't exist.
Coming up for air!  But there isn't any air.  The dustbin that
we're in reaches up to the stratosphere.  All the same, I didn't
particularly care.  After all, I thought, I've still got three days
left.  I'd have a bit of peace and quiet, and stop bothering about
what they'd done to Lower Binfield.  As for my idea of going
fishing--that was off, of course.  Fishing, indeed!  At my age!
Really, Hilda was right.

I dumped the car in the garage of the George and walked into the
lounge.  It was six o'clock.  Somebody had switched on the wireless
and the news-broadcast was beginning.  I came through the door just
in time to hear the last few words of an S.O.S.  And it gave me a
bit of a jolt, I admit.  For the words I heard were:

'--where his wife, Hilda Bowling, is seriously ill.'

The next instant the plummy voice went on:  'Here is another S.O.S.
Will Percival Chute, who was last heard of--', but I didn't wait to
hear any more.  I just walked straight on.  What made me feel
rather proud, when I thought it over afterwards, was that when I
heard those words come out of the loudspeaker I never turned an
eyelash.  Not even a pause in my step to let anyone know that I was
George Bowling, whose wife Hilda Bowling was seriously ill.  The
landlord's wife was in the lounge, and she knew my name was
Bowling, at any rate she'd seen it in the register.  Otherwise
there was nobody there except a couple of chaps who were staying at
the George and who didn't know me from Adam.  But I kept my head.
Not a sign to anyone.  I merely walked on into the private bar,
which had just opened, and ordered my pint as usual.

I had to think it over.  By the time I'd drunk about half the pint
I began to get the bearings of the situation.  In the first place,
Hilda WASN'T ill, seriously or otherwise.  I knew that.  She'd been
perfectly well when I came away, and it wasn't the time of the year
for 'flu or anything of that kind.  She was shamming.  Why?

Obviously it was just another of her dodges.  I saw how it was.
She'd got wind somehow--trust Hilda!--that I wasn't really at
Birmingham, and this was just her way of getting me home.  Couldn't
bear to think of me any longer with that other woman.  Because of
course she'd take it for granted that I was with a woman.  Can't
imagine any other motive.  And naturally she assumed that I'd come
rushing home as soon as I heard she was ill.

But that's just where you've got it wrong, I thought to myself as
I finished off the pint.  I'm too cute to be caught that way.  I
remembered the dodges she'd pulled before, and the extraordinary
trouble she'll take to catch me out.  I've even known her, when I'd
been on some journey she was suspicious about, check it all up with
a Bradshaw and a road-map, just to see whether I was telling the
truth about my movements.  And then there was that time when she
followed me all the way to Colchester and suddenly burst in on me
at the Temperance Hotel.  And that time, unfortunately, she
happened to be right--at least, she wasn't, but there were
circumstances which made it look as if she was.  I hadn't the
slightest belief that she was ill.  In fact, I knew she wasn't,
although I couldn't say exactly how.

I had another pint and things looked better.  Of course there was
a row coming when I got home, but there'd have been a row anyway.
I've got three good days ahead of me, I thought.  Curiously enough,
now that the things I'd come to look for had turned out not to
exist, the idea of having a bit of holiday appealed to me all the
more.  Being away from home--that was the great thing.  Peace
perfect peace with loved ones far away, as the hymn puts it.  And
suddenly I decided that I WOULD have a woman if I felt like it.  It
would serve Hilda right for being so dirty-minded, and besides,
where's the sense of being suspected if it isn't true?

But as the second pint worked inside me, the thing began to amuse
me.  I hadn't fallen for it, but it was damned ingenious all the
same.  I wondered how she'd managed about the S.O.S.  I've no idea
what the procedure is.  Do you have to have a doctor's certificate,
or do you just send your name in?  I felt pretty sure it was the
Wheeler woman who'd put her up to it.  It seemed to me to have the
Wheeler touch.

But all the same, the cheek of it!  The lengths that women will go!
Sometimes you can't help kind of admiring them.



6


After breakfast I strolled out into the market-place.  It was a
lovely morning, kind of cool and still, with a pale yellow light
like white wine playing over everything.  The fresh smell of the
morning was mixed up with the smell of my cigar.  But there was a
zooming noise from behind the houses, and suddenly a fleet of great
black bombers came whizzing over.  I looked up at them.  They
seemed to be bang overhead.

The next moment I heard something.  And at the same moment, if
you'd happened to be there, you'd have seen an interesting instance
of what I believe is called conditioned reflex.  Because what I'd
heard--there wasn't any question of mistake--was the whistle of a
bomb.  I hadn't heard such a thing for twenty years, but I didn't
need to be told what it was.  And without taking any kind of
thought I did the right thing.  I flung myself on my face.

After all I'm glad you didn't see me.  I don't suppose I looked
dignified.  I was flattened out on the pavement like a rat when it
squeezes under a door.  Nobody else had been half as prompt.  I'd
acted so quickly that in the split second while the bomb was
whistling down I even had time to be afraid that it was all a
mistake and I'd made a fool of myself for nothing.

But the next moment--ah!

BOOM-BRRRRR!

A noise like the Day of Judgment, and then a noise like a ton of
coal falling on to a sheet of tin.  That was falling bricks.  I
seemed to kind of melt into the pavement.  'It's started,' I
thought.  'I knew it!  Old Hitler didn't wait.  Just sent his
bombers across without warning.'

And yet here's a peculiar thing.  Even in the echo of that awful,
deafening crash, which seemed to freeze me up from top to toe, I
had time to think that there's something grand about the bursting
of a big projectile.  What does it sound like?  It's hard to say,
because what you hear is mixed up with what you're frightened of.
Mainly it gives you a vision of bursting metal.  You seem to see
great sheets of iron bursting open.  But the peculiar thing is the
feeling it gives you of being suddenly shoved up against reality.
It's like being woken up by somebody shying a bucket of water over
you.  You're suddenly dragged out of your dreams by a clang of
bursting metal, and it's terrible, and it's real.

There was a sound of screams and yells, and also of car brakes
being suddenly jammed on.  The second bomb which I was waiting for
didn't fall.  I raised my head a little.  On every side people
seemed to be rushing round and screaming.  A car was skidding
diagonally across the road, I could hear a woman's voice shrieking,
'The Germans!  The Germans!'  To the right I had a vague impression
of a man's round white face, rather like a wrinkled paper bag,
looking down at me.  He was kind of dithering:

'What is it?  What's happened?  What are they doing?'

'It's started,' I said.  'That was a bomb.  Lie down.'

But still the second bomb didn't fall.  Another quarter of a minute
or so, and I raised my head again.  Some of the people were still
rushing about, others were standing as if they'd been glued to the
ground.  From somewhere behind the houses a huge haze of dust had
risen up, and through it a black jet of smoke was streaming
upwards.  And then I saw an extraordinary sight.  At the other end
of the market-place the High Street rises a little.  And down this
little hill a herd of pigs was galloping, a sort of huge flood of
pig-faces.  The next moment, of course, I saw what it was.  It
wasn't pigs at all, it was only the schoolchildren in their gas-
masks.  I suppose they were bolting for some cellar where they'd
been told to take cover in case of air-raids.  At the back of them
I could even make out a taller pig who was probably Miss Todgers.
But I tell you for a moment they looked exactly like a herd of
pigs.

I picked myself up and walked across the market-place.  People were
calming down already, and quite a little crowd had begun to flock
towards the place where the bomb had dropped.

Oh, yes, you're right, of course.  It wasn't a German aeroplane
after all.  The war hadn't broken out.  It was only an accident.
The planes were flying over to do a bit of bombing practice--at any
rate they were carrying bombs--and somebody had put his hands on
the lever by mistake.  I expect he got a good ticking off for it.
By the time that the postmaster had rung up London to ask whether
there was a war on, and been told that there wasn't, everyone had
grasped that it was an accident.  But there'd been a space of time,
something between a minute and five minutes, when several thousand
people believed we were at war.  A good job it didn't last any
longer.  Another quarter of an hour and we'd have been lynching our
first spy.

I followed the crowd.  The bomb had dropped in a little side-street
off the High Street, the one where Uncle Ezekiel used to have his
shop.  It wasn't fifty yards from where the shop used to be.  As I
came round the corner I could hear voices murmuring 'Oo-oo!'--a
kind of awed noise, as if they were frightened and getting a big
kick out of it.  Luckily I got there a few minutes before the
ambulance and the fire-engine, and in spite of the fifty people or
so that had already collected I saw everything.

At first sight it looked as if the sky had been raining bricks and
vegetables.  There were cabbage leaves everywhere.  The bomb had
blown a greengrocer's shop out of existence.  The house to the
right of it had part of its roof blown off, and the roof beams were
on fire, and all the houses round had been more or less damaged and
had their windows smashed.  But what everyone was looking at was
the house on the left.  Its wall, the one that joined the
greengrocer's shop, was ripped off as neatly as if someone had done
it with a knife.  And what was extraordinary was that in the
upstairs rooms nothing had been touched.  It was just like looking
into a doll's house.  Chests-of-drawers, bedroom chairs, faded
wallpaper, a bed not yet made, and a jerry under the bed--all
exactly as it had been lived in, except that one wall was gone.
But the lower rooms had caught the force of the explosion.  There
was a frightful smashed-up mess of bricks, plaster, chair-legs,
bits of a varnished dresser, rags of tablecloth, piles of broken
plates, and chunks of a scullery sink.  A jar of marmalade had
rolled across the floor, leaving a long streak of marmalade behind,
and running side by side with it there was a ribbon of blood.  But
in among the broken crockery there was lying a leg.  Just a leg,
with the trouser still on it and a black boot with a Wood-Milne
rubber heel.  This was what people were oo-ing and ah-ing at.

I had a good look at it and took it in.  The blood was beginning to
get mixed up with the marmalade.  When the fire-engine arrived I
cleared off to the George to pack my bag.

This finishes me with Lower Binfield, I thought.  I'm going home.
But as a matter of fact I didn't shake the dust off my shoes and
leave immediately.  One never does.  When anything like that
happens, people always stand about and discuss it for hours.  There
wasn't much work done in the old part of Lower Binfield that day,
everyone was too busy talking about the bomb, what it sounded like
and what they thought when they heard it.  The barmaid at the
George said it fair gave her the shudders.  She said she'd never
sleep sound in her bed again, and what did you expect, it just
showed that with these here bombs you never knew.  A woman had
bitten off part of her tongue owing to the jump the explosion gave
her.  It turned out that whereas at our end of the town everyone
had imagined it was a German air-raid, everyone at the other end
had taken it for granted that it was an explosion at the stocking
factory.  Afterwards (I got this out of the newspaper) the Air
Ministry sent a chap to inspect the damage, and issued a report
saying that the effects of the bomb were 'disappointing'.  As a
matter of fact it only killed three people, the greengrocer,
Perrott his name was, and an old couple who lived next door.  The
woman wasn't much smashed about, and they identified the old man by
his boots, but they never found a trace of Perrott.  Not even a
trouser-button to read the burial service over.

In the afternoon I paid my bill and hooked it.  I didn't have much
more than three quid left after I'd paid the bill.  They know how
to cut it out of you these dolled-up country hotels, and what with
drinks and other odds and ends I'd been shying money about pretty
freely.  I left my new rod and the rest of the fishing tackle in my
bedroom.  Let 'em keep it.  No use to me.  It was merely a quid
that I'd chucked down the drain to teach myself a lesson.  And I'd
learnt the lesson all right.  Fat men of forty-five can't go
fishing.  That kind of thing doesn't happen any longer, it's just
a dream, there'll be no more fishing this side of the grave.

It's funny how things sink into you by degrees.  What had I really
felt when the bomb exploded?  At the actual moment, of course, it
scared the wits out of me, and when I saw the smashed-up house and
the old man's leg I'd had the kind of mild kick that you get from
seeing a street-accident.  Disgusting, of course.  Quite enough to
make me fed-up with this so-called holiday.  But it hadn't really
made much impression.

But as I got clear of the outskirts of Lower Binfield and turned
the car eastward, it all came back to me.  You know how it is when
you're in a car alone.  There's something either in the hedges
flying past you, or in the throb of the engine, that gets your
thoughts running in a certain rhythm.  You have the same feeling
sometimes when you're in the train.  It's a feeling of being able
to see things in better perspective than usual.  All kinds of
things that I'd been doubtful about I felt certain about now.  To
begin with, I'd come to Lower Binfield with a question in my mind.
What's ahead of us?  Is the game really up?  Can we get back to the
life we used to live, or is it gone for ever?  Well, I'd had my
answer.  The old life's finished, and to go back to Lower Binfield,
you can't put Jonah back into the whale.  I KNEW, though I don't
expect you to follow my train of thought.  And it was a queer thing
I'd done coming here.  All those years Lower Binfield had been
tucked away somewhere or other in my mind, a sort of quiet corner
that I could step back into when I felt like it, and finally I'd
stepped back into it and found that it didn't exist.  I'd chucked a
pineapple into my dreams, and lest there should be any mistake the
Royal Air Force had followed up with five hundred pounds of T.N.T.

War is coming.  1941, they say.  And there'll be plenty of broken
crockery, and little houses ripped open like packing-cases, and the
guts of the chartered accountant's clerk plastered over the piano
that he's buying on the never-never.  But what does that kind of
thing matter, anyway?  I'll tell you what my stay in Lower Binfield
had taught me, and it was this.  IT'S ALL GOING TO HAPPEN.  All the
things you've got at the back of your mind, the things you're
terrified of, the things that you tell yourself are just a
nightmare or only happen in foreign countries.  The bombs, the
food-queues, the rubber truncheons, the barbed wire, the coloured
shirts, the slogans, the enormous faces, the machine-guns squirting
out of bedroom windows.  It's all going to happen.  I know it--at
any rate, I knew it then.  There's no escape.  Fight against it if
you like, or look the other way and pretend not to notice, or grab
your spanner and rush out to do a bit of face-smashing along with
the others.  But there's no way out.  It's just something that's
got to happen.

I trod on the gas, and the old car whizzed up and down the little
hills, and the cows and elm trees and fields of wheat rushed past
till the engine was pretty nearly red-hot.  I felt in much the same
mood as I'd felt that day in January when I was coming down the
Strand, the day I got my new false teeth.  It was as though the
power of prophecy had been given me.  It seemed to me that I could
see the whole of England, and all the people in it, and all the
things that'll happen to all of them.  Sometimes, of course, even
then, I had a doubt or two.  The world is very large, that's a
thing you notice when you're driving about in a car, and in a way
it's reassuring.  Think of the enormous stretches of land you pass
over when you cross a corner of a single English county.  It's like
Siberia.  And the fields and beech spinneys and farmhouses and
churches, and the villages with their little grocers' shops and the
parish hall and the ducks walking across the green.  Surely it's
too big to be changed?  Bound to remain more or less the same.  And
presently I struck into outer London and followed the Uxbridge Road
as far as Southall.  Miles and miles of ugly houses, with people
living dull decent lives inside them.  And beyond it London
stretching on and on, streets, squares, back-alleys, tenements,
blocks of flats, pubs, fried-fish shops, picture-houses, on and on
for twenty miles, and all the eight million people with their
little private lives which they don't want to have altered.  The
bombs aren't made that could smash it out of existence.  And the
chaos of it!  The privateness of all those lives!  John Smith
cutting out the football coupons, Bill Williams swapping stories in
the barber's.  Mrs Jones coming home with the supper beer.  Eight
million of them!  Surely they'll manage somehow, bombs or no bombs,
to keep on with the life that they've been used to?

Illusion!  Baloney!  It doesn't matter how many of them there are,
they're all for it.  The bad times are coming, and the streamlined
men are coming too.  What's coming afterwards I don't know, it
hardly even interests me.  I only know that if there's anything you
care a curse about, better say good-bye to it now, because
everything you've ever known is going down, down, into the muck,
with the machine-guns rattling all the time.

But when I got back to the suburb my mood suddenly changed.

It suddenly struck me--and it hadn't even crossed my mind till that
moment--that Hilda might really be ill after all.

That's the effect of environment, you see.  In Lower Binfield I'd
taken it absolutely for granted that she wasn't ill and was merely
shamming in order to get me home.  It had seemed natural at the
time, I don't know why.  But as I drove into West Bletchley and the
Hesperides Estate closed round me like a kind of red-brick prison,
which is what it is, the ordinary habits of thought came back.  I
had this kind of Monday morning feeling when everything seems bleak
and sensible.  I saw what bloody rot it was, this business that I'd
wasted the last five days on.  Sneaking off to Lower Binfield to
try and recover the past, and then, in the car coming home,
thinking a lot of prophetic baloney about the future.  The future!
What's the future got to do with chaps like you and me?  Holding
down our jobs--that's our future.  As for Hilda, even when the
bombs are dropping she'll be still thinking about the price of
butter.

And suddenly I saw what a fool I'd been to think she'd do a thing
like that.  Of course the S.O.S. wasn't a fake!  As though she'd
have the imagination!  It was just the plain cold truth.  She
wasn't shamming at all, she was really ill.  And Gosh! at this
moment she might be lying somewhere in ghastly pain, or even dead,
for all I knew.  The thought sent a most horrible pang of fright
through me, a sort of dreadful cold feeling in my guts.  I whizzed
down Ellesmere Road at nearly forty miles an hour, and instead of
taking the car to the lock-up garage as usual I stopped outside the
house and jumped out.

So I'm fond of Hilda after all, you say!  I don't know exactly what
you mean by fond.  Are you fond of your own face?  Probably not,
but you can't imagine yourself without it.  It's part of you.
Well, that's how I felt about Hilda.  When things are going well I
can't stick the sight of her, but the thought that she might be
dead or even in pain sent the shivers through me.

I fumbled with the key, got the door open, and the familiar smell
of old mackintoshes hit me.

'Hilda!' I yelled.  'Hilda!'

No answer.  For a moment I was yelling 'Hilda!  Hilda!' into utter
silence, and some cold sweat started out on my backbone.  Maybe
they carted her away to hospital already--maybe there was a corpse
lying upstairs in the empty house.

I started to dash up the stairs, but at the same moment the two
kids, in their pyjamas, came out of their rooms on either side of
the landing.  It was eight or nine o'clock, I suppose--at any rate
the light was just beginning to fail.  Lorna hung over the
banisters.

'Oo, Daddy!  Oo, it's Daddy!  Why have you come back today?  Mummy
said you weren't coming till Friday.'

'Where's your mother?' I said.

'Mummy's out.  She went out with Mrs Wheeler.  Why have you come
home today, Daddy?'

'Then your mother hasn't been ill?'

'No.  Who said she'd been ill?  Daddy!  Have you been in Birmingham?'

'Yes.  Get back to bed, now.  You'll be catching cold.'

'But where's our presents, Daddy?'

'What presents?'

'The presents you've bought us from Birmingham.'

'You'll see them in the morning,' I said.

'Oo, Daddy!  Can't we see them tonight?'

'No.  Dry up.  Get back to bed or I'll wallop the pair of you.'

So she wasn't ill after all.  She HAD been shamming.  And really I
hardly knew whether to be glad or sorry.  I turned back to the
front door, which I'd left open, and there, as large as life, was
Hilda coming up the garden path.

I looked at her as she came towards me in the last of the evening
light.  It was queer to think that less than three minutes earlier
I'd been in the devil of a stew, with actual cold sweat on my
backbone, at the thought that she might be dead.  Well, she wasn't
dead, she was just as usual.  Old Hilda with her thin shoulders and
her anxious face, and the gas bill and the school-fees, and the
mackintoshy smell and the office on Monday--all the bedrock facts
that you invariably come back to, the eternal verities as old
Porteous calls them.  I could see that Hilda wasn't in too good a
temper.  She darted me a little quick look, like she does sometimes
when she's got something on her mind, the kind of look some little
thin animal, a weasel for instance, might give you.  She didn't
seem surprised to see me back, however.

'Oh, so you're back already, are you?' she said.

It seemed pretty obvious that I was back, and I didn't answer.  She
didn't make any move to kiss me.

'There's nothing for your supper,' she went on promptly.  That's
Hilda all over.  Always manages to say something depressing the
instant you set foot inside the house.  'I wasn't expecting you.
You'll just have to have bread and cheese--but I don't think we've
got any cheese.'

I followed her indoors, into the smell of mackintoshes.  We went
into the sitting-room.  I shut the door and switched on the light.
I meant to get my say in first, and I knew it would make things
better if I took a strong line from the start.

'Now', I said, 'what the bloody hell do you mean by playing that
trick on me?'

She'd just laid her bag down on top of the radio, and for a moment
she looked genuinely surprised.

'What trick?  What do you mean?'

'Sending out that S.O.S.!'

'What S.O.S.?  What are you TALKING about, George?'

'Are you trying to tell me you didn't get them to send out an
S.O.S. saying you were seriously ill?'

'Of course I didn't!  How could I?  I wasn't ill.  What would I do
a thing like that for?'

I began to explain, but almost before I began I saw what had
happened.  It was all a mistake.  I'd only heard the last few words
of the S.O.S. and obviously it was some other Hilda Bowling.  I
suppose there'd be scores of Hilda Bowlings if you looked the name
up in the directory.  It just was the kind of dull stupid mistake
that's always happening.  Hilda hadn't even showed that little bit
of imagination I'd credited her with.  The sole interest in the
whole affair had been the five minutes or so when I thought she was
dead, and found that I cared after all.  But that was over and done
with.  While I explained she was watching me, and I could see in
her eye that there was trouble of some kind coming.  And then she
began questioning me in what I call her third-degree voice, which
isn't, as you might expect, angry and nagging, but quiet and kind
of watchful.

'So you heard this S.O.S. in the hotel at Birmingham?'

'Yes.  Last night, on the National Broadcast.'

'When did you leave Birmingham, then?'

'This morning, of course.'  (I'd planned out the journey in my
mind, just in case there should be any need to lie my way out of
it.  Left at ten, lunch at Coventry, tea at Bedford--I'd got it all
mapped out.)

'So you thought last night I was seriously ill, and you didn't even
leave till this morning?'

'But I tell you I didn't think you were ill.  Haven't I explained?
I thought it was just another of your tricks.  It sounded a damn
sight more likely.'

'Then I'm rather surprised you left at all!' she said with so much
vinegar in her voice that I knew there was something more coming.
But she went on more quietly:  'So you left this morning, did you?'

'Yes.  I left about ten.  I had lunch at Coventry--'

'Then how do you account for THIS?' she suddenly shot out at me,
and in the same instant she ripped her bag open, took out a piece
of paper, and held it out as if it had been a forged cheque, or
something.

I felt as if someone had hit me a sock in the wind.  I might have
known it!  She'd caught me after all.  And there was the evidence,
the dossier of the case.  I didn't even know what it was, except
that it was something that proved I'd been off with a woman.  All
the stuffing went out of me.  A moment earlier I'd been kind of
bullying her, making out to be angry because I'd been dragged back
from Birmingham for nothing, and now she'd suddenly turned the
tables on me.  You don't have to tell me what I look like at that
moment.  I know.  Guilt written all over me in big letters--I know.
And I wasn't even guilty!  But it's a matter of habit.  I'm used to
being in the wrong.  For a hundred quid I couldn't have kept the
guilt out of my voice as I answered:

'What do you mean?  What's that thing you've got there?'

'You read it and you'll see what it is.'

I took it.  It was a letter from what seemed to be a firm of
solicitors, and it was addressed from the same street as
Rowbottom's Hotel, I noticed.

'Dear Madam,' I read, 'With reference to your letter of the 18th
inst., we think there must be some mistake.  Rowbottom's Hotel was
closed down two years ago and has been converted into a block of
offices.  No one answering the description of your husband has been
here.  Possibly--'

I didn't read any further.  Of course I saw it all in a flash.  I'd
been a little bit too clever and put my foot in it.  There was just
one faint ray of hope--young Saunders might have forgotten to post
the letter I'd addressed from Rowbottom's, in which case it was
just possible I could brazen it out.  But Hilda soon put the lid on
that idea.

'Well, George, you see what the letter says?  The day you left here
I wrote to Rowbottom's Hotel--oh, just a little note, asking them
whether you'd arrived there.  And you see the answer I got!  There
isn't even any such place as Rowbottom's Hotel.  And the same day,
the very same post, I got your letter saying you were at the hotel.
You got someone to post it for you, I suppose.  THAT was your
business in Birmingham!'

'But look here, Hilda!  You've got all this wrong.  It isn't what
you think at all.  You don't understand.'

'Oh, yes, I do, George.  I understand PERFECTLY.'

'But look here, Hilda--'

Wasn't any use, of course.  It was a fair cop.  I couldn't even
meet her eye.  I turned and tried to make for the door.

'I'll have to take the car round to the garage,' I said.

'Oh, no George!  You don't get out of it like that.  You'll stay
here and listen to what I've got to say, please.'

'But, damn it!  I've got to switch the lights on, haven't I?  It's
past lighting-up time.  You don't want us to get fined?'

At that she let me go, and I went out and switched the car lights
on, but when I came back she was still standing there like a figure
of doom, with the two letters, mine and the solicitor's on the
table in front of her.  I'd got a little of my nerve back, and I
had another try:

'Listen, Hilda.  You've got hold of the wrong end of the stick
about this business.  I can explain the whole thing.'

'I'm sure YOU could explain anything, George.  The question is
whether I'd believe you.'

'But you're just jumping to conclusions!  What made you write to
these hotel people, anyway?'

'It was Mrs Wheeler's idea.  And a very good idea too, as it turned
out.'

'Oh, Mrs Wheeler, was it?  So you don't mind letting that blasted
woman into our private affairs?'

'She didn't need any letting in.  It was she who warned me what you
were up to this week.  Something seemed to tell her, she said.  And
she was right, you see.  She knows all about you, George.  She used
to have a husband JUST like you.'

'But, Hilda--'

I looked at her.  Her face had gone a kind of white under the
surface, the way it does when she thinks of me with another woman.
A woman.  If only it had been true!

And Gosh! what I could see ahead of me!  You know what it's like.
The weeks on end of ghastly nagging and sulking, and the catty
remarks after you think peace has been signed, and the meals always
late, and the kids wanting to know what it's all about.  But what
really got me down was the kind of mental squalor, the kind of
mental atmosphere in which the real reason why I'd gone to Lower
Binfield wouldn't even be conceivable.  That was what chiefly
struck me at the moment.  If I spent a week explaining to Hilda WHY
I'd been to Lower Binfield, she'd never understand.  And who WOULD
understand, here in Ellesmere Road?  Gosh! did I even understand
myself?  The whole thing seemed to be fading out of my mind.  Why
had I gone to Lower Binfield?  HAD I gone there?  In this
atmosphere it just seemed meaningless.  Nothing's real in Ellesmere
Road except gas bills, school-fees, boiled cabbage, and the office
on Monday.

One more try:

'But look here, Hilda!  I know what you think.  But you're
absolutely wrong.  I swear to you you're wrong.'

'Oh, no, George.  If I was wrong why did you have to tell all those
lies?'

No getting away from that, of course.

I took a pace or two up and down.  The smell of old mackintoshes
was very strong.  Why had I run away like that?  Why had I bothered
about the future and the past, seeing that the future and the past
don't matter?  Whatever motives I might have had, I could hardly
remember them now.  The old life in Lower Binfield, the war and the
after-war, Hitler, Stalin, bombs, machine-guns, food-queues, rubber
truncheons--it was fading out, all fading out.  Nothing remained
except a vulgar low-down row in a smell of old mackintoshes.

One last try:

'Hilda!  Just listen to me a minute.  Look here, you don't know
where I've been all this week, do you?'

'I don't want to know where you've been.  I know WHAT you've been
doing.  That's quite enough for me.'

'But dash it--'

Quite useless, of course.  She'd found me guilty and now she was
going to tell me what she thought of me.  That might take a couple
of hours.  And after that there was further trouble looming up,
because presently it would occur to her to wonder where I'd got the
money for this trip, and then she'd discover that I'd been holding
out on her about the seventeen quid.  Really there was no reason
why this row shouldn't go on till three in the morning.  No use
playing injured innocence any longer.  All I wanted was the line of
least resistance.  And in my mind I ran over the three possibilities,
which were:

A.  To tell her what I'd really been doing and somehow make her
believe me.

B.  To pull the old gag about losing my memory.

C.  To let her go on thinking it was a woman, and take my medicine.

But, damn it!  I knew which it would have to be.

THE END

Project Gutenberg Australia

Title:      Animal Farm
Author:     George Orwell (pseudonym of Eric Blair) (1903-1950)

Chapter I

Mr. Jones, of the Manor Farm, had locked the hen-houses for the night, but
was too drunk to remember to shut the pop-holes. With the ring of light
from his lantern dancing from side to side, he lurched across the yard,
kicked off his boots at the back door, drew himself a last glass of beer
from the barrel in the scullery, and made his way up to bed, where
Mrs. Jones was already snoring.

As soon as the light in the bedroom went out there was a stirring and a
fluttering all through the farm buildings. Word had gone round during the
day that old Major, the prize Middle White boar, had had a strange dream
on the previous night and wished to communicate it to the other animals.
It had been agreed that they should all meet in the big barn as soon as
Mr. Jones was safely out of the way. Old Major (so he was always called,
though the name under which he had been exhibited was Willingdon Beauty)
was so highly regarded on the farm that everyone was quite ready to lose
an hour's sleep in order to hear what he had to say.

At one end of the big barn, on a sort of raised platform, Major was
already ensconced on his bed of straw, under a lantern which hung from a
beam. He was twelve years old and had lately grown rather stout, but he
was still a majestic-looking pig, with a wise and benevolent appearance in
spite of the fact that his tushes had never been cut. Before long the
other animals began to arrive and make themselves comfortable after their
different fashions. First came the three dogs, Bluebell, Jessie, and
Pincher, and then the pigs, who settled down in the straw immediately in
front of the platform. The hens perched themselves on the window-sills,
the pigeons fluttered up to the rafters, the sheep and cows lay down
behind the pigs and began to chew the cud. The two cart-horses, Boxer and
Clover, came in together, walking very slowly and setting down their vast
hairy hoofs with great care lest there should be some small animal
concealed in the straw. Clover was a stout motherly mare approaching
middle life, who had never quite got her figure back after her fourth foal.
Boxer was an enormous beast, nearly eighteen hands high, and as strong as
any two ordinary horses put together. A white stripe down his nose gave
him a somewhat stupid appearance, and in fact he was not of first-rate
intelligence, but he was universally respected for his steadiness of
character and tremendous powers of work. After the horses came Muriel,
the white goat, and Benjamin, the donkey. Benjamin was the oldest animal
on the farm, and the worst tempered. He seldom talked, and when he did, it
was usually to make some cynical remark--for instance, he would say that
God had given him a tail to keep the flies off, but that he would sooner
have had no tail and no flies. Alone among the animals on the farm he
never laughed. If asked why, he would say that he saw nothing to laugh at.
Nevertheless, without openly admitting it, he was devoted to Boxer; the
two of them usually spent their Sundays together in the small paddock
beyond the orchard, grazing side by side and never speaking.

The two horses had just lain down when a brood of ducklings, which had
lost their mother, filed into the barn, cheeping feebly and wandering from
side to side to find some place where they would not be trodden on. Clover
made a sort of wall round them with her great foreleg, and the ducklings
nestled down inside it and promptly fell asleep. At the last moment
Mollie, the foolish, pretty white mare who drew Mr. Jones's trap, came
mincing daintily in, chewing at a lump of sugar. She took a place near the
front and began flirting her white mane, hoping to draw attention to the
red ribbons it was plaited with. Last of all came the cat, who looked
round, as usual, for the warmest place, and finally squeezed herself in
between Boxer and Clover; there she purred contentedly throughout Major's
speech without listening to a word of what he was saying.

All the animals were now present except Moses, the tame raven, who slept
on a perch behind the back door. When Major saw that they had all made
themselves comfortable and were waiting attentively, he cleared his throat
and began:

"Comrades, you have heard already about the strange dream that I had last
night. But I will come to the dream later. I have something else to say
first. I do not think, comrades, that I shall be with you for many months
longer, and before I die, I feel it my duty to pass on to you such wisdom
as I have acquired. I have had a long life, I have had much time for
thought as I lay alone in my stall, and I think I may say that I
understand the nature of life on this earth as well as any animal now
living. It is about this that I wish to speak to you.

"Now, comrades, what is the nature of this life of ours? Let us face it:
our lives are miserable, laborious, and short. We are born, we are given
just so much food as will keep the breath in our bodies, and those of us
who are capable of it are forced to work to the last atom of our strength;
and the very instant that our usefulness has come to an end we are
slaughtered with hideous cruelty. No animal in England knows the meaning
of happiness or leisure after he is a year old. No animal in England is
free. The life of an animal is misery and slavery: that is the plain truth.

"But is this simply part of the order of nature? Is it because this land
of ours is so poor that it cannot afford a decent life to those who dwell
upon it? No, comrades, a thousand times no! The soil of England is
fertile, its climate is good, it is capable of affording food in abundance
to an enormously greater number of animals than now inhabit it. This
single farm of ours would support a dozen horses, twenty cows, hundreds of
sheep--and all of them living in a comfort and a dignity that are now
almost beyond our imagining. Why then do we continue in this miserable
condition? Because nearly the whole of the produce of our labour is stolen
from us by human beings. There, comrades, is the answer to all our
problems. It is summed up in a single word--Man. Man is the only real
enemy we have. Remove Man from the scene, and the root cause of hunger and
overwork is abolished for ever.

"Man is the only creature that consumes without producing. He does not
give milk, he does not lay eggs, he is too weak to pull the plough, he
cannot run fast enough to catch rabbits. Yet he is lord of all the
animals. He sets them to work, he gives back to them the bare minimum that
will prevent them from starving, and the rest he keeps for himself. Our
labour tills the soil, our dung fertilises it, and yet there is not one of
us that owns more than his bare skin. You cows that I see before me, how
many thousands of gallons of milk have you given during this last year?
And what has happened to that milk which should have been breeding up
sturdy calves? Every drop of it has gone down the throats of our enemies.
And you hens, how many eggs have you laid in this last year, and how many
of those eggs ever hatched into chickens? The rest have all gone to market
to bring in money for Jones and his men. And you, Clover, where are those
four foals you bore, who should have been the support and pleasure of your
old age? Each was sold at a year old--you will never see one of them
again. In return for your four confinements and all your labour in the
fields, what have you ever had except your bare rations and a stall?

"And even the miserable lives we lead are not allowed to reach their
natural span. For myself I do not grumble, for I am one of the lucky ones.
I am twelve years old and have had over four hundred children. Such is the
natural life of a pig. But no animal escapes the cruel knife in the end.
You young porkers who are sitting in front of me, every one of you will
scream your lives out at the block within a year. To that horror we all
must come--cows, pigs, hens, sheep, everyone. Even the horses and the dogs
have no better fate. You, Boxer, the very day that those great muscles of
yours lose their power, Jones will sell you to the knacker, who will cut
your throat and boil you down for the foxhounds. As for the dogs, when
they grow old and toothless, Jones ties a brick round their necks and
drowns them in the nearest pond.

"Is it not crystal clear, then, comrades, that all the evils of this life
of ours spring from the tyranny of human beings? Only get rid of Man, and
the produce of our labour would be our own. Almost overnight we could
become rich and free. What then must we do? Why, work night and day, body
and soul, for the overthrow of the human race! That is my message to you,
comrades: Rebellion! I do not know when that Rebellion will come, it might
be in a week or in a hundred years, but I know, as surely as I see this
straw beneath my feet, that sooner or later justice will be done. Fix your
eyes on that, comrades, throughout the short remainder of your lives! And
above all, pass on this message of mine to those who come after you, so
that future generations shall carry on the struggle until it is victorious.

"And remember, comrades, your resolution must never falter. No argument
must lead you astray. Never listen when they tell you that Man and the
animals have a common interest, that the prosperity of the one is the
prosperity of the others. It is all lies. Man serves the interests of no
creature except himself. And among us animals let there be perfect unity,
perfect comradeship in the struggle. All men are enemies. All animals are
comrades."

At this moment there was a tremendous uproar. While Major was speaking
four large rats had crept out of their holes and were sitting on their
hindquarters, listening to him. The dogs had suddenly caught sight of
them, and it was only by a swift dash for their holes that the rats saved
their lives. Major raised his trotter for silence.

"Comrades," he said, "here is a point that must be settled. The wild
creatures, such as rats and rabbits--are they our friends or our enemies?
Let us put it to the vote. I propose this question to the meeting: Are
rats comrades?"

The vote was taken at once, and it was agreed by an overwhelming majority
that rats were comrades. There were only four dissentients, the three dogs
and the cat, who was afterwards discovered to have voted on both sides.
Major continued:

"I have little more to say. I merely repeat, remember always your duty of
enmity towards Man and all his ways. Whatever goes upon two legs is an
enemy. Whatever goes upon four legs, or has wings, is a friend. And
remember also that in fighting against Man, we must not come to resemble
him. Even when you have conquered him, do not adopt his vices. No animal
must ever live in a house, or sleep in a bed, or wear clothes, or drink
alcohol, or smoke tobacco, or touch money, or engage in trade. All the
habits of Man are evil. And, above all, no animal must ever tyrannise over
his own kind. Weak or strong, clever or simple, we are all brothers. No
animal must ever kill any other animal. All animals are equal.

"And now, comrades, I will tell you about my dream of last night. I cannot
describe that dream to you. It was a dream of the earth as it will be when
Man has vanished. But it reminded me of something that I had long
forgotten. Many years ago, when I was a little pig, my mother and the
other sows used to sing an old song of which they knew only the tune and
the first three words. I had known that tune in my infancy, but it had
long since passed out of my mind. Last night, however, it came back to me
in my dream. And what is more, the words of the song also came back-words,
I am certain, which were sung by the animals of long ago and have been
lost to memory for generations. I will sing you that song now, comrades.
I am old and my voice is hoarse, but when I have taught you the tune, you
can sing it better for yourselves. It is called 'Beasts of England'."

Old Major cleared his throat and began to sing. As he had said, his voice
was hoarse, but he sang well enough, and it was a stirring tune, something
between 'Clementine' and 'La Cucaracha'. The words ran:

Beasts of England, beasts of Ireland,
Beasts of every land and clime,
Hearken to my joyful tidings
Of the golden future time.

Soon or late the day is coming,
Tyrant Man shall be o'erthrown,
And the fruitful fields of England
Shall be trod by beasts alone.

Rings shall vanish from our noses,
And the harness from our back,
Bit and spur shall rust forever,
Cruel whips no more shall crack.

Riches more than mind can picture,
Wheat and barley, oats and hay,
Clover, beans, and mangel-wurzels
Shall be ours upon that day.

Bright will shine the fields of England,
Purer shall its waters be,
Sweeter yet shall blow its breezes
On the day that sets us free.

For that day we all must labour,
Though we die before it break;
Cows and horses, geese and turkeys,
All must toil for freedom's sake.

Beasts of England, beasts of Ireland,
Beasts of every land and clime,
Hearken well and spread my tidings
Of the golden future time.


The singing of this song threw the animals into the wildest excitement.
Almost before Major had reached the end, they had begun singing it for
themselves. Even the stupidest of them had already picked up the tune and
a few of the words, and as for the clever ones, such as the pigs and dogs,
they had the entire song by heart within a few minutes. And then, after a
few preliminary tries, the whole farm burst out into 'Beasts of England' in
tremendous unison. The cows lowed it, the dogs whined it, the sheep
bleated it, the horses whinnied it, the ducks quacked it. They were so
delighted with the song that they sang it right through five times in
succession, and might have continued singing it all night if they had not
been interrupted.

Unfortunately, the uproar awoke Mr. Jones, who sprang out of bed, making
sure that there was a fox in the yard. He seized the gun which always
stood in a corner of his bedroom, and let fly a charge of number 6 shot
into the darkness. The pellets buried themselves in the wall of the barn
and the meeting broke up hurriedly. Everyone fled to his own
sleeping-place. The birds jumped on to their perches, the animals settled
down in the straw, and the whole farm was asleep in a moment.




Chapter II



Three nights later old Major died peacefully in his sleep. His body was
buried at the foot of the orchard.

This was early in March. During the next three months there was much
secret activity. Major's speech had given to the more intelligent animals
on the farm a completely new outlook on life. They did not know when the
Rebellion predicted by Major would take place, they had no reason for
thinking that it would be within their own lifetime, but they saw clearly
that it was their duty to prepare for it. The work of teaching and
organising the others fell naturally upon the pigs, who were generally
recognised as being the cleverest of the animals. Pre-eminent among the
pigs were two young boars named Snowball and Napoleon, whom Mr. Jones was
breeding up for sale. Napoleon was a large, rather fierce-looking
Berkshire boar, the only Berkshire on the farm, not much of a talker, but
with a reputation for getting his own way. Snowball was a more vivacious
pig than Napoleon, quicker in speech and more inventive, but was not
considered to have the same depth of character. All the other male pigs on
the farm were porkers. The best known among them was a small fat pig named
Squealer, with very round cheeks, twinkling eyes, nimble movements, and a
shrill voice. He was a brilliant talker, and when he was arguing some
difficult point he had a way of skipping from side to side and whisking
his tail which was somehow very persuasive. The others said of Squealer
that he could turn black into white.

These three had elaborated old Major's teachings into a complete system of
thought, to which they gave the name of Animalism. Several nights a week,
after Mr. Jones was asleep, they held secret meetings in the barn and
expounded the principles of Animalism to the others. At the beginning they
met with much stupidity and apathy. Some of the animals talked of the duty
of loyalty to Mr. Jones, whom they referred to as "Master," or made
elementary remarks such as "Mr. Jones feeds us. If he were gone, we should
starve to death." Others asked such questions as "Why should we care what
happens after we are dead?" or "If this Rebellion is to happen anyway,
what difference does it make whether we work for it or not?", and the pigs
had great difficulty in making them see that this was contrary to the
spirit of Animalism. The stupidest questions of all were asked by Mollie,
the white mare. The very first question she asked Snowball was: "Will
there still be sugar after the Rebellion?"

"No," said Snowball firmly. "We have no means of making sugar on this
farm. Besides, you do not need sugar. You will have all the oats and hay
you want."

"And shall I still be allowed to wear ribbons in my mane?" asked Mollie.

"Comrade," said Snowball, "those ribbons that you are so devoted to are
the badge of slavery. Can you not understand that liberty is worth more
than ribbons?"

Mollie agreed, but she did not sound very convinced.

The pigs had an even harder struggle to counteract the lies put about by
Moses, the tame raven. Moses, who was Mr. Jones's especial pet, was a spy
and a tale-bearer, but he was also a clever talker. He claimed to know of
the existence of a mysterious country called Sugarcandy Mountain, to which
all animals went when they died. It was situated somewhere up in the sky,
a little distance beyond the clouds, Moses said. In Sugarcandy Mountain it
was Sunday seven days a week, clover was in season all the year round, and
lump sugar and linseed cake grew on the hedges. The animals hated Moses
because he told tales and did no work, but some of them believed in
Sugarcandy Mountain, and the pigs had to argue very hard to persuade them
that there was no such place.

Their most faithful disciples were the two cart-horses, Boxer and Clover.
These two had great difficulty in thinking anything out for themselves,
but having once accepted the pigs as their teachers, they absorbed
everything that they were told, and passed it on to the other animals by
simple arguments. They were unfailing in their attendance at the secret
meetings in the barn, and led the singing of 'Beasts of England', with
which the meetings always ended.

Now, as it turned out, the Rebellion was achieved much earlier and more
easily than anyone had expected. In past years Mr. Jones, although a hard
master, had been a capable farmer, but of late he had fallen on evil days.
He had become much disheartened after losing money in a lawsuit, and had
taken to drinking more than was good for him. For whole days at a time he
would lounge in his Windsor chair in the kitchen, reading the newspapers,
drinking, and occasionally feeding Moses on crusts of bread soaked in
beer. His men were idle and dishonest, the fields were full of weeds, the
buildings wanted roofing, the hedges were neglected, and the animals were
underfed.

June came and the hay was almost ready for cutting. On Midsummer's Eve,
which was a Saturday, Mr. Jones went into Willingdon and got so drunk at
the Red Lion that he did not come back till midday on Sunday. The men had
milked the cows in the early morning and then had gone out rabbiting,
without bothering to feed the animals. When Mr. Jones got back he
immediately went to sleep on the drawing-room sofa with the News of the
World over his face, so that when evening came, the animals were still
unfed. At last they could stand it no longer. One of the cows broke in the
door of the store-shed with her horn and all the animals began to help
themselves from the bins. It was just then that Mr. Jones woke up. The
next moment he and his four men were in the store-shed with whips in their
hands, lashing out in all directions. This was more than the hungry
animals could bear. With one accord, though nothing of the kind had been
planned beforehand, they flung themselves upon their tormentors. Jones and
his men suddenly found themselves being butted and kicked from all sides.
The situation was quite out of their control. They had never seen animals
behave like this before, and this sudden uprising of creatures whom they
were used to thrashing and maltreating just as they chose, frightened them
almost out of their wits. After only a moment or two they gave up trying
to defend themselves and took to their heels. A minute later all five of
them were in full flight down the cart-track that led to the main road,
with the animals pursuing them in triumph.

Mrs. Jones looked out of the bedroom window, saw what was happening,
hurriedly flung a few possessions into a carpet bag, and slipped out of
the farm by another way. Moses sprang off his perch and flapped after her,
croaking loudly. Meanwhile the animals had chased Jones and his men out on
to the road and slammed the five-barred gate behind them. And so, almost
before they knew what was happening, the Rebellion had been successfully
carried through: Jones was expelled, and the Manor Farm was theirs.

For the first few minutes the animals could hardly believe in their good
fortune. Their first act was to gallop in a body right round the
boundaries of the farm, as though to make quite sure that no human being
was hiding anywhere upon it; then they raced back to the farm buildings to
wipe out the last traces of Jones's hated reign. The harness-room at the
end of the stables was broken open; the bits, the nose-rings, the
dog-chains, the cruel knives with which Mr. Jones had been used to
castrate the pigs and lambs, were all flung down the well. The reins, the
halters, the blinkers, the degrading nosebags, were thrown on to the
rubbish fire which was burning in the yard. So were the whips. All the
animals capered with joy when they saw the whips going up in flames.
Snowball also threw on to the fire the ribbons with which the horses'
manes and tails had usually been decorated on market days.

"Ribbons," he said, "should be considered as clothes, which are the mark
of a human being. All animals should go naked."

When Boxer heard this he fetched the small straw hat which he wore in
summer to keep the flies out of his ears, and flung it on to the fire with
the rest.

In a very little while the animals had destroyed everything that reminded
them of Mr. Jones. Napoleon then led them back to the store-shed and
served out a double ration of corn to everybody, with two biscuits for
each dog. Then they sang 'Beasts of England' from end to end seven times
running, and after that they settled down for the night and slept as they
had never slept before.

But they woke at dawn as usual, and suddenly remembering the glorious
thing that had happened, they all raced out into the pasture together. A
little way down the pasture there was a knoll that commanded a view of
most of the farm. The animals rushed to the top of it and gazed round them
in the clear morning light. Yes, it was theirs--everything that they could
see was theirs! In the ecstasy of that thought they gambolled round and
round, they hurled themselves into the air in great leaps of excitement.
They rolled in the dew, they cropped mouthfuls of the sweet summer grass,
they kicked up clods of the black earth and snuffed its rich scent. Then
they made a tour of inspection of the whole farm and surveyed with
speechless admiration the ploughland, the hayfield, the orchard, the pool,
the spinney. It was as though they had never seen these things before, and
even now they could hardly believe that it was all their own.

Then they filed back to the farm buildings and halted in silence outside
the door of the farmhouse. That was theirs too, but they were frightened
to go inside. After a moment, however, Snowball and Napoleon butted the
door open with their shoulders and the animals entered in single file,
walking with the utmost care for fear of disturbing anything. They tiptoed
from room to room, afraid to speak above a whisper and gazing with a kind
of awe at the unbelievable luxury, at the beds with their feather
mattresses, the looking-glasses, the horsehair sofa, the Brussels carpet,
the lithograph of Queen Victoria over the drawing-room mantelpiece. They
were just coming down the stairs when Mollie was discovered to be missing.
Going back, the others found that she had remained behind in the best
bedroom. She had taken a piece of blue ribbon from Mrs. Jones's
dressing-table, and was holding it against her shoulder and admiring
herself in the glass in a very foolish manner. The others reproached her
sharply, and they went outside. Some hams hanging in the kitchen were
taken out for burial, and the barrel of beer in the scullery was stove in
with a kick from Boxer's hoof, otherwise nothing in the house was touched.
A unanimous resolution was passed on the spot that the farmhouse should be
preserved as a museum. All were agreed that no animal must ever live there.

The animals had their breakfast, and then Snowball and Napoleon called
them together again.

"Comrades," said Snowball, "it is half-past six and we have a long day
before us. Today we begin the hay harvest. But there is another matter
that must be attended to first."

The pigs now revealed that during the past three months they had taught
themselves to read and write from an old spelling book which had belonged
to Mr. Jones's children and which had been thrown on the rubbish heap.
Napoleon sent for pots of black and white paint and led the way down to
the five-barred gate that gave on to the main road. Then Snowball (for it
was Snowball who was best at writing) took a brush between the two
knuckles of his trotter, painted out MANOR FARM from the top bar of the
gate and in its place painted ANIMAL FARM. This was to be the name of the
farm from now onwards. After this they went back to the farm buildings,
where Snowball and Napoleon sent for a ladder which they caused to be set
against the end wall of the big barn. They explained that by their studies
of the past three months the pigs had succeeded in reducing the principles
of Animalism to Seven Commandments. These Seven Commandments would now be
inscribed on the wall; they would form an unalterable law by which all the
animals on Animal Farm must live for ever after. With some difficulty
(for it is not easy for a pig to balance himself on a ladder) Snowball
climbed up and set to work, with Squealer a few rungs below him holding
the paint-pot. The Commandments were written on the tarred wall in great
white letters that could be read thirty yards away. They ran thus:


THE SEVEN COMMANDMENTS

1. Whatever goes upon two legs is an enemy.
2. Whatever goes upon four legs, or has wings, is a friend.
3. No animal shall wear clothes.
4. No animal shall sleep in a bed.
5. No animal shall drink alcohol.
6. No animal shall kill any other animal.
7. All animals are equal.


It was very neatly written, and except that "friend" was written "freind"
and one of the "S's" was the wrong way round, the spelling was correct all
the way through. Snowball read it aloud for the benefit of the others. All
the animals nodded in complete agreement, and the cleverer ones at once
began to learn the Commandments by heart.

"Now, comrades," cried Snowball, throwing down the paint-brush, "to the
hayfield! Let us make it a point of honour to get in the harvest more
quickly than Jones and his men could do."

But at this moment the three cows, who had seemed uneasy for some time
past, set up a loud lowing. They had not been milked for twenty-four
hours, and their udders were almost bursting. After a little thought, the
pigs sent for buckets and milked the cows fairly successfully, their
trotters being well adapted to this task. Soon there were five buckets of
frothing creamy milk at which many of the animals looked with considerable
interest.

"What is going to happen to all that milk?" said someone.

"Jones used sometimes to mix some of it in our mash," said one of the hens.

"Never mind the milk, comrades!" cried Napoleon, placing himself in front
of the buckets. "That will be attended to. The harvest is more important.
Comrade Snowball will lead the way. I shall follow in a few minutes.
Forward, comrades! The hay is waiting."

So the animals trooped down to the hayfield to begin the harvest, and when
they came back in the evening it was noticed that the milk had disappeared.




Chapter III



How they toiled and sweated to get the hay in! But their efforts were
rewarded, for the harvest was an even bigger success than they had hoped.

Sometimes the work was hard; the implements had been designed for human
beings and not for animals, and it was a great drawback that no animal was
able to use any tool that involved standing on his hind legs. But the pigs
were so clever that they could think of a way round every difficulty. As
for the horses, they knew every inch of the field, and in fact understood
the business of mowing and raking far better than Jones and his men had
ever done. The pigs did not actually work, but directed and supervised the
others. With their superior knowledge it was natural that they should
assume the leadership. Boxer and Clover would harness themselves to the
cutter or the horse-rake (no bits or reins were needed in these days, of
course) and tramp steadily round and round the field with a pig walking
behind and calling out "Gee up, comrade!" or "Whoa back, comrade!" as the
case might be. And every animal down to the humblest worked at turning the
hay and gathering it. Even the ducks and hens toiled to and fro all day in
the sun, carrying tiny wisps of hay in their beaks. In the end they
finished the harvest in two days' less time than it had usually taken
Jones and his men. Moreover, it was the biggest harvest that the farm had
ever seen. There was no wastage whatever; the hens and ducks with their
sharp eyes had gathered up the very last stalk. And not an animal on the
farm had stolen so much as a mouthful.

All through that summer the work of the farm went like clockwork. The
animals were happy as they had never conceived it possible to be. Every
mouthful of food was an acute positive pleasure, now that it was truly
their own food, produced by themselves and for themselves, not doled out
to them by a grudging master. With the worthless parasitical human beings
gone, there was more for everyone to eat. There was more leisure too,
inexperienced though the animals were. They met with many difficulties--for
instance, later in the year, when they harvested the corn, they had to
tread it out in the ancient style and blow away the chaff with their
breath, since the farm possessed no threshing machine--but the pigs with
their cleverness and Boxer with his tremendous muscles always pulled them
through. Boxer was the admiration of everybody. He had been a hard worker
even in Jones's time, but now he seemed more like three horses than one;
there were days when the entire work of the farm seemed to rest on his
mighty shoulders. From morning to night he was pushing and pulling, always
at the spot where the work was hardest. He had made an arrangement with
one of the cockerels to call him in the mornings half an hour earlier than
anyone else, and would put in some volunteer labour at whatever seemed to
be most needed, before the regular day's work began. His answer to every
problem, every setback, was "I will work harder!"--which he had adopted as
his personal motto.

But everyone worked according to his capacity. The hens and ducks, for
instance, saved five bushels of corn at the harvest by gathering up the
stray grains. Nobody stole, nobody grumbled over his rations, the
quarrelling and biting and jealousy which had been normal features of life
in the old days had almost disappeared. Nobody shirked--or almost nobody.
Mollie, it was true, was not good at getting up in the mornings, and had a
way of leaving work early on the ground that there was a stone in her
hoof. And the behaviour of the cat was somewhat peculiar. It was soon
noticed that when there was work to be done the cat could never be found.
She would vanish for hours on end, and then reappear at meal-times, or in
the evening after work was over, as though nothing had happened. But she
always made such excellent excuses, and purred so affectionately, that it
was impossible not to believe in her good intentions. Old Benjamin, the
donkey, seemed quite unchanged since the Rebellion. He did his work in the
same slow obstinate way as he had done it in Jones's time, never shirking
and never volunteering for extra work either. About the Rebellion and its
results he would express no opinion. When asked whether he was not happier
now that Jones was gone, he would say only "Donkeys live a long time. None
of you has ever seen a dead donkey," and the others had to be content with
this cryptic answer.

On Sundays there was no work. Breakfast was an hour later than usual, and
after breakfast there was a ceremony which was observed every week without
fail. First came the hoisting of the flag. Snowball had found in the
harness-room an old green tablecloth of Mrs. Jones's and had painted on it
a hoof and a horn in white. This was run up the flagstaff in the farmhouse
garden every Sunday morning. The flag was green, Snowball explained, to
represent the green fields of England, while the hoof and horn signified
the future Republic of the Animals which would arise when the human race
had been finally overthrown. After the hoisting of the flag all the
animals trooped into the big barn for a general assembly which was known
as the Meeting. Here the work of the coming week was planned out and
resolutions were put forward and debated. It was always the pigs who put
forward the resolutions. The other animals understood how to vote, but
could never think of any resolutions of their own. Snowball and Napoleon
were by far the most active in the debates. But it was noticed that these
two were never in agreement: whatever suggestion either of them made, the
other could be counted on to oppose it. Even when it was resolved--a thing
no one could object to in itself--to set aside the small paddock behind
the orchard as a home of rest for animals who were past work, there was a
stormy debate over the correct retiring age for each class of animal. The
Meeting always ended with the singing of 'Beasts of England', and the
afternoon was given up to recreation.

The pigs had set aside the harness-room as a headquarters for themselves.
Here, in the evenings, they studied blacksmithing, carpentering, and other
necessary arts from books which they had brought out of the farmhouse.
Snowball also busied himself with organising the other animals into what
he called Animal Committees. He was indefatigable at this. He formed the
Egg Production Committee for the hens, the Clean Tails League for the
cows, the Wild Comrades' Re-education Committee (the object of this was to
tame the rats and rabbits), the Whiter Wool Movement for the sheep, and
various others, besides instituting classes in reading and writing. On the
whole, these projects were a failure. The attempt to tame the wild
creatures, for instance, broke down almost immediately. They continued to
behave very much as before, and when treated with generosity, simply took
advantage of it. The cat joined the Re-education Committee and was very
active in it for some days. She was seen one day sitting on a roof and
talking to some sparrows who were just out of her reach. She was telling
them that all animals were now comrades and that any sparrow who chose
could come and perch on her paw; but the sparrows kept their distance.

The reading and writing classes, however, were a great success. By the
autumn almost every animal on the farm was literate in some degree.

As for the pigs, they could already read and write perfectly. The dogs
learned to read fairly well, but were not interested in reading anything
except the Seven Commandments. Muriel, the goat, could read somewhat
better than the dogs, and sometimes used to read to the others in the
evenings from scraps of newspaper which she found on the rubbish heap.
Benjamin could read as well as any pig, but never exercised his faculty.
So far as he knew, he said, there was nothing worth reading. Clover learnt
the whole alphabet, but could not put words together. Boxer could not get
beyond the letter D. He would trace out A, B, C, D, in the dust with his
great hoof, and then would stand staring at the letters with his ears
back, sometimes shaking his forelock, trying with all his might to
remember what came next and never succeeding. On several occasions,
indeed, he did learn E, F, G, H, but by the time he knew them, it was
always discovered that he had forgotten A, B, C, and D. Finally he decided
to be content with the first four letters, and used to write them out once
or twice every day to refresh his memory. Mollie refused to learn any but
the six letters which spelt her own name. She would form these very neatly
out of pieces of twig, and would then decorate them with a flower or two
and walk round them admiring them.

None of the other animals on the farm could get further than the letter A.
It was also found that the stupider animals, such as the sheep, hens, and
ducks, were unable to learn the Seven Commandments by heart. After much
thought Snowball declared that the Seven Commandments could in effect be
reduced to a single maxim, namely: "Four legs good, two legs bad." This,
he said, contained the essential principle of Animalism. Whoever had
thoroughly grasped it would be safe from human influences. The birds at
first objected, since it seemed to them that they also had two legs, but
Snowball proved to them that this was not so.

"A bird's wing, comrades," he said, "is an organ of propulsion and not of
manipulation. It should therefore be regarded as a leg. The distinguishing
mark of man is the HAND, the instrument with which he does all his
mischief."

The birds did not understand Snowball's long words, but they accepted his
explanation, and all the humbler animals set to work to learn the new
maxim by heart. FOUR LEGS GOOD, TWO LEGS BAD, was inscribed on the end
wall of the barn, above the Seven Commandments and in bigger letters. When
they had once got it by heart, the sheep developed a great liking for this
maxim, and often as they lay in the field they would all start bleating
"Four legs good, two legs bad! Four legs good, two legs bad!" and keep it
up for hours on end, never growing tired of it.

Napoleon took no interest in Snowball's committees. He said that the
education of the young was more important than anything that could be done
for those who were already grown up. It happened that Jessie and Bluebell
had both whelped soon after the hay harvest, giving birth between them to
nine sturdy puppies. As soon as they were weaned, Napoleon took them away
from their mothers, saying that he would make himself responsible for
their education. He took them up into a loft which could only be reached
by a ladder from the harness-room, and there kept them in such seclusion
that the rest of the farm soon forgot their existence.

The mystery of where the milk went to was soon cleared up. It was mixed
every day into the pigs' mash. The early apples were now ripening, and the
grass of the orchard was littered with windfalls. The animals had assumed
as a matter of course that these would be shared out equally; one day,
however, the order went forth that all the windfalls were to be collected
and brought to the harness-room for the use of the pigs. At this some of
the other animals murmured, but it was no use. All the pigs were in full
agreement on this point, even Snowball and Napoleon. Squealer was sent to
make the necessary explanations to the others.

"Comrades!" he cried. "You do not imagine, I hope, that we pigs are doing
this in a spirit of selfishness and privilege? Many of us actually dislike
milk and apples. I dislike them myself. Our sole object in taking these
things is to preserve our health. Milk and apples (this has been proved by
Science, comrades) contain substances absolutely necessary to the
well-being of a pig. We pigs are brainworkers. The whole management and
organisation of this farm depend on us. Day and night we are watching over
your welfare. It is for YOUR sake that we drink that milk and eat those
apples. Do you know what would happen if we pigs failed in our duty? Jones
would come back! Yes, Jones would come back! Surely, comrades," cried
Squealer almost pleadingly, skipping from side to side and whisking his
tail, "surely there is no one among you who wants to see Jones come back?"

Now if there was one thing that the animals were completely certain of, it
was that they did not want Jones back. When it was put to them in this
light, they had no more to say. The importance of keeping the pigs in good
health was all too obvious. So it was agreed without further argument that
the milk and the windfall apples (and also the main crop of apples when
they ripened) should be reserved for the pigs alone.




Chapter IV



By the late summer the news of what had happened on Animal Farm had spread
across half the county. Every day Snowball and Napoleon sent out flights
of pigeons whose instructions were to mingle with the animals on
neighbouring farms, tell them the story of the Rebellion, and teach them
the tune of 'Beasts of England'.

Most of this time Mr. Jones had spent sitting in the taproom of the Red
Lion at Willingdon, complaining to anyone who would listen of the
monstrous injustice he had suffered in being turned out of his property by
a pack of good-for-nothing animals. The other farmers sympathised in
principle, but they did not at first give him much help. At heart, each of
them was secretly wondering whether he could not somehow turn Jones's
misfortune to his own advantage. It was lucky that the owners of the two
farms which adjoined Animal Farm were on permanently bad terms. One of
them, which was named Foxwood, was a large, neglected, old-fashioned farm,
much overgrown by woodland, with all its pastures worn out and its hedges
in a disgraceful condition. Its owner, Mr. Pilkington, was an easy-going
gentleman farmer who spent most of his time in fishing or hunting
according to the season. The other farm, which was called Pinchfield, was
smaller and better kept. Its owner was a Mr. Frederick, a tough, shrewd
man, perpetually involved in lawsuits and with a name for driving hard
bargains. These two disliked each other so much that it was difficult for
them to come to any agreement, even in defence of their own interests.

Nevertheless, they were both thoroughly frightened by the rebellion on
Animal Farm, and very anxious to prevent their own animals from learning
too much about it. At first they pretended to laugh to scorn the idea of
animals managing a farm for themselves. The whole thing would be over in a
fortnight, they said. They put it about that the animals on the Manor Farm
(they insisted on calling it the Manor Farm; they would not tolerate the
name "Animal Farm") were perpetually fighting among themselves and were
also rapidly starving to death. When time passed and the animals had
evidently not starved to death, Frederick and Pilkington changed their
tune and began to talk of the terrible wickedness that now flourished on
Animal Farm. It was given out that the animals there practised cannibalism,
tortured one another with red-hot horseshoes, and had their females in
common. This was what came of rebelling against the laws of Nature,
Frederick and Pilkington said.

However, these stories were never fully believed. Rumours of a wonderful
farm, where the human beings had been turned out and the animals managed
their own affairs, continued to circulate in vague and distorted forms,
and throughout that year a wave of rebelliousness ran through the
countryside. Bulls which had always been tractable suddenly turned savage,
sheep broke down hedges and devoured the clover, cows kicked the pail
over, hunters refused their fences and shot their riders on to the other
side. Above all, the tune and even the words of 'Beasts of England' were
known everywhere. It had spread with astonishing speed. The human beings
could not contain their rage when they heard this song, though they
pretended to think it merely ridiculous. They could not understand, they
said, how even animals could bring themselves to sing such contemptible
rubbish. Any animal caught singing it was given a flogging on the spot.
And yet the song was irrepressible. The blackbirds whistled it in the
hedges, the pigeons cooed it in the elms, it got into the din of the
smithies and the tune of the church bells. And when the human beings
listened to it, they secretly trembled, hearing in it a prophecy of their
future doom.

Early in October, when the corn was cut and stacked and some of it was
already threshed, a flight of pigeons came whirling through the air and
alighted in the yard of Animal Farm in the wildest excitement. Jones and
all his men, with half a dozen others from Foxwood and Pinchfield, had
entered the five-barred gate and were coming up the cart-track that led to
the farm. They were all carrying sticks, except Jones, who was marching
ahead with a gun in his hands. Obviously they were going to attempt the
recapture of the farm.

This had long been expected, and all preparations had been made. Snowball,
who had studied an old book of Julius Caesar's campaigns which he had
found in the farmhouse, was in charge of the defensive operations. He gave
his orders quickly, and in a couple of minutes every animal was at his
post.

As the human beings approached the farm buildings, Snowball launched his
first attack. All the pigeons, to the number of thirty-five, flew to and
fro over the men's heads and muted upon them from mid-air; and while the
men were dealing with this, the geese, who had been hiding behind the
hedge, rushed out and pecked viciously at the calves of their legs.
However, this was only a light skirmishing manoeuvre, intended to create a
little disorder, and the men easily drove the geese off with their sticks.
Snowball now launched his second line of attack. Muriel, Benjamin, and all
the sheep, with Snowball at the head of them, rushed forward and prodded
and butted the men from every side, while Benjamin turned around and
lashed at them with his small hoofs. But once again the men, with their
sticks and their hobnailed boots, were too strong for them; and suddenly,
at a squeal from Snowball, which was the signal for retreat, all the
animals turned and fled through the gateway into the yard.

The men gave a shout of triumph. They saw, as they imagined, their enemies
in flight, and they rushed after them in disorder. This was just what
Snowball had intended. As soon as they were well inside the yard, the
three horses, the three cows, and the rest of the pigs, who had been lying
in ambush in the cowshed, suddenly emerged in their rear, cutting them
off. Snowball now gave the signal for the charge. He himself dashed
straight for Jones. Jones saw him coming, raised his gun and fired. The
pellets scored bloody streaks along Snowball's back, and a sheep dropped
dead. Without halting for an instant, Snowball flung his fifteen stone
against Jones's legs. Jones was hurled into a pile of dung and his gun
flew out of his hands. But the most terrifying spectacle of all was Boxer,
rearing up on his hind legs and striking out with his great iron-shod
hoofs like a stallion. His very first blow took a stable-lad from Foxwood
on the skull and stretched him lifeless in the mud. At the sight, several
men dropped their sticks and tried to run. Panic overtook them, and the
next moment all the animals together were chasing them round and round the
yard. They were gored, kicked, bitten, trampled on. There was not an
animal on the farm that did not take vengeance on them after his own
fashion. Even the cat suddenly leapt off a roof onto a cowman's shoulders
and sank her claws in his neck, at which he yelled horribly. At a moment
when the opening was clear, the men were glad enough to rush out of the
yard and make a bolt for the main road. And so within five minutes of
their invasion they were in ignominious retreat by the same way as they
had come, with a flock of geese hissing after them and pecking at their
calves all the way.

All the men were gone except one. Back in the yard Boxer was pawing with
his hoof at the stable-lad who lay face down in the mud, trying to turn
him over. The boy did not stir.

"He is dead," said Boxer sorrowfully. "I had no intention of doing that.
I forgot that I was wearing iron shoes. Who will believe that I did not do
this on purpose?"

"No sentimentality, comrade!" cried Snowball from whose wounds the blood
was still dripping. "War is war. The only good human being is a dead one."

"I have no wish to take life, not even human life," repeated Boxer, and
his eyes were full of tears.

"Where is Mollie?" exclaimed somebody.

Mollie in fact was missing. For a moment there was great alarm; it was
feared that the men might have harmed her in some way, or even carried her
off with them. In the end, however, she was found hiding in her stall with
her head buried among the hay in the manger. She had taken to flight as
soon as the gun went off. And when the others came back from looking for
her, it was to find that the stable-lad, who in fact was only stunned, had
already recovered and made off.

The animals had now reassembled in the wildest excitement, each recounting
his own exploits in the battle at the top of his voice. An impromptu
celebration of the victory was held immediately. The flag was run up and
'Beasts of England' was sung a number of times, then the sheep who had been
killed was given a solemn funeral, a hawthorn bush being planted on her
grave. At the graveside Snowball made a little speech, emphasising the
need for all animals to be ready to die for Animal Farm if need be.

The animals decided unanimously to create a military decoration, "Animal
Hero, First Class," which was conferred there and then on Snowball and
Boxer. It consisted of a brass medal (they were really some old
horse-brasses which had been found in the harness-room), to be worn on
Sundays and holidays. There was also "Animal Hero, Second Class," which
was conferred posthumously on the dead sheep.

There was much discussion as to what the battle should be called. In the
end, it was named the Battle of the Cowshed, since that was where the
ambush had been sprung. Mr. Jones's gun had been found lying in the mud,
and it was known that there was a supply of cartridges in the farmhouse.
It was decided to set the gun up at the foot of the Flagstaff, like a
piece of artillery, and to fire it twice a year--once on October the
twelfth, the anniversary of the Battle of the Cowshed, and once on
Midsummer Day, the anniversary of the Rebellion.




Chapter V



As winter drew on, Mollie became more and more troublesome. She was late
for work every morning and excused herself by saying that she had
overslept, and she complained of mysterious pains, although her appetite
was excellent. On every kind of pretext she would run away from work and
go to the drinking pool, where she would stand foolishly gazing at her own
reflection in the water. But there were also rumours of something more
serious. One day, as Mollie strolled blithely into the yard, flirting her
long tail and chewing at a stalk of hay, Clover took her aside.

"Mollie," she said, "I have something very serious to say to you. This
morning I saw you looking over the hedge that divides Animal Farm from
Foxwood. One of Mr. Pilkington's men was standing on the other side of the
hedge. And--I was a long way away, but I am almost certain I saw this--he
was talking to you and you were allowing him to stroke your nose. What
does that mean, Mollie?"

"He didn't! I wasn't! It isn't true!" cried Mollie, beginning to prance
about and paw the ground.

"Mollie! Look me in the face. Do you give me your word of honour that that
man was not stroking your nose?"

"It isn't true!" repeated Mollie, but she could not look Clover in the
face, and the next moment she took to her heels and galloped away into the
field.

A thought struck Clover. Without saying anything to the others, she went
to Mollie's stall and turned over the straw with her hoof. Hidden under
the straw was a little pile of lump sugar and several bunches of ribbon of
different colours.

Three days later Mollie disappeared. For some weeks nothing was known of
her whereabouts, then the pigeons reported that they had seen her on the
other side of Willingdon. She was between the shafts of a smart dogcart
painted red and black, which was standing outside a public-house. A fat
red-faced man in check breeches and gaiters, who looked like a publican,
was stroking her nose and feeding her with sugar. Her coat was newly
clipped and she wore a scarlet ribbon round her forelock. She appeared to
be enjoying herself, so the pigeons said. None of the animals ever
mentioned Mollie again.

In January there came bitterly hard weather. The earth was like iron, and
nothing could be done in the fields. Many meetings were held in the big
barn, and the pigs occupied themselves with planning out the work of the
coming season. It had come to be accepted that the pigs, who were
manifestly cleverer than the other animals, should decide all questions of
farm policy, though their decisions had to be ratified by a majority vote.
This arrangement would have worked well enough if it had not been for the
disputes between Snowball and Napoleon. These two disagreed at every point
where disagreement was possible. If one of them suggested sowing a bigger
acreage with barley, the other was certain to demand a bigger acreage of
oats, and if one of them said that such and such a field was just right
for cabbages, the other would declare that it was useless for anything
except roots. Each had his own following, and there were some violent
debates. At the Meetings Snowball often won over the majority by his
brilliant speeches, but Napoleon was better at canvassing support for
himself in between times. He was especially successful with the sheep. Of
late the sheep had taken to bleating "Four legs good, two legs bad" both
in and out of season, and they often interrupted the Meeting with this. It
was noticed that they were especially liable to break into "Four legs
good, two legs bad" at crucial moments in Snowball's speeches. Snowball
had made a close study of some back numbers of the 'Farmer and
Stockbreeder' which he had found in the farmhouse, and was full of plans
for innovations and improvements. He talked learnedly about field drains,
silage, and basic slag, and had worked out a complicated scheme for all
the animals to drop their dung directly in the fields, at a different spot
every day, to save the labour of cartage. Napoleon produced no schemes of
his own, but said quietly that Snowball's would come to nothing, and
seemed to be biding his time. But of all their controversies, none was so
bitter as the one that took place over the windmill.

In the long pasture, not far from the farm buildings, there was a small
knoll which was the highest point on the farm. After surveying the ground,
Snowball declared that this was just the place for a windmill, which could
be made to operate a dynamo and supply the farm with electrical power.
This would light the stalls and warm them in winter, and would also run a
circular saw, a chaff-cutter, a mangel-slicer, and an electric milking
machine. The animals had never heard of anything of this kind before
(for the farm was an old-fashioned one and had only the most primitive
machinery), and they listened in astonishment while Snowball conjured up
pictures of fantastic machines which would do their work for them while
they grazed at their ease in the fields or improved their minds with
reading and conversation.

Within a few weeks Snowball's plans for the windmill were fully worked
out. The mechanical details came mostly from three books which had
belonged to Mr. Jones--'One Thousand Useful Things to Do About the House',
'Every Man His Own Bricklayer', and 'Electricity for Beginners'. Snowball
used as his study a shed which had once been used for incubators and had a
smooth wooden floor, suitable for drawing on. He was closeted there for
hours at a time. With his books held open by a stone, and with a piece of
chalk gripped between the knuckles of his trotter, he would move rapidly
to and fro, drawing in line after line and uttering little whimpers of
excitement. Gradually the plans grew into a complicated mass of cranks and
cog-wheels, covering more than half the floor, which the other animals
found completely unintelligible but very impressive. All of them came to
look at Snowball's drawings at least once a day. Even the hens and ducks
came, and were at pains not to tread on the chalk marks. Only Napoleon
held aloof. He had declared himself against the windmill from the start.
One day, however, he arrived unexpectedly to examine the plans. He walked
heavily round the shed, looked closely at every detail of the plans and
snuffed at them once or twice, then stood for a little while contemplating
them out of the corner of his eye; then suddenly he lifted his leg,
urinated over the plans, and walked out without uttering a word.

The whole farm was deeply divided on the subject of the windmill. Snowball
did not deny that to build it would be a difficult business. Stone would
have to be carried and built up into walls, then the sails would have to
be made and after that there would be need for dynamos and cables. (How
these were to be procured, Snowball did not say.) But he maintained that
it could all be done in a year. And thereafter, he declared, so much
labour would be saved that the animals would only need to work three days
a week. Napoleon, on the other hand, argued that the great need of the
moment was to increase food production, and that if they wasted time on
the windmill they would all starve to death. The animals formed themselves
into two factions under the slogan, "Vote for Snowball and the three-day
week" and "Vote for Napoleon and the full manger." Benjamin was the only
animal who did not side with either faction. He refused to believe either
that food would become more plentiful or that the windmill would save
work. Windmill or no windmill, he said, life would go on as it had always
gone on--that is, badly.

Apart from the disputes over the windmill, there was the question of the
defence of the farm. It was fully realised that though the human beings
had been defeated in the Battle of the Cowshed they might make another and
more determined attempt to recapture the farm and reinstate Mr. Jones.
They had all the more reason for doing so because the news of their defeat
had spread across the countryside and made the animals on the neighbouring
farms more restive than ever. As usual, Snowball and Napoleon were in
disagreement. According to Napoleon, what the animals must do was to
procure firearms and train themselves in the use of them. According to
Snowball, they must send out more and more pigeons and stir up rebellion
among the animals on the other farms. The one argued that if they could
not defend themselves they were bound to be conquered, the other argued
that if rebellions happened everywhere they would have no need to defend
themselves. The animals listened first to Napoleon, then to Snowball, and
could not make up their minds which was right; indeed, they always found
themselves in agreement with the one who was speaking at the moment.

At last the day came when Snowball's plans were completed. At the Meeting
on the following Sunday the question of whether or not to begin work on
the windmill was to be put to the vote. When the animals had assembled in
the big barn, Snowball stood up and, though occasionally interrupted by
bleating from the sheep, set forth his reasons for advocating the building
of the windmill. Then Napoleon stood up to reply. He said very quietly
that the windmill was nonsense and that he advised nobody to vote for it,
and promptly sat down again; he had spoken for barely thirty seconds, and
seemed almost indifferent as to the effect he produced. At this Snowball
sprang to his feet, and shouting down the sheep, who had begun bleating
again, broke into a passionate appeal in favour of the windmill. Until now
the animals had been about equally divided in their sympathies, but in a
moment Snowball's eloquence had carried them away. In glowing sentences he
painted a picture of Animal Farm as it might be when sordid labour was
lifted from the animals' backs. His imagination had now run far beyond
chaff-cutters and turnip-slicers. Electricity, he said, could operate
threshing machines, ploughs, harrows, rollers, and reapers and binders,
besides supplying every stall with its own electric light, hot and cold
water, and an electric heater. By the time he had finished speaking, there
was no doubt as to which way the vote would go. But just at this moment
Napoleon stood up and, casting a peculiar sidelong look at Snowball,
uttered a high-pitched whimper of a kind no one had ever heard him utter
before.

At this there was a terrible baying sound outside, and nine enormous dogs
wearing brass-studded collars came bounding into the barn. They dashed
straight for Snowball, who only sprang from his place just in time to
escape their snapping jaws. In a moment he was out of the door and they
were after him. Too amazed and frightened to speak, all the animals
crowded through the door to watch the chase. Snowball was racing across
the long pasture that led to the road. He was running as only a pig can
run, but the dogs were close on his heels. Suddenly he slipped and it
seemed certain that they had him. Then he was up again, running faster
than ever, then the dogs were gaining on him again. One of them all but
closed his jaws on Snowball's tail, but Snowball whisked it free just in
time. Then he put on an extra spurt and, with a few inches to spare,
slipped through a hole in the hedge and was seen no more.

Silent and terrified, the animals crept back into the barn. In a moment
the dogs came bounding back. At first no one had been able to imagine
where these creatures came from, but the problem was soon solved: they
were the puppies whom Napoleon had taken away from their mothers and
reared privately. Though not yet full-grown, they were huge dogs, and as
fierce-looking as wolves. They kept close to Napoleon. It was noticed that
they wagged their tails to him in the same way as the other dogs had been
used to do to Mr. Jones.

Napoleon, with the dogs following him, now mounted on to the raised
portion of the floor where Major had previously stood to deliver his
speech. He announced that from now on the Sunday-morning Meetings would
come to an end. They were unnecessary, he said, and wasted time. In future
all questions relating to the working of the farm would be settled by a
special committee of pigs, presided over by himself. These would meet in
private and afterwards communicate their decisions to the others. The
animals would still assemble on Sunday mornings to salute the flag, sing
'Beasts of England', and receive their orders for the week; but there would
be no more debates.

In spite of the shock that Snowball's expulsion had given them, the
animals were dismayed by this announcement. Several of them would have
protested if they could have found the right arguments. Even Boxer was
vaguely troubled. He set his ears back, shook his forelock several times,
and tried hard to marshal his thoughts; but in the end he could not think
of anything to say. Some of the pigs themselves, however, were more
articulate. Four young porkers in the front row uttered shrill squeals of
disapproval, and all four of them sprang to their feet and began speaking
at once. But suddenly the dogs sitting round Napoleon let out deep,
menacing growls, and the pigs fell silent and sat down again. Then the
sheep broke out into a tremendous bleating of "Four legs good, two legs
bad!" which went on for nearly a quarter of an hour and put an end to any
chance of discussion.

Afterwards Squealer was sent round the farm to explain the new arrangement
to the others.

"Comrades," he said, "I trust that every animal here appreciates the
sacrifice that Comrade Napoleon has made in taking this extra labour upon
himself. Do not imagine, comrades, that leadership is a pleasure! On the
contrary, it is a deep and heavy responsibility. No one believes more
firmly than Comrade Napoleon that all animals are equal. He would be only
too happy to let you make your decisions for yourselves. But sometimes you
might make the wrong decisions, comrades, and then where should we be?
Suppose you had decided to follow Snowball, with his moonshine of
windmills--Snowball, who, as we now know, was no better than a criminal?"

"He fought bravely at the Battle of the Cowshed," said somebody.

"Bravery is not enough," said Squealer. "Loyalty and obedience are more
important. And as to the Battle of the Cowshed, I believe the time will
come when we shall find that Snowball's part in it was much exaggerated.
Discipline, comrades, iron discipline! That is the watchword for today.
One false step, and our enemies would be upon us. Surely, comrades, you do
not want Jones back?"

Once again this argument was unanswerable. Certainly the animals did not
want Jones back; if the holding of debates on Sunday mornings was liable
to bring him back, then the debates must stop. Boxer, who had now had time
to think things over, voiced the general feeling by saying: "If Comrade
Napoleon says it, it must be right." And from then on he adopted the
maxim, "Napoleon is always right," in addition to his private motto of "I
will work harder."

By this time the weather had broken and the spring ploughing had begun.
The shed where Snowball had drawn his plans of the windmill had been shut
up and it was assumed that the plans had been rubbed off the floor. Every
Sunday morning at ten o'clock the animals assembled in the big barn to
receive their orders for the week. The skull of old Major, now clean of
flesh, had been disinterred from the orchard and set up on a stump at the
foot of the flagstaff, beside the gun. After the hoisting of the flag, the
animals were required to file past the skull in a reverent manner before
entering the barn. Nowadays they did not sit all together as they had done
in the past. Napoleon, with Squealer and another pig named Minimus, who
had a remarkable gift for composing songs and poems, sat on the front of
the raised platform, with the nine young dogs forming a semicircle round
them, and the other pigs sitting behind. The rest of the animals sat
facing them in the main body of the barn. Napoleon read out the orders for
the week in a gruff soldierly style, and after a single singing of 'Beasts
of England', all the animals dispersed.

On the third Sunday after Snowball's expulsion, the animals were somewhat
surprised to hear Napoleon announce that the windmill was to be built
after all. He did not give any reason for having changed his mind, but
merely warned the animals that this extra task would mean very hard work,
it might even be necessary to reduce their rations. The plans, however,
had all been prepared, down to the last detail. A special committee of
pigs had been at work upon them for the past three weeks. The building of
the windmill, with various other improvements, was expected to take two
years.

That evening Squealer explained privately to the other animals that
Napoleon had never in reality been opposed to the windmill. On the
contrary, it was he who had advocated it in the beginning, and the plan
which Snowball had drawn on the floor of the incubator shed had actually
been stolen from among Napoleon's papers. The windmill was, in fact,
Napoleon's own creation. Why, then, asked somebody, had he spoken so
strongly against it? Here Squealer looked very sly. That, he said, was
Comrade Napoleon's cunning. He had SEEMED to oppose the windmill, simply
as a manoeuvre to get rid of Snowball, who was a dangerous character and a
bad influence. Now that Snowball was out of the way, the plan could go
forward without his interference. This, said Squealer, was something
called tactics. He repeated a number of times, "Tactics, comrades,
tactics!" skipping round and whisking his tail with a merry laugh. The
animals were not certain what the word meant, but Squealer spoke so
persuasively, and the three dogs who happened to be with him growled so
threateningly, that they accepted his explanation without further
questions.




Chapter VI



All that year the animals worked like slaves. But they were happy in their
work; they grudged no effort or sacrifice, well aware that everything that
they did was for the benefit of themselves and those of their kind who
would come after them, and not for a pack of idle, thieving human beings.

Throughout the spring and summer they worked a sixty-hour week, and in
August Napoleon announced that there would be work on Sunday afternoons
as well. This work was strictly voluntary, but any animal who absented
himself from it would have his rations reduced by half. Even so, it was
found necessary to leave certain tasks undone. The harvest was a little
less successful than in the previous year, and two fields which should
have been sown with roots in the early summer were not sown because the
ploughing had not been completed early enough. It was possible to foresee
that the coming winter would be a hard one.

The windmill presented unexpected difficulties. There was a good quarry of
limestone on the farm, and plenty of sand and cement had been found in one
of the outhouses, so that all the materials for building were at hand. But
the problem the animals could not at first solve was how to break up the
stone into pieces of suitable size. There seemed no way of doing this
except with picks and crowbars, which no animal could use, because no
animal could stand on his hind legs. Only after weeks of vain effort did
the right idea occur to somebody-namely, to utilise the force of gravity.
Huge boulders, far too big to be used as they were, were lying all over
the bed of the quarry. The animals lashed ropes round these, and then all
together, cows, horses, sheep, any animal that could lay hold of the
rope--even the pigs sometimes joined in at critical moments--they dragged
them with desperate slowness up the slope to the top of the quarry, where
they were toppled over the edge, to shatter to pieces below. Transporting
the stone when it was once broken was comparatively simple. The horses
carried it off in cart-loads, the sheep dragged single blocks, even Muriel
and Benjamin yoked themselves into an old governess-cart and did their
share. By late summer a sufficient store of stone had accumulated, and
then the building began, under the superintendence of the pigs.

But it was a slow, laborious process. Frequently it took a whole day of
exhausting effort to drag a single boulder to the top of the quarry, and
sometimes when it was pushed over the edge it failed to break. Nothing
could have been achieved without Boxer, whose strength seemed equal to
that of all the rest of the animals put together. When the boulder began
to slip and the animals cried out in despair at finding themselves dragged
down the hill, it was always Boxer who strained himself against the rope
and brought the boulder to a stop. To see him toiling up the slope inch by
inch, his breath coming fast, the tips of his hoofs clawing at the ground,
and his great sides matted with sweat, filled everyone with admiration.
Clover warned him sometimes to be careful not to overstrain himself, but
Boxer would never listen to her. His two slogans, "I will work harder"
and "Napoleon is always right," seemed to him a sufficient answer to all
problems. He had made arrangements with the cockerel to call him
three-quarters of an hour earlier in the mornings instead of half an hour.
And in his spare moments, of which there were not many nowadays, he would
go alone to the quarry, collect a load of broken stone, and drag it down
to the site of the windmill unassisted.

The animals were not badly off throughout that summer, in spite of the
hardness of their work. If they had no more food than they had had in
Jones's day, at least they did not have less. The advantage of only having
to feed themselves, and not having to support five extravagant human
beings as well, was so great that it would have taken a lot of failures to
outweigh it. And in many ways the animal method of doing things was more
efficient and saved labour. Such jobs as weeding, for instance, could be
done with a thoroughness impossible to human beings. And again, since no
animal now stole, it was unnecessary to fence off pasture from arable
land, which saved a lot of labour on the upkeep of hedges and gates.
Nevertheless, as the summer wore on, various unforeseen shortages began to
make them selves felt. There was need of paraffin oil, nails, string, dog
biscuits, and iron for the horses' shoes, none of which could be produced
on the farm. Later there would also be need for seeds and artificial
manures, besides various tools and, finally, the machinery for the
windmill. How these were to be procured, no one was able to imagine.

One Sunday morning, when the animals assembled to receive their orders,
Napoleon announced that he had decided upon a new policy. From now onwards
Animal Farm would engage in trade with the neighbouring farms: not, of
course, for any commercial purpose, but simply in order to obtain certain
materials which were urgently necessary. The needs of the windmill must
override everything else, he said. He was therefore making arrangements to
sell a stack of hay and part of the current year's wheat crop, and later
on, if more money were needed, it would have to be made up by the sale of
eggs, for which there was always a market in Willingdon. The hens, said
Napoleon, should welcome this sacrifice as their own special contribution
towards the building of the windmill.

Once again the animals were conscious of a vague uneasiness. Never to have
any dealings with human beings, never to engage in trade, never to make
use of money--had not these been among the earliest resolutions passed at
that first triumphant Meeting after Jones was expelled? All the animals
remembered passing such resolutions: or at least they thought that they
remembered it. The four young pigs who had protested when Napoleon
abolished the Meetings raised their voices timidly, but they were promptly
silenced by a tremendous growling from the dogs. Then, as usual, the sheep
broke into "Four legs good, two legs bad!" and the momentary awkwardness
was smoothed over. Finally Napoleon raised his trotter for silence and
announced that he had already made all the arrangements. There would be no
need for any of the animals to come in contact with human beings, which
would clearly be most undesirable. He intended to take the whole burden
upon his own shoulders. A Mr. Whymper, a solicitor living in Willingdon,
had agreed to act as intermediary between Animal Farm and the outside
world, and would visit the farm every Monday morning to receive his
instructions. Napoleon ended his speech with his usual cry of "Long live
Animal Farm!" and after the singing of 'Beasts of England' the animals
were dismissed.

Afterwards Squealer made a round of the farm and set the animals' minds at
rest. He assured them that the resolution against engaging in trade and
using money had never been passed, or even suggested. It was pure
imagination, probably traceable in the beginning to lies circulated by
Snowball. A few animals still felt faintly doubtful, but Squealer asked
them shrewdly, "Are you certain that this is not something that you have
dreamed, comrades? Have you any record of such a resolution? Is it written
down anywhere?" And since it was certainly true that nothing of the kind
existed in writing, the animals were satisfied that they had been mistaken.

Every Monday Mr. Whymper visited the farm as had been arranged. He was a
sly-looking little man with side whiskers, a solicitor in a very small way
of business, but sharp enough to have realised earlier than anyone else
that Animal Farm would need a broker and that the commissions would be
worth having. The animals watched his coming and going with a kind of
dread, and avoided him as much as possible. Nevertheless, the sight of
Napoleon, on all fours, delivering orders to Whymper, who stood on two
legs, roused their pride and partly reconciled them to the new
arrangement. Their relations with the human race were now not quite the
same as they had been before. The human beings did not hate Animal Farm
any less now that it was prospering; indeed, they hated it more than ever.
Every human being held it as an article of faith that the farm would go
bankrupt sooner or later, and, above all, that the windmill would be a
failure. They would meet in the public-houses and prove to one another by
means of diagrams that the windmill was bound to fall down, or that if it
did stand up, then that it would never work. And yet, against their will,
they had developed a certain respect for the efficiency with which the
animals were managing their own affairs. One symptom of this was that they
had begun to call Animal Farm by its proper name and ceased to pretend
that it was called the Manor Farm. They had also dropped their championship
of Jones, who had given up hope of getting his farm back and gone to live
in another part of the county. Except through Whymper, there was as yet no
contact between Animal Farm and the outside world, but there were constant
rumours that Napoleon was about to enter into a definite business agreement
either with Mr. Pilkington of Foxwood or with Mr. Frederick of
Pinchfield--but never, it was noticed, with both simultaneously.

It was about this time that the pigs suddenly moved into the farmhouse and
took up their residence there. Again the animals seemed to remember that a
resolution against this had been passed in the early days, and again
Squealer was able to convince them that this was not the case. It was
absolutely necessary, he said, that the pigs, who were the brains of the
farm, should have a quiet place to work in. It was also more suited to the
dignity of the Leader (for of late he had taken to speaking of Napoleon
under the title of "Leader") to live in a house than in a mere sty.
Nevertheless, some of the animals were disturbed when they heard that the
pigs not only took their meals in the kitchen and used the drawing-room
as a recreation room, but also slept in the beds. Boxer passed it off as
usual with "Napoleon is always right!", but Clover, who thought she
remembered a definite ruling against beds, went to the end of the barn and
tried to puzzle out the Seven Commandments which were inscribed there.
Finding herself unable to read more than individual letters, she fetched
Muriel.

"Muriel," she said, "read me the Fourth Commandment. Does it not say
something about never sleeping in a bed?"

With some difficulty Muriel spelt it out.

"It says, 'No animal shall sleep in a bed with sheets,"' she announced
finally.

Curiously enough, Clover had not remembered that the Fourth Commandment
mentioned sheets; but as it was there on the wall, it must have done so.
And Squealer, who happened to be passing at this moment, attended by two
or three dogs, was able to put the whole matter in its proper perspective.

"You have heard then, comrades," he said, "that we pigs now sleep in the
beds of the farmhouse? And why not? You did not suppose, surely, that
there was ever a ruling against beds? A bed merely means a place to sleep
in. A pile of straw in a stall is a bed, properly regarded. The rule was
against sheets, which are a human invention. We have removed the sheets
from the farmhouse beds, and sleep between blankets. And very comfortable
beds they are too! But not more comfortable than we need, I can tell you,
comrades, with all the brainwork we have to do nowadays. You would not rob
us of our repose, would you, comrades? You would not have us too tired to
carry out our duties? Surely none of you wishes to see Jones back?"

The animals reassured him on this point immediately, and no more was said
about the pigs sleeping in the farmhouse beds. And when, some days
afterwards, it was announced that from now on the pigs would get up an
hour later in the mornings than the other animals, no complaint was made
about that either.

By the autumn the animals were tired but happy. They had had a hard year,
and after the sale of part of the hay and corn, the stores of food for the
winter were none too plentiful, but the windmill compensated for
everything. It was almost half built now. After the harvest there was a
stretch of clear dry weather, and the animals toiled harder than ever,
thinking it well worth while to plod to and fro all day with blocks of
stone if by doing so they could raise the walls another foot. Boxer would
even come out at nights and work for an hour or two on his own by the
light of the harvest moon. In their spare moments the animals would walk
round and round the half-finished mill, admiring the strength and
perpendicularity of its walls and marvelling that they should ever have
been able to build anything so imposing. Only old Benjamin refused to grow
enthusiastic about the windmill, though, as usual, he would utter nothing
beyond the cryptic remark that donkeys live a long time.

November came, with raging south-west winds. Building had to stop because
it was now too wet to mix the cement. Finally there came a night when the
gale was so violent that the farm buildings rocked on their foundations
and several tiles were blown off the roof of the barn. The hens woke up
squawking with terror because they had all dreamed simultaneously of
hearing a gun go off in the distance. In the morning the animals came out
of their stalls to find that the flagstaff had been blown down and an elm
tree at the foot of the orchard had been plucked up like a radish. They
had just noticed this when a cry of despair broke from every animal's
throat. A terrible sight had met their eyes. The windmill was in ruins.

With one accord they dashed down to the spot. Napoleon, who seldom moved
out of a walk, raced ahead of them all. Yes, there it lay, the fruit of
all their struggles, levelled to its foundations, the stones they had
broken and carried so laboriously scattered all around. Unable at first to
speak, they stood gazing mournfully at the litter of fallen stone. Napoleon
paced to and fro in silence, occasionally snuffing at the ground. His tail
had grown rigid and twitched sharply from side to side, a sign in him of
intense mental activity. Suddenly he halted as though his mind were
made up.

"Comrades," he said quietly, "do you know who is responsible for this? Do
you know the enemy who has come in the night and overthrown our windmill?
SNOWBALL!" he suddenly roared in a voice of thunder. "Snowball has done
this thing! In sheer malignity, thinking to set back our plans and avenge
himself for his ignominious expulsion, this traitor has crept here under
cover of night and destroyed our work of nearly a year. Comrades, here
and now I pronounce the death sentence upon Snowball. 'Animal Hero, Second
Class,' and half a bushel of apples to any animal who brings him to
justice. A full bushel to anyone who captures him alive!"

The animals were shocked beyond measure to learn that even Snowball could
be guilty of such an action. There was a cry of indignation, and everyone
began thinking out ways of catching Snowball if he should ever come back.
Almost immediately the footprints of a pig were discovered in the grass at
a little distance from the knoll. They could only be traced for a few
yards, but appeared to lead to a hole in the hedge. Napoleon snuffed
deeply at them and pronounced them to be Snowball's. He gave it as his
opinion that Snowball had probably come from the direction of Foxwood Farm.

"No more delays, comrades!" cried Napoleon when the footprints had been
examined. "There is work to be done. This very morning we begin rebuilding
the windmill, and we will build all through the winter, rain or shine. We
will teach this miserable traitor that he cannot undo our work so easily.
Remember, comrades, there must be no alteration in our plans: they shall
be carried out to the day. Forward, comrades! Long live the windmill! Long
live Animal Farm!"




Chapter VII



It was a bitter winter. The stormy weather was followed by sleet and snow,
and then by a hard frost which did not break till well into February. The
animals carried on as best they could with the rebuilding of the windmill,
well knowing that the outside world was watching them and that the envious
human beings would rejoice and triumph if the mill were not finished
on time.

Out of spite, the human beings pretended not to believe that it was
Snowball who had destroyed the windmill: they said that it had fallen down
because the walls were too thin. The animals knew that this was not the
case. Still, it had been decided to build the walls three feet thick this
time instead of eighteen inches as before, which meant collecting much
larger quantities of stone. For a long time the quarry was full of
snowdrifts and nothing could be done. Some progress was made in the dry
frosty weather that followed, but it was cruel work, and the animals could
not feel so hopeful about it as they had felt before. They were always
cold, and usually hungry as well. Only Boxer and Clover never lost heart.
Squealer made excellent speeches on the joy of service and the dignity of
labour, but the other animals found more inspiration in Boxer's strength
and his never-failing cry of "I will work harder!"

In January food fell short. The corn ration was drastically reduced, and
it was announced that an extra potato ration would be issued to make up
for it. Then it was discovered that the greater part of the potato crop
had been frosted in the clamps, which had not been covered thickly enough.
The potatoes had become soft and discoloured, and only a few were edible.
For days at a time the animals had nothing to eat but chaff and mangels.
Starvation seemed to stare them in the face.

It was vitally necessary to conceal this fact from the outside world.
Emboldened by the collapse of the windmill, the human beings were
inventing fresh lies about Animal Farm. Once again it was being put about
that all the animals were dying of famine and disease, and that they were
continually fighting among themselves and had resorted to cannibalism and
infanticide. Napoleon was well aware of the bad results that might follow
if the real facts of the food situation were known, and he decided to make
use of Mr. Whymper to spread a contrary impression. Hitherto the animals
had had little or no contact with Whymper on his weekly visits: now,
however, a few selected animals, mostly sheep, were instructed to remark
casually in his hearing that rations had been increased. In addition,
Napoleon ordered the almost empty bins in the store-shed to be filled
nearly to the brim with sand, which was then covered up with what remained
of the grain and meal. On some suitable pretext Whymper was led through
the store-shed and allowed to catch a glimpse of the bins. He was
deceived, and continued to report to the outside world that there was no
food shortage on Animal Farm.

Nevertheless, towards the end of January it became obvious that it would
be necessary to procure some more grain from somewhere. In these days
Napoleon rarely appeared in public, but spent all his time in the
farmhouse, which was guarded at each door by fierce-looking dogs. When he
did emerge, it was in a ceremonial manner, with an escort of six dogs who
closely surrounded him and growled if anyone came too near. Frequently he
did not even appear on Sunday mornings, but issued his orders through one
of the other pigs, usually Squealer.

One Sunday morning Squealer announced that the hens, who had just come in
to lay again, must surrender their eggs. Napoleon had accepted, through
Whymper, a contract for four hundred eggs a week. The price of these would
pay for enough grain and meal to keep the farm going till summer came on
and conditions were easier.

When the hens heard this, they raised a terrible outcry. They had been
warned earlier that this sacrifice might be necessary, but had not
believed that it would really happen. They were just getting their
clutches ready for the spring sitting, and they protested that to take the
eggs away now was murder. For the first time since the expulsion of Jones,
there was something resembling a rebellion. Led by three young Black
Minorca pullets, the hens made a determined effort to thwart Napoleon's
wishes. Their method was to fly up to the rafters and there lay their
eggs, which smashed to pieces on the floor. Napoleon acted swiftly and
ruthlessly. He ordered the hens' rations to be stopped, and decreed that
any animal giving so much as a grain of corn to a hen should be punished
by death. The dogs saw to it that these orders were carried out. For five
days the hens held out, then they capitulated and went back to their
nesting boxes. Nine hens had died in the meantime. Their bodies were
buried in the orchard, and it was given out that they had died of
coccidiosis. Whymper heard nothing of this affair, and the eggs were duly
delivered, a grocer's van driving up to the farm once a week to take them
away.

All this while no more had been seen of Snowball. He was rumoured to be
hiding on one of the neighbouring farms, either Foxwood or Pinchfield.
Napoleon was by this time on slightly better terms with the other farmers
than before. It happened that there was in the yard a pile of timber which
had been stacked there ten years earlier when a beech spinney was cleared.
It was well seasoned, and Whymper had advised Napoleon to sell it; both
Mr. Pilkington and Mr. Frederick were anxious to buy it. Napoleon was
hesitating between the two, unable to make up his mind. It was noticed
that whenever he seemed on the point of coming to an agreement with
Frederick, Snowball was declared to be in hiding at Foxwood, while, when
he inclined toward Pilkington, Snowball was said to be at Pinchfield.

Suddenly, early in the spring, an alarming thing was discovered. Snowball
was secretly frequenting the farm by night! The animals were so disturbed
that they could hardly sleep in their stalls. Every night, it was said, he
came creeping in under cover of darkness and performed all kinds of
mischief. He stole the corn, he upset the milk-pails, he broke the eggs,
he trampled the seedbeds, he gnawed the bark off the fruit trees. Whenever
anything went wrong it became usual to attribute it to Snowball. If a
window was broken or a drain was blocked up, someone was certain to say
that Snowball had come in the night and done it, and when the key of the
store-shed was lost, the whole farm was convinced that Snowball had thrown
it down the well. Curiously enough, they went on believing this even after
the mislaid key was found under a sack of meal. The cows declared
unanimously that Snowball crept into their stalls and milked them in their
sleep. The rats, which had been troublesome that winter, were also said to
be in league with Snowball.

Napoleon decreed that there should be a full investigation into Snowball's
activities. With his dogs in attendance he set out and made a careful tour
of inspection of the farm buildings, the other animals following at a
respectful distance. At every few steps Napoleon stopped and snuffed the
ground for traces of Snowball's footsteps, which, he said, he could detect
by the smell. He snuffed in every corner, in the barn, in the cow-shed,
in the henhouses, in the vegetable garden, and found traces of Snowball
almost everywhere. He would put his snout to the ground, give several deep
sniffs, ad exclaim in a terrible voice, "Snowball! He has been here! I can
smell him distinctly!" and at the word "Snowball" all the dogs let out
blood-curdling growls and showed their side teeth.

The animals were thoroughly frightened. It seemed to them as though
Snowball were some kind of invisible influence, pervading the air about
them and menacing them with all kinds of dangers. In the evening Squealer
called them together, and with an alarmed expression on his face told
them that he had some serious news to report.

"Comrades!" cried Squealer, making little nervous skips, "a most terrible
thing has been discovered. Snowball has sold himself to Frederick of
Pinchfield Farm, who is even now plotting to attack us and take our farm
away from us! Snowball is to act as his guide when the attack begins. But
there is worse than that. We had thought that Snowball's rebellion was
caused simply by his vanity and ambition. But we were wrong, comrades. Do
you know what the real reason was? Snowball was in league with Jones from
the very start! He was Jones's secret agent all the time. It has all been
proved by documents which he left behind him and which we have only just
discovered. To my mind this explains a great deal, comrades. Did we not
see for ourselves how he attempted--fortunately without success--to get us
defeated and destroyed at the Battle of the Cowshed?"

The animals were stupefied. This was a wickedness far outdoing Snowball's
destruction of the windmill. But it was some minutes before they could
fully take it in. They all remembered, or thought they remembered, how
they had seen Snowball charging ahead of them at the Battle of the
Cowshed, how he had rallied and encouraged them at every turn, and how he
had not paused for an instant even when the pellets from Jones's gun had
wounded his back. At first it was a little difficult to see how this
fitted in with his being on Jones's side. Even Boxer, who seldom asked
questions, was puzzled. He lay down, tucked his fore hoofs beneath him,
shut his eyes, and with a hard effort managed to formulate his thoughts.

"I do not believe that," he said. "Snowball fought bravely at the Battle
of the Cowshed. I saw him myself. Did we not give him 'Animal Hero, first
Class,' immediately afterwards?"

"That was our mistake, comrade. For we know now--it is all written down in
the secret documents that we have found--that in reality he was trying to
lure us to our doom."

"But he was wounded," said Boxer. "We all saw him running with blood."

"That was part of the arrangement!" cried Squealer. "Jones's shot only
grazed him. I could show you this in his own writing, if you were able to
read it. The plot was for Snowball, at the critical moment, to give the
signal for flight and leave the field to the enemy. And he very nearly
succeeded--I will even say, comrades, he WOULD have succeeded if it had
not been for our heroic Leader, Comrade Napoleon. Do you not remember how,
just at the moment when Jones and his men had got inside the yard,
Snowball suddenly turned and fled, and many animals followed him? And do
you not remember, too, that it was just at that moment, when panic was
spreading and all seemed lost, that Comrade Napoleon sprang forward with a
cry of 'Death to Humanity!' and sank his teeth in Jones's leg? Surely you
remember THAT, comrades?" exclaimed Squealer, frisking from side to side.

Now when Squealer described the scene so graphically, it seemed to the
animals that they did remember it. At any rate, they remembered that at
the critical moment of the battle Snowball had turned to flee. But Boxer
was still a little uneasy.

"I do not believe that Snowball was a traitor at the beginning," he said
finally. "What he has done since is different. But I believe that at the
Battle of the Cowshed he was a good comrade."

"Our Leader, Comrade Napoleon," announced Squealer, speaking very slowly
and firmly, "has stated categorically--categorically, comrade--that
Snowball was Jones's agent from the very beginning--yes, and from long
before the Rebellion was ever thought of."

"Ah, that is different!" said Boxer. "If Comrade Napoleon says it, it must
be right."

"That is the true spirit, comrade!" cried Squealer, but it was noticed he
cast a very ugly look at Boxer with his little twinkling eyes. He turned
to go, then paused and added impressively: "I warn every animal on this
farm to keep his eyes very wide open. For we have reason to think that
some of Snowball's secret agents are lurking among us at this moment!"

Four days later, in the late afternoon, Napoleon ordered all the animals
to assemble in the yard. When they were all gathered together, Napoleon
emerged from the farmhouse, wearing both his medals (for he had recently
awarded himself "Animal Hero, First Class", and "Animal Hero, Second
Class"), with his nine huge dogs frisking round him and uttering growls
that sent shivers down all the animals' spines. They all cowered silently
in their places, seeming to know in advance that some terrible thing was
about to happen.

Napoleon stood sternly surveying his audience; then he uttered a
high-pitched whimper. Immediately the dogs bounded forward, seized four of
the pigs by the ear and dragged them, squealing with pain and terror, to
Napoleon's feet. The pigs' ears were bleeding, the dogs had tasted blood,
and for a few moments they appeared to go quite mad. To the amazement of
everybody, three of them flung themselves upon Boxer. Boxer saw them
coming and put out his great hoof, caught a dog in mid-air, and pinned
him to the ground. The dog shrieked for mercy and the other two fled with
their tails between their legs. Boxer looked at Napoleon to know whether
he should crush the dog to death or let it go. Napoleon appeared to change
countenance, and sharply ordered Boxer to let the dog go, whereat Boxer
lifted his hoof, and the dog slunk away, bruised and howling.

Presently the tumult died down. The four pigs waited, trembling, with
guilt written on every line of their countenances. Napoleon now called
upon them to confess their crimes. They were the same four pigs as had
protested when Napoleon abolished the Sunday Meetings. Without any further
prompting they confessed that they had been secretly in touch with
Snowball ever since his expulsion, that they had collaborated with him in
destroying the windmill, and that they had entered into an agreement with
him to hand over Animal Farm to Mr. Frederick. They added that Snowball
had privately admitted to them that he had been Jones's secret agent for
years past. When they had finished their confession, the dogs promptly
tore their throats out, and in a terrible voice Napoleon demanded whether
any other animal had anything to confess.

The three hens who had been the ringleaders in the attempted rebellion
over the eggs now came forward and stated that Snowball had appeared to
them in a dream and incited them to disobey Napoleon's orders. They, too,
were slaughtered. Then a goose came forward and confessed to having
secreted six ears of corn during the last year's harvest and eaten them in
the night. Then a sheep confessed to having urinated in the drinking
pool--urged to do this, so she said, by Snowball--and two other sheep
confessed to having murdered an old ram, an especially devoted follower of
Napoleon, by chasing him round and round a bonfire when he was suffering
from a cough. They were all slain on the spot. And so the tale of
confessions and executions went on, until there was a pile of corpses
lying before Napoleon's feet and the air was heavy with the smell of
blood, which had been unknown there since the expulsion of Jones.

When it was all over, the remaining animals, except for the pigs and dogs,
crept away in a body. They were shaken and miserable. They did not know
which was more shocking--the treachery of the animals who had leagued
themselves with Snowball, or the cruel retribution they had just
witnessed. In the old days there had often been scenes of bloodshed
equally terrible, but it seemed to all of them that it was far worse now
that it was happening among themselves. Since Jones had left the farm,
until today, no animal had killed another animal. Not even a rat had been
killed. They had made their way on to the little knoll where the
half-finished windmill stood, and with one accord they all lay down as
though huddling together for warmth--Clover, Muriel, Benjamin, the cows,
the sheep, and a whole flock of geese and hens--everyone, indeed, except
the cat, who had suddenly disappeared just before Napoleon ordered the
animals to assemble. For some time nobody spoke. Only Boxer remained on
his feet. He fidgeted to and fro, swishing his long black tail against his
sides and occasionally uttering a little whinny of surprise. Finally he
said:

"I do not understand it. I would not have believed that such things could
happen on our farm. It must be due to some fault in ourselves. The
solution, as I see it, is to work harder. From now onwards I shall get up
a full hour earlier in the mornings."

And he moved off at his lumbering trot and made for the quarry. Having got
there, he collected two successive loads of stone and dragged them down to
the windmill before retiring for the night.

The animals huddled about Clover, not speaking. The knoll where they were
lying gave them a wide prospect across the countryside. Most of Animal
Farm was within their view--the long pasture stretching down to the main
road, the hayfield, the spinney, the drinking pool, the ploughed fields
where the young wheat was thick and green, and the red roofs of the farm
buildings with the smoke curling from the chimneys. It was a clear spring
evening. The grass and the bursting hedges were gilded by the level rays
of the sun. Never had the farm--and with a kind of surprise they
remembered that it was their own farm, every inch of it their own
property--appeared to the animals so desirable a place. As Clover looked
down the hillside her eyes filled with tears. If she could have spoken her
thoughts, it would have been to say that this was not what they had aimed
at when they had set themselves years ago to work for the overthrow of the
human race. These scenes of terror and slaughter were not what they had
looked forward to on that night when old Major first stirred them to
rebellion. If she herself had had any picture of the future, it had been
of a society of animals set free from hunger and the whip, all equal, each
working according to his capacity, the strong protecting the weak, as she
had protected the lost brood of ducklings with her foreleg on the night of
Major's speech. Instead--she did not know why--they had come to a time
when no one dared speak his mind, when fierce, growling dogs roamed
everywhere, and when you had to watch your comrades torn to pieces after
confessing to shocking crimes. There was no thought of rebellion or
disobedience in her mind. She knew that, even as things were, they were
far better off than they had been in the days of Jones, and that before
all else it was needful to prevent the return of the human beings.
Whatever happened she would remain faithful, work hard, carry out the
orders that were given to her, and accept the leadership of Napoleon. But
still, it was not for this that she and all the other animals had hoped
and toiled. It was not for this that they had built the windmill and faced
the bullets of Jones's gun. Such were her thoughts, though she lacked the
words to express them.

At last, feeling this to be in some way a substitute for the words she was
unable to find, she began to sing 'Beasts of England'. The other animals
sitting round her took it up, and they sang it three times over--very
tunefully, but slowly and mournfully, in a way they had never sung it
before.

They had just finished singing it for the third time when Squealer,
attended by two dogs, approached them with the air of having something
important to say. He announced that, by a special decree of Comrade
Napoleon, 'Beasts of England' had been abolished. From now onwards it was
forbidden to sing it.

The animals were taken aback.

"Why?" cried Muriel.

"It's no longer needed, comrade," said Squealer stiffly. "'Beasts of
England' was the song of the Rebellion. But the Rebellion is now
completed. The execution of the traitors this afternoon was the final act.
The enemy both external and internal has been defeated. In 'Beasts of
England' we expressed our longing for a better society in days to come.
But that society has now been established. Clearly this song has no longer
any purpose."

Frightened though they were, some of the animals might possibly have
protested, but at this moment the sheep set up their usual bleating of
"Four legs good, two legs bad," which went on for several minutes and put
an end to the discussion.

So 'Beasts of England' was heard no more. In its place Minimus, the poet,
had composed another song which began:


Animal Farm, Animal Farm,
Never through me shalt thou come to harm!


and this was sung every Sunday morning after the hoisting of the flag.
But somehow neither the words nor the tune ever seemed to the animals to
come up to 'Beasts of England'.




Chapter VIII



A few days later, when the terror caused by the executions had died down,
some of the animals remembered--or thought they remembered--that the Sixth
Commandment decreed "No animal shall kill any other animal." And though no
one cared to mention it in the hearing of the pigs or the dogs, it was
felt that the killings which had taken place did not square with this.
Clover asked Benjamin to read her the Sixth Commandment, and when
Benjamin, as usual, said that he refused to meddle in such matters, she
fetched Muriel. Muriel read the Commandment for her. It ran: "No animal
shall kill any other animal WITHOUT CAUSE." Somehow or other, the last two
words had slipped out of the animals' memory. But they saw now that the
Commandment had not been violated; for clearly there was good reason for
killing the traitors who had leagued themselves with Snowball.

Throughout the year the animals worked even harder than they had worked in
the previous year. To rebuild the windmill, with walls twice as thick as
before, and to finish it by the appointed date, together with the regular
work of the farm, was a tremendous labour. There were times when it seemed
to the animals that they worked longer hours and fed no better than they
had done in Jones's day. On Sunday mornings Squealer, holding down a long
strip of paper with his trotter, would read out to them lists of figures
proving that the production of every class of foodstuff had increased by
two hundred per cent, three hundred per cent, or five hundred per cent,
as the case might be. The animals saw no reason to disbelieve him,
especially as they could no longer remember very clearly what conditions
had been like before the Rebellion. All the same, there were days when
they felt that they would sooner have had less figures and more food.

All orders were now issued through Squealer or one of the other pigs.
Napoleon himself was not seen in public as often as once in a fortnight.
When he did appear, he was attended not only by his retinue of dogs but by
a black cockerel who marched in front of him and acted as a kind of
trumpeter, letting out a loud "cock-a-doodle-doo" before Napoleon spoke.
Even in the farmhouse, it was said, Napoleon inhabited separate apartments
from the others. He took his meals alone, with two dogs to wait upon him,
and always ate from the Crown Derby dinner service which had been in the
glass cupboard in the drawing-room. It was also announced that the gun
would be fired every year on Napoleon's birthday, as well as on the other
two anniversaries.

Napoleon was now never spoken of simply as "Napoleon." He was always
referred to in formal style as "our Leader, Comrade Napoleon," and this
pigs liked to invent for him such titles as Father of All Animals, Terror
of Mankind, Protector of the Sheep-fold, Ducklings' Friend, and the like.
In his speeches, Squealer would talk with the tears rolling down his
cheeks of Napoleon's wisdom the goodness of his heart, and the deep love
he bore to all animals everywhere, even and especially the unhappy animals
who still lived in ignorance and slavery on other farms. It had become
usual to give Napoleon the credit for every successful achievement and
every stroke of good fortune. You would often hear one hen remark to
another, "Under the guidance of our Leader, Comrade Napoleon, I have laid
five eggs in six days"; or two cows, enjoying a drink at the pool, would
exclaim, "Thanks to the leadership of Comrade Napoleon, how excellent this
water tastes!" The general feeling on the farm was well expressed in a
poem entitled Comrade Napoleon, which was composed by Minimus and which
ran as follows:


Friend of fatherless!
Fountain of happiness!
Lord of the swill-bucket! Oh, how my soul is on
Fire when I gaze at thy
Calm and commanding eye,
Like the sun in the sky,
Comrade Napoleon!

Thou are the giver of
All that thy creatures love,
Full belly twice a day, clean straw to roll upon;
Every beast great or small
Sleeps at peace in his stall,
Thou watchest over all,
Comrade Napoleon!

Had I a sucking-pig,
Ere he had grown as big
Even as a pint bottle or as a rolling-pin,
He should have learned to be
Faithful and true to thee,
Yes, his first squeak should be
"Comrade Napoleon!"


Napoleon approved of this poem and caused it to be inscribed on the wall
of the big barn, at the opposite end from the Seven Commandments. It was
surmounted by a portrait of Napoleon, in profile, executed by Squealer in
white paint.

Meanwhile, through the agency of Whymper, Napoleon was engaged in
complicated negotiations with Frederick and Pilkington. The pile of timber
was still unsold. Of the two, Frederick was the more anxious to get hold
of it, but he would not offer a reasonable price. At the same time there
were renewed rumours that Frederick and his men were plotting to attack
Animal Farm and to destroy the windmill, the building of which had aroused
furious jealousy in him. Snowball was known to be still skulking on
Pinchfield Farm. In the middle of the summer the animals were alarmed to
hear that three hens had come forward and confessed that, inspired by
Snowball, they had entered into a plot to murder Napoleon. They were
executed immediately, and fresh precautions for Napoleon's safety were
taken. Four dogs guarded his bed at night, one at each corner, and a young
pig named Pinkeye was given the task of tasting all his food before he ate
it, lest it should be poisoned.

At about the same time it was given out that Napoleon had arranged to sell
the pile of timber to Mr. Pilkington; he was also going to enter into a
regular agreement for the exchange of certain products between Animal Farm
and Foxwood. The relations between Napoleon and Pilkington, though they
were only conducted through Whymper, were now almost friendly. The animals
distrusted Pilkington, as a human being, but greatly preferred him to
Frederick, whom they both feared and hated. As the summer wore on, and the
windmill neared completion, the rumours of an impending treacherous attack
grew stronger and stronger. Frederick, it was said, intended to bring
against them twenty men all armed with guns, and he had already bribed the
magistrates and police, so that if he could once get hold of the
title-deeds of Animal Farm they would ask no questions. Moreover, terrible
stories were leaking out from Pinchfield about the cruelties that
Frederick practised upon his animals. He had flogged an old horse to
death, he starved his cows, he had killed a dog by throwing it into the
furnace, he amused himself in the evenings by making cocks fight with
splinters of razor-blade tied to their spurs. The animals' blood boiled
with rage when they heard of these things being done to their comrades,
and sometimes they clamoured to be allowed to go out in a body and attack
Pinchfield Farm, drive out the humans, and set the animals free. But
Squealer counselled them to avoid rash actions and trust in Comrade
Napoleon's strategy.

Nevertheless, feeling against Frederick continued to run high. One Sunday
morning Napoleon appeared in the barn and explained that he had never at
any time contemplated selling the pile of timber to Frederick; he
considered it beneath his dignity, he said, to have dealings with
scoundrels of that description. The pigeons who were still sent out to
spread tidings of the Rebellion were forbidden to set foot anywhere on
Foxwood, and were also ordered to drop their former slogan of "Death to
Humanity" in favour of "Death to Frederick." In the late summer yet
another of Snowball's machinations was laid bare. The wheat crop was full
of weeds, and it was discovered that on one of his nocturnal visits
Snowball had mixed weed seeds with the seed corn. A gander who had been
privy to the plot had confessed his guilt to Squealer and immediately
committed suicide by swallowing deadly nightshade berries. The animals
now also learned that Snowball had never--as many of them had believed
hitherto--received the order of "Animal Hero, First Class." This was
merely a legend which had been spread some time after the Battle of the
Cowshed by Snowball himself. So far from being decorated, he had been
censured for showing cowardice in the battle. Once again some of the
animals heard this with a certain bewilderment, but Squealer was soon able
to convince them that their memories had been at fault.

In the autumn, by a tremendous, exhausting effort--for the harvest had to
be gathered at almost the same time--the windmill was finished. The
machinery had still to be installed, and Whymper was negotiating the
purchase of it, but the structure was completed. In the teeth of every
difficulty, in spite of inexperience, of primitive implements, of bad luck
and of Snowball's treachery, the work had been finished punctually to the
very day! Tired out but proud, the animals walked round and round their
masterpiece, which appeared even more beautiful in their eyes than when it
had been built the first time. Moreover, the walls were twice as thick as
before. Nothing short of explosives would lay them low this time! And when
they thought of how they had laboured, what discouragements they had
overcome, and the enormous difference that would be made in their lives
when the sails were turning and the dynamos running--when they thought of
all this, their tiredness forsook them and they gambolled round and round
the windmill, uttering cries of triumph. Napoleon himself, attended by his
dogs and his cockerel, came down to inspect the completed work; he
personally congratulated the animals on their achievement, and announced
that the mill would be named Napoleon Mill.

Two days later the animals were called together for a special meeting in
the barn. They were struck dumb with surprise when Napoleon announced that
he had sold the pile of timber to Frederick. Tomorrow Frederick's wagons
would arrive and begin carting it away. Throughout the whole period of his
seeming friendship with Pilkington, Napoleon had really been in secret
agreement with Frederick.

All relations with Foxwood had been broken off; insulting messages had
been sent to Pilkington. The pigeons had been told to avoid Pinchfield
Farm and to alter their slogan from "Death to Frederick" to "Death to
Pilkington." At the same time Napoleon assured the animals that the
stories of an impending attack on Animal Farm were completely untrue, and
that the tales about Frederick's cruelty to his own animals had been
greatly exaggerated. All these rumours had probably originated with
Snowball and his agents. It now appeared that Snowball was not, after all,
hiding on Pinchfield Farm, and in fact had never been there in his life:
he was living--in considerable luxury, so it was said--at Foxwood, and had
in reality been a pensioner of Pilkington for years past.

The pigs were in ecstasies over Napoleon's cunning. By seeming to be
friendly with Pilkington he had forced Frederick to raise his price by
twelve pounds. But the superior quality of Napoleon's mind, said Squealer,
was shown in the fact that he trusted nobody, not even Frederick.
Frederick had wanted to pay for the timber with something called a cheque,
which, it seemed, was a piece of paper with a promise to pay written upon
it. But Napoleon was too clever for him. He had demanded payment in real
five-pound notes, which were to be handed over before the timber was
removed. Already Frederick had paid up; and the sum he had paid was just
enough to buy the machinery for the windmill.

Meanwhile the timber was being carted away at high speed. When it was all
gone, another special meeting was held in the barn for the animals to
inspect Frederick's bank-notes. Smiling beatifically, and wearing both his
decorations, Napoleon reposed on a bed of straw on the platform, with the
money at his side, neatly piled on a china dish from the farmhouse
kitchen. The animals filed slowly past, and each gazed his fill. And Boxer
put out his nose to sniff at the bank-notes, and the flimsy white things
stirred and rustled in his breath.

Three days later there was a terrible hullabaloo. Whymper, his face deadly
pale, came racing up the path on his bicycle, flung it down in the yard
and rushed straight into the farmhouse. The next moment a choking roar of
rage sounded from Napoleon's apartments. The news of what had happened
sped round the farm like wildfire. The banknotes were forgeries! Frederick
had got the timber for nothing!

Napoleon called the animals together immediately and in a terrible voice
pronounced the death sentence upon Frederick. When captured, he said,
Frederick should be boiled alive. At the same time he warned them that
after this treacherous deed the worst was to be expected. Frederick and
his men might make their long-expected attack at any moment. Sentinels
were placed at all the approaches to the farm. In addition, four pigeons
were sent to Foxwood with a conciliatory message, which it was hoped might
re-establish good relations with Pilkington.

The very next morning the attack came. The animals were at breakfast when
the look-outs came racing in with the news that Frederick and his
followers had already come through the five-barred gate. Boldly enough the
animals sallied forth to meet them, but this time they did not have the
easy victory that they had had in the Battle of the Cowshed. There were
fifteen men, with half a dozen guns between them, and they opened fire as
soon as they got within fifty yards. The animals could not face the
terrible explosions and the stinging pellets, and in spite of the efforts
of Napoleon and Boxer to rally them, they were soon driven back. A number
of them were already wounded. They took refuge in the farm buildings and
peeped cautiously out from chinks and knot-holes. The whole of the big
pasture, including the windmill, was in the hands of the enemy. For the
moment even Napoleon seemed at a loss. He paced up and down without a
word, his tail rigid and twitching. Wistful glances were sent in the
direction of Foxwood. If Pilkington and his men would help them, the day
might yet be won. But at this moment the four pigeons, who had been sent
out on the day before, returned, one of them bearing a scrap of paper from
Pilkington. On it was pencilled the words: "Serves you right."

Meanwhile Frederick and his men had halted about the windmill. The animals
watched them, and a murmur of dismay went round. Two of the men had
produced a crowbar and a sledge hammer. They were going to knock the
windmill down.

"Impossible!" cried Napoleon. "We have built the walls far too thick for
that. They could not knock it down in a week. Courage, comrades!"

But Benjamin was watching the movements of the men intently. The two with
the hammer and the crowbar were drilling a hole near the base of the
windmill. Slowly, and with an air almost of amusement, Benjamin nodded his
long muzzle.

"I thought so," he said. "Do you not see what they are doing? In another
moment they are going to pack blasting powder into that hole."

Terrified, the animals waited. It was impossible now to venture out of the
shelter of the buildings. After a few minutes the men were seen to be
running in all directions. Then there was a deafening roar. The pigeons
swirled into the air, and all the animals, except Napoleon, flung
themselves flat on their bellies and hid their faces. When they got up
again, a huge cloud of black smoke was hanging where the windmill had
been. Slowly the breeze drifted it away. The windmill had ceased to exist!

At this sight the animals' courage returned to them. The fear and despair
they had felt a moment earlier were drowned in their rage against this
vile, contemptible act. A mighty cry for vengeance went up, and without
waiting for further orders they charged forth in a body and made straight
for the enemy. This time they did not heed the cruel pellets that swept
over them like hail. It was a savage, bitter battle. The men fired again
and again, and, when the animals got to close quarters, lashed out with
their sticks and their heavy boots. A cow, three sheep, and two geese were
killed, and nearly everyone was wounded. Even Napoleon, who was directing
operations from the rear, had the tip of his tail chipped by a pellet. But
the men did not go unscathed either. Three of them had their heads broken
by blows from Boxer's hoofs; another was gored in the belly by a cow's
horn; another had his trousers nearly torn off by Jessie and Bluebell. And
when the nine dogs of Napoleon's own bodyguard, whom he had instructed to
make a detour under cover of the hedge, suddenly appeared on the men's
flank, baying ferociously, panic overtook them. They saw that they were in
danger of being surrounded. Frederick shouted to his men to get out while
the going was good, and the next moment the cowardly enemy was running for
dear life. The animals chased them right down to the bottom of the field,
and got in some last kicks at them as they forced their way through the
thorn hedge.

They had won, but they were weary and bleeding. Slowly they began to limp
back towards the farm. The sight of their dead comrades stretched upon the
grass moved some of them to tears. And for a little while they halted in
sorrowful silence at the place where the windmill had once stood. Yes, it
was gone; almost the last trace of their labour was gone! Even the
foundations were partially destroyed. And in rebuilding it they could not
this time, as before, make use of the fallen stones. This time the stones
had vanished too. The force of the explosion had flung them to distances
of hundreds of yards. It was as though the windmill had never been.

As they approached the farm Squealer, who had unaccountably been absent
during the fighting, came skipping towards them, whisking his tail and
beaming with satisfaction. And the animals heard, from the direction of
the farm buildings, the solemn booming of a gun.

"What is that gun firing for?" said Boxer.

"To celebrate our victory!" cried Squealer.

"What victory?" said Boxer. His knees were bleeding, he had lost a shoe
and split his hoof, and a dozen pellets had lodged themselves in his hind
leg.

"What victory, comrade? Have we not driven the enemy off our soil--the
sacred soil of Animal Farm?"

"But they have destroyed the windmill. And we had worked on it for two
years!"

"What matter? We will build another windmill. We will build six windmills
if we feel like it. You do not appreciate, comrade, the mighty thing that
we have done. The enemy was in occupation of this very ground that we
stand upon. And now--thanks to the leadership of Comrade Napoleon--we have
won every inch of it back again!"

"Then we have won back what we had before," said Boxer.

"That is our victory," said Squealer.

They limped into the yard. The pellets under the skin of Boxer's leg
smarted painfully. He saw ahead of him the heavy labour of rebuilding the
windmill from the foundations, and already in imagination he braced
himself for the task. But for the first time it occurred to him that he
was eleven years old and that perhaps his great muscles were not quite
what they had once been.

But when the animals saw the green flag flying, and heard the gun firing
again--seven times it was fired in all--and heard the speech that Napoleon
made, congratulating them on their conduct, it did seem to them after all
that they had won a great victory. The animals slain in the battle were
given a solemn funeral. Boxer and Clover pulled the wagon which served as
a hearse, and Napoleon himself walked at the head of the procession. Two
whole days were given over to celebrations. There were songs, speeches,
and more firing of the gun, and a special gift of an apple was bestowed on
every animal, with two ounces of corn for each bird and three biscuits for
each dog. It was announced that the battle would be called the Battle of
the Windmill, and that Napoleon had created a new decoration, the Order
of the Green Banner, which he had conferred upon himself. In the general
rejoicings the unfortunate affair of the banknotes was forgotten.

It was a few days later than this that the pigs came upon a case of whisky
in the cellars of the farmhouse. It had been overlooked at the time when
the house was first occupied. That night there came from the farmhouse the
sound of loud singing, in which, to everyone's surprise, the strains of
'Beasts of England' were mixed up. At about half past nine Napoleon,
wearing an old bowler hat of Mr. Jones's, was distinctly seen to emerge
from the back door, gallop rapidly round the yard, and disappear indoors
again. But in the morning a deep silence hung over the farmhouse. Not a
pig appeared to be stirring. It was nearly nine o'clock when Squealer made
his appearance, walking slowly and dejectedly, his eyes dull, his tail
hanging limply behind him, and with every appearance of being seriously
ill. He called the animals together and told them that he had a terrible
piece of news to impart. Comrade Napoleon was dying!

A cry of lamentation went up. Straw was laid down outside the doors of the
farmhouse, and the animals walked on tiptoe. With tears in their eyes they
asked one another what they should do if their Leader were taken away from
them. A rumour went round that Snowball had after all contrived to
introduce poison into Napoleon's food. At eleven o'clock Squealer came
out to make another announcement. As his last act upon earth, Comrade
Napoleon had pronounced a solemn decree: the drinking of alcohol was to be
punished by death.

By the evening, however, Napoleon appeared to be somewhat better, and the
following morning Squealer was able to tell them that he was well on the
way to recovery. By the evening of that day Napoleon was back at work, and
on the next day it was learned that he had instructed Whymper to purchase
in Willingdon some booklets on brewing and distilling. A week later
Napoleon gave orders that the small paddock beyond the orchard, which it
had previously been intended to set aside as a grazing-ground for animals
who were past work, was to be ploughed up. It was given out that the
pasture was exhausted and needed re-seeding; but it soon became known that
Napoleon intended to sow it with barley.

About this time there occurred a strange incident which hardly anyone was
able to understand. One night at about twelve o'clock there was a loud
crash in the yard, and the animals rushed out of their stalls. It was a
moonlit night. At the foot of the end wall of the big barn, where the
Seven Commandments were written, there lay a ladder broken in two pieces.
Squealer, temporarily stunned, was sprawling beside it, and near at hand
there lay a lantern, a paint-brush, and an overturned pot of white paint.
The dogs immediately made a ring round Squealer, and escorted him back to
the farmhouse as soon as he was able to walk. None of the animals could
form any idea as to what this meant, except old Benjamin, who nodded his
muzzle with a knowing air, and seemed to understand, but would say nothing.

But a few days later Muriel, reading over the Seven Commandments to
herself, noticed that there was yet another of them which the animals had
remembered wrong. They had thought the Fifth Commandment was "No animal
shall drink alcohol," but there were two words that they had forgotten.
Actually the Commandment read: "No animal shall drink alcohol TO EXCESS."




Chapter IX



Boxer's split hoof was a long time in healing. They had started the
rebuilding of the windmill the day after the victory celebrations were
ended. Boxer refused to take even a day off work, and made it a point of
honour not to let it be seen that he was in pain. In the evenings he would
admit privately to Clover that the hoof troubled him a great deal. Clover
treated the hoof with poultices of herbs which she prepared by chewing
them, and both she and Benjamin urged Boxer to work less hard. "A horse's
lungs do not last for ever," she said to him. But Boxer would not listen.
He had, he said, only one real ambition left--to see the windmill well
under way before he reached the age for retirement.

At the beginning, when the laws of Animal Farm were first formulated,
the retiring age had been fixed for horses and pigs at twelve, for cows at
fourteen, for dogs at nine, for sheep at seven, and for hens and geese at
five. Liberal old-age pensions had been agreed upon. As yet no animal had
actually retired on pension, but of late the subject had been discussed
more and more. Now that the small field beyond the orchard had been set
aside for barley, it was rumoured that a corner of the large pasture was
to be fenced off and turned into a grazing-ground for superannuated
animals. For a horse, it was said, the pension would be five pounds of
corn a day and, in winter, fifteen pounds of hay, with a carrot or
possibly an apple on public holidays. Boxer's twelfth birthday was due in
the late summer of the following year.

Meanwhile life was hard. The winter was as cold as the last one had been,
and food was even shorter. Once again all rations were reduced, except
those of the pigs and the dogs. A too rigid equality in rations, Squealer
explained, would have been contrary to the principles of Animalism. In any
case he had no difficulty in proving to the other animals that they were
NOT in reality short of food, whatever the appearances might be. For the
time being, certainly, it had been found necessary to make a readjustment
of rations (Squealer always spoke of it as a "readjustment," never as a
"reduction"), but in comparison with the days of Jones, the improvement
was enormous. Reading out the figures in a shrill, rapid voice, he proved
to them in detail that they had more oats, more hay, more turnips than
they had had in Jones's day, that they worked shorter hours, that their
drinking water was of better quality, that they lived longer, that a
larger proportion of their young ones survived infancy, and that they had
more straw in their stalls and suffered less from fleas. The animals
believed every word of it. Truth to tell, Jones and all he stood for had
almost faded out of their memories. They knew that life nowadays was harsh
and bare, that they were often hungry and often cold, and that they were
usually working when they were not asleep. But doubtless it had been worse
in the old days. They were glad to believe so. Besides, in those days they
had been slaves and now they were free, and that made all the difference,
as Squealer did not fail to point out.

There were many more mouths to feed now. In the autumn the four sows had
all littered about simultaneously, producing thirty-one young pigs between
them. The young pigs were piebald, and as Napoleon was the only boar on
the farm, it was possible to guess at their parentage. It was announced
that later, when bricks and timber had been purchased, a schoolroom would
be built in the farmhouse garden. For the time being, the young pigs were
given their instruction by Napoleon himself in the farmhouse kitchen. They
took their exercise in the garden, and were discouraged from playing with
the other young animals. About this time, too, it was laid down as a rule
that when a pig and any other animal met on the path, the other animal
must stand aside: and also that all pigs, of whatever degree, were to have
the privilege of wearing green ribbons on their tails on Sundays.

The farm had had a fairly successful year, but was still short of money.
There were the bricks, sand, and lime for the schoolroom to be purchased,
and it would also be necessary to begin saving up again for the machinery
for the windmill. Then there were lamp oil and candles for the house,
sugar for Napoleon's own table (he forbade this to the other pigs, on the
ground that it made them fat), and all the usual replacements such as
tools, nails, string, coal, wire, scrap-iron, and dog biscuits. A stump of
hay and part of the potato crop were sold off, and the contract for eggs
was increased to six hundred a week, so that that year the hens barely
hatched enough chicks to keep their numbers at the same level. Rations,
reduced in December, were reduced again in February, and lanterns in the
stalls were forbidden to save oil. But the pigs seemed comfortable enough,
and in fact were putting on weight if anything. One afternoon in late
February a warm, rich, appetising scent, such as the animals had never
smelt before, wafted itself across the yard from the little brew-house,
which had been disused in Jones's time, and which stood beyond the
kitchen. Someone said it was the smell of cooking barley. The animals
sniffed the air hungrily and wondered whether a warm mash was being
prepared for their supper. But no warm mash appeared, and on the following
Sunday it was announced that from now onwards all barley would be reserved
for the pigs. The field beyond the orchard had already been sown with
barley. And the news soon leaked out that every pig was now receiving a
ration of a pint of beer daily, with half a gallon for Napoleon himself,
which was always served to him in the Crown Derby soup tureen.

But if there were hardships to be borne, they were partly offset by the
fact that life nowadays had a greater dignity than it had had before.
There were more songs, more speeches, more processions. Napoleon had
commanded that once a week there should be held something called a
Spontaneous Demonstration, the object of which was to celebrate the
struggles and triumphs of Animal Farm. At the appointed time the animals
would leave their work and march round the precincts of the farm in
military formation, with the pigs leading, then the horses, then the cows,
then the sheep, and then the poultry. The dogs flanked the procession and
at the head of all marched Napoleon's black cockerel. Boxer and Clover
always carried between them a green banner marked with the hoof and the
horn and the caption, "Long live Comrade Napoleon!" Afterwards there were
recitations of poems composed in Napoleon's honour, and a speech by
Squealer giving particulars of the latest increases in the production of
foodstuffs, and on occasion a shot was fired from the gun. The sheep were
the greatest devotees of the Spontaneous Demonstration, and if anyone
complained (as a few animals sometimes did, when no pigs or dogs were near)
that they wasted time and meant a lot of standing about in the cold, the
sheep were sure to silence him with a tremendous bleating of "Four legs
good, two legs bad!" But by and large the animals enjoyed these
celebrations. They found it comforting to be reminded that, after all,
they were truly their own masters and that the work they did was for their
own benefit. So that, what with the songs, the processions, Squealer's
lists of figures, the thunder of the gun, the crowing of the cockerel,
and the fluttering of the flag, they were able to forget that their
bellies were empty, at least part of the time.

In April, Animal Farm was proclaimed a Republic, and it became necessary
to elect a President. There was only one candidate, Napoleon, who was
elected unanimously. On the same day it was given out that fresh documents
had been discovered which revealed further details about Snowball's
complicity with Jones. It now appeared that Snowball had not, as the
animals had previously imagined, merely attempted to lose the Battle of
the Cowshed by means of a stratagem, but had been openly fighting on
Jones's side. In fact, it was he who had actually been the leader of the
human forces, and had charged into battle with the words "Long live
Humanity!" on his lips. The wounds on Snowball's back, which a few of the
animals still remembered to have seen, had been inflicted by Napoleon's
teeth.

In the middle of the summer Moses the raven suddenly reappeared on the
farm, after an absence of several years. He was quite unchanged, still did
no work, and talked in the same strain as ever about Sugarcandy Mountain.
He would perch on a stump, flap his black wings, and talk by the hour to
anyone who would listen. "Up there, comrades," he would say solemnly,
pointing to the sky with his large beak--"up there, just on the other side
of that dark cloud that you can see--there it lies, Sugarcandy Mountain,
that happy country where we poor animals shall rest for ever from our
labours!" He even claimed to have been there on one of his higher flights,
and to have seen the everlasting fields of clover and the linseed cake and
lump sugar growing on the hedges. Many of the animals believed him. Their
lives now, they reasoned, were hungry and laborious; was it not right and
just that a better world should exist somewhere else? A thing that was
difficult to determine was the attitude of the pigs towards Moses. They
all declared contemptuously that his stories about Sugarcandy Mountain
were lies, and yet they allowed him to remain on the farm, not working,
with an allowance of a gill of beer a day.

After his hoof had healed up, Boxer worked harder than ever. Indeed, all
the animals worked like slaves that year. Apart from the regular work of
the farm, and the rebuilding of the windmill, there was the schoolhouse
for the young pigs, which was started in March. Sometimes the long hours
on insufficient food were hard to bear, but Boxer never faltered. In
nothing that he said or did was there any sign that his strength was not
what it had been. It was only his appearance that was a little altered;
his hide was less shiny than it had used to be, and his great haunches
seemed to have shrunken. The others said, "Boxer will pick up when the
spring grass comes on"; but the spring came and Boxer grew no fatter.
Sometimes on the slope leading to the top of the quarry, when he braced
his muscles against the weight of some vast boulder, it seemed that
nothing kept him on his feet except the will to continue. At such times
his lips were seen to form the words, "I will work harder"; he had no
voice left. Once again Clover and Benjamin warned him to take care of his
health, but Boxer paid no attention. His twelfth birthday was approaching.
He did not care what happened so long as a good store of stone was
accumulated before he went on pension.

Late one evening in the summer, a sudden rumour ran round the farm that
something had happened to Boxer. He had gone out alone to drag a load of
stone down to the windmill. And sure enough, the rumour was true. A few
minutes later two pigeons came racing in with the news; "Boxer has fallen!
He is lying on his side and can't get up!"

About half the animals on the farm rushed out to the knoll where the
windmill stood. There lay Boxer, between the shafts of the cart, his neck
stretched out, unable even to raise his head. His eyes were glazed, his
sides matted with sweat. A thin stream of blood had trickled out of his
mouth. Clover dropped to her knees at his side.

"Boxer!" she cried, "how are you?"

"It is my lung," said Boxer in a weak voice. "It does not matter. I think
you will be able to finish the windmill without me. There is a pretty good
store of stone accumulated. I had only another month to go in any case.
To tell you the truth, I had been looking forward to my retirement. And
perhaps, as Benjamin is growing old too, they will let him retire at the
same time and be a companion to me."

"We must get help at once," said Clover. "Run, somebody, and tell Squealer
what has happened."

All the other animals immediately raced back to the farmhouse to give
Squealer the news. Only Clover remained, and Benjamin who lay down at
Boxer's side, and, without speaking, kept the flies off him with his long
tail. After about a quarter of an hour Squealer appeared, full of sympathy
and concern. He said that Comrade Napoleon had learned with the very
deepest distress of this misfortune to one of the most loyal workers on
the farm, and was already making arrangements to send Boxer to be treated
in the hospital at Willingdon. The animals felt a little uneasy at this.
Except for Mollie and Snowball, no other animal had ever left the farm,
and they did not like to think of their sick comrade in the hands of human
beings. However, Squealer easily convinced them that the veterinary
surgeon in Willingdon could treat Boxer's case more satisfactorily than
could be done on the farm. And about half an hour later, when Boxer had
somewhat recovered, he was with difficulty got on to his feet, and managed
to limp back to his stall, where Clover and Benjamin had prepared a good
bed of straw for him.

For the next two days Boxer remained in his stall. The pigs had sent out a
large bottle of pink medicine which they had found in the medicine chest
in the bathroom, and Clover administered it to Boxer twice a day after
meals. In the evenings she lay in his stall and talked to him, while
Benjamin kept the flies off him. Boxer professed not to be sorry for what
had happened. If he made a good recovery, he might expect to live another
three years, and he looked forward to the peaceful days that he would
spend in the corner of the big pasture. It would be the first time that he
had had leisure to study and improve his mind. He intended, he said, to
devote the rest of his life to learning the remaining twenty-two letters
of the alphabet.

However, Benjamin and Clover could only be with Boxer after working hours,
and it was in the middle of the day when the van came to take him away.
The animals were all at work weeding turnips under the supervision of a
pig, when they were astonished to see Benjamin come galloping from the
direction of the farm buildings, braying at the top of his voice. It was
the first time that they had ever seen Benjamin excited--indeed, it was
the first time that anyone had ever seen him gallop. "Quick, quick!" he
shouted. "Come at once! They're taking Boxer away!" Without waiting for
orders from the pig, the animals broke off work and raced back to the farm
buildings. Sure enough, there in the yard was a large closed van, drawn by
two horses, with lettering on its side and a sly-looking man in a
low-crowned bowler hat sitting on the driver's seat. And Boxer's stall was
empty.

The animals crowded round the van. "Good-bye, Boxer!" they chorused,
"good-bye!"

"Fools! Fools!" shouted Benjamin, prancing round them and stamping the
earth with his small hoofs. "Fools! Do you not see what is written on the
side of that van?"

That gave the animals pause, and there was a hush. Muriel began to spell
out the words. But Benjamin pushed her aside and in the midst of a deadly
silence he read:

"'Alfred Simmonds, Horse Slaughterer and Glue Boiler, Willingdon. Dealer
in Hides and Bone-Meal. Kennels Supplied.' Do you not understand what that
means? They are taking Boxer to the knacker's!"

A cry of horror burst from all the animals. At this moment the man on the
box whipped up his horses and the van moved out of the yard at a smart
trot. All the animals followed, crying out at the tops of their voices.
Clover forced her way to the front. The van began to gather speed. Clover
tried to stir her stout limbs to a gallop, and achieved a canter. "Boxer!"
she cried. "Boxer! Boxer! Boxer!" And just at this moment, as though he
had heard the uproar outside, Boxer's face, with the white stripe down his
nose, appeared at the small window at the back of the van.

"Boxer!" cried Clover in a terrible voice. "Boxer! Get out! Get out
quickly! They're taking you to your death!"

All the animals took up the cry of "Get out, Boxer, get out!" But the van
was already gathering speed and drawing away from them. It was uncertain
whether Boxer had understood what Clover had said. But a moment later his
face disappeared from the window and there was the sound of a tremendous
drumming of hoofs inside the van. He was trying to kick his way out. The
time had been when a few kicks from Boxer's hoofs would have smashed the
van to matchwood. But alas! his strength had left him; and in a few
moments the sound of drumming hoofs grew fainter and died away. In
desperation the animals began appealing to the two horses which drew the
van to stop. "Comrades, comrades!" they shouted. "Don't take your own
brother to his death!" But the stupid brutes, too ignorant to realise
what was happening, merely set back their ears and quickened their pace.
Boxer's face did not reappear at the window. Too late, someone thought of
racing ahead and shutting the five-barred gate; but in another moment the
van was through it and rapidly disappearing down the road. Boxer was never
seen again.

Three days later it was announced that he had died in the hospital at
Willingdon, in spite of receiving every attention a horse could have.
Squealer came to announce the news to the others. He had, he said, been
present during Boxer's last hours.

"It was the most affecting sight I have ever seen!" said Squealer, lifting
his trotter and wiping away a tear. "I was at his bedside at the very
last. And at the end, almost too weak to speak, he whispered in my ear
that his sole sorrow was to have passed on before the windmill was
finished. 'Forward, comrades!' he whispered. 'Forward in the name of the
Rebellion. Long live Animal Farm! Long live Comrade Napoleon! Napoleon is
always right.' Those were his very last words, comrades."

Here Squealer's demeanour suddenly changed. He fell silent for a moment,
and his little eyes darted suspicious glances from side to side before he
proceeded.

It had come to his knowledge, he said, that a foolish and wicked rumour
had been circulated at the time of Boxer's removal. Some of the animals
had noticed that the van which took Boxer away was marked "Horse
Slaughterer," and had actually jumped to the conclusion that Boxer was
being sent to the knacker's. It was almost unbelievable, said Squealer,
that any animal could be so stupid. Surely, he cried indignantly, whisking
his tail and skipping from side to side, surely they knew their beloved
Leader, Comrade Napoleon, better than that? But the explanation was really
very simple. The van had previously been the property of the knacker, and
had been bought by the veterinary surgeon, who had not yet painted the old
name out. That was how the mistake had arisen.

The animals were enormously relieved to hear this. And when Squealer went
on to give further graphic details of Boxer's death-bed, the admirable
care he had received, and the expensive medicines for which Napoleon had
paid without a thought as to the cost, their last doubts disappeared and
the sorrow that they felt for their comrade's death was tempered by the
thought that at least he had died happy.

Napoleon himself appeared at the meeting on the following Sunday morning
and pronounced a short oration in Boxer's honour. It had not been
possible, he said, to bring back their lamented comrade's remains for
interment on the farm, but he had ordered a large wreath to be made from
the laurels in the farmhouse garden and sent down to be placed on Boxer's
grave. And in a few days' time the pigs intended to hold a memorial
banquet in Boxer's honour. Napoleon ended his speech with a reminder of
Boxer's two favourite maxims, "I will work harder" and "Comrade Napoleon
is always right"--maxims, he said, which every animal would do well to
adopt as his own.

On the day appointed for the banquet, a grocer's van drove up from
Willingdon and delivered a large wooden crate at the farmhouse. That night
there was the sound of uproarious singing, which was followed by what
sounded like a violent quarrel and ended at about eleven o'clock with a
tremendous crash of glass. No one stirred in the farmhouse before noon on
the following day, and the word went round that from somewhere or other
the pigs had acquired the money to buy themselves another case of whisky.




Chapter X



Years passed. The seasons came and went, the short animal lives fled by.
A time came when there was no one who remembered the old days before the
Rebellion, except Clover, Benjamin, Moses the raven, and a number of the
pigs.

Muriel was dead; Bluebell, Jessie, and Pincher were dead. Jones too was
dead--he had died in an inebriates' home in another part of the country.
Snowball was forgotten. Boxer was forgotten, except by the few who had
known him. Clover was an old stout mare now, stiff in the joints and with
a tendency to rheumy eyes. She was two years past the retiring age, but in
fact no animal had ever actually retired. The talk of setting aside a
corner of the pasture for superannuated animals had long since been
dropped. Napoleon was now a mature boar of twenty-four stone. Squealer was
so fat that he could with difficulty see out of his eyes. Only old
Benjamin was much the same as ever, except for being a little greyer about
the muzzle, and, since Boxer's death, more morose and taciturn than ever.

There were many more creatures on the farm now, though the increase was
not so great as had been expected in earlier years. Many animals had been
born to whom the Rebellion was only a dim tradition, passed on by word of
mouth, and others had been bought who had never heard mention of such a
thing before their arrival. The farm possessed three horses now besides
Clover. They were fine upstanding beasts, willing workers and good
comrades, but very stupid. None of them proved able to learn the alphabet
beyond the letter B. They accepted everything that they were told about
the Rebellion and the principles of Animalism, especially from Clover, for
whom they had an almost filial respect; but it was doubtful whether they
understood very much of it.

The farm was more prosperous now, and better organised: it had even been
enlarged by two fields which had been bought from Mr. Pilkington. The
windmill had been successfully completed at last, and the farm possessed a
threshing machine and a hay elevator of its own, and various new buildings
had been added to it. Whymper had bought himself a dogcart. The windmill,
however, had not after all been used for generating electrical power. It
was used for milling corn, and brought in a handsome money profit. The
animals were hard at work building yet another windmill; when that one was
finished, so it was said, the dynamos would be installed. But the luxuries
of which Snowball had once taught the animals to dream, the stalls with
electric light and hot and cold water, and the three-day week, were no
longer talked about. Napoleon had denounced such ideas as contrary to the
spirit of Animalism. The truest happiness, he said, lay in working hard
and living frugally.

Somehow it seemed as though the farm had grown richer without making the
animals themselves any richer-except, of course, for the pigs and the
dogs. Perhaps this was partly because there were so many pigs and so many
dogs. It was not that these creatures did not work, after their fashion.
There was, as Squealer was never tired of explaining, endless work in the
supervision and organisation of the farm. Much of this work was of a kind
that the other animals were too ignorant to understand. For example,
Squealer told them that the pigs had to expend enormous labours every day
upon mysterious things called "files," "reports," "minutes," and
"memoranda". These were large sheets of paper which had to be closely
covered with writing, and as soon as they were so covered, they were burnt
in the furnace. This was of the highest importance for the welfare of the
farm, Squealer said. But still, neither pigs nor dogs produced any food by
their own labour; and there were very many of them, and their appetites
were always good.

As for the others, their life, so far as they knew, was as it had always
been. They were generally hungry, they slept on straw, they drank from the
pool, they laboured in the fields; in winter they were troubled by the
cold, and in summer by the flies. Sometimes the older ones among them
racked their dim memories and tried to determine whether in the early
days of the Rebellion, when Jones's expulsion was still recent, things had
been better or worse than now. They could not remember. There was nothing
with which they could compare their present lives: they had nothing to go
upon except Squealer's lists of figures, which invariably demonstrated
that everything was getting better and better. The animals found the
problem insoluble; in any case, they had little time for speculating on
such things now. Only old Benjamin professed to remember every detail of
his long life and to know that things never had been, nor ever could be
much better or much worse--hunger, hardship, and disappointment being, so
he said, the unalterable law of life.

And yet the animals never gave up hope. More, they never lost, even for an
instant, their sense of honour and privilege in being members of Animal
Farm. They were still the only farm in the whole county--in all
England!--owned and operated by animals. Not one of them, not even the
youngest, not even the newcomers who had been brought from farms ten or
twenty miles away, ever ceased to marvel at that. And when they heard the
gun booming and saw the green flag fluttering at the masthead, their
hearts swelled with imperishable pride, and the talk turned always towards
the old heroic days, the expulsion of Jones, the writing of the Seven
Commandments, the great battles in which the human invaders had been
defeated. None of the old dreams had been abandoned. The Republic of the
Animals which Major had foretold, when the green fields of England should
be untrodden by human feet, was still believed in. Some day it was coming:
it might not be soon, it might not be with in the lifetime of any animal
now living, but still it was coming. Even the tune of 'Beasts of England'
was perhaps hummed secretly here and there: at any rate, it was a fact
that every animal on the farm knew it, though no one would have dared to
sing it aloud. It might be that their lives were hard and that not all of
their hopes had been fulfilled; but they were conscious that they were not
as other animals. If they went hungry, it was not from feeding tyrannical
human beings; if they worked hard, at least they worked for themselves.
No creature among them went upon two legs. No creature called any other
creature "Master." All animals were equal.

One day in early summer Squealer ordered the sheep to follow him, and led
them out to a piece of waste ground at the other end of the farm, which
had become overgrown with birch saplings. The sheep spent the whole day
there browsing at the leaves under Squealer's supervision. In the evening
he returned to the farmhouse himself, but, as it was warm weather, told
the sheep to stay where they were. It ended by their remaining there for a
whole week, during which time the other animals saw nothing of them.
Squealer was with them for the greater part of every day. He was, he said,
teaching them to sing a new song, for which privacy was needed.

It was just after the sheep had returned, on a pleasant evening when the
animals had finished work and were making their way back to the farm
buildings, that the terrified neighing of a horse sounded from the yard.
Startled, the animals stopped in their tracks. It was Clover's voice. She
neighed again, and all the animals broke into a gallop and rushed into the
yard. Then they saw what Clover had seen.

It was a pig walking on his hind legs.

Yes, it was Squealer. A little awkwardly, as though not quite used to
supporting his considerable bulk in that position, but with perfect
balance, he was strolling across the yard. And a moment later, out from
the door of the farmhouse came a long file of pigs, all walking on their
hind legs. Some did it better than others, one or two were even a trifle
unsteady and looked as though they would have liked the support of a
stick, but every one of them made his way right round the yard
successfully. And finally there was a tremendous baying of dogs and a
shrill crowing from the black cockerel, and out came Napoleon himself,
majestically upright, casting haughty glances from side to side, and with
his dogs gambolling round him.

He carried a whip in his trotter.

There was a deadly silence. Amazed, terrified, huddling together, the
animals watched the long line of pigs march slowly round the yard. It was
as though the world had turned upside-down. Then there came a moment when
the first shock had worn off and when, in spite of everything-in spite of
their terror of the dogs, and of the habit, developed through long years,
of never complaining, never criticising, no matter what happened--they
might have uttered some word of protest. But just at that moment, as
though at a signal, all the sheep burst out into a tremendous bleating of--

"Four legs good, two legs BETTER! Four legs good, two legs BETTER! Four
legs good, two legs BETTER!"

It went on for five minutes without stopping. And by the time the sheep
had quieted down, the chance to utter any protest had passed, for the pigs
had marched back into the farmhouse.

Benjamin felt a nose nuzzling at his shoulder. He looked round. It was
Clover. Her old eyes looked dimmer than ever. Without saying anything, she
tugged gently at his mane and led him round to the end of the big barn,
where the Seven Commandments were written. For a minute or two they stood
gazing at the tatted wall with its white lettering.

"My sight is failing," she said finally. "Even when I was young I could
not have read what was written there. But it appears to me that that wall
looks different. Are the Seven Commandments the same as they used to be,
Benjamin?"

For once Benjamin consented to break his rule, and he read out to her what
was written on the wall. There was nothing there now except a single
Commandment. It ran:

ALL ANIMALS ARE EQUAL
BUT SOME ANIMALS ARE MORE EQUAL THAN OTHERS

After that it did not seem strange when next day the pigs who were
supervising the work of the farm all carried whips in their trotters. It
did not seem strange to learn that the pigs had bought themselves a
wireless set, were arranging to install a telephone, and had taken out
subscriptions to 'John Bull', 'Tit-Bits', and the 'Daily Mirror'. It did
not seem strange when Napoleon was seen strolling in the farmhouse garden
with a pipe in his mouth--no, not even when the pigs took Mr. Jones's
clothes out of the wardrobes and put them on, Napoleon himself appearing
in a black coat, ratcatcher breeches, and leather leggings, while his
favourite sow appeared in the watered silk dress which Mrs. Jones had been
used to wearing on Sundays.

A week later, in the afternoon, a number of dog-carts drove up to the farm.
A deputation of neighbouring farmers had been invited to make a tour of
inspection. They were shown all over the farm, and expressed great
admiration for everything they saw, especially the windmill. The animals
were weeding the turnip field. They worked diligently hardly raising their
faces from the ground, and not knowing whether to be more frightened of
the pigs or of the human visitors.

That evening loud laughter and bursts of singing came from the farmhouse.
And suddenly, at the sound of the mingled voices, the animals were
stricken with curiosity. What could be happening in there, now that for
the first time animals and human beings were meeting on terms of equality?
With one accord they began to creep as quietly as possible into the
farmhouse garden.

At the gate they paused, half frightened to go on but Clover led the way
in. They tiptoed up to the house, and such animals as were tall enough
peered in at the dining-room window. There, round the long table, sat half
a dozen farmers and half a dozen of the more eminent pigs, Napoleon
himself occupying the seat of honour at the head of the table. The pigs
appeared completely at ease in their chairs. The company had been enjoying
a game of cards but had broken off for the moment, evidently in order to
drink a toast. A large jug was circulating, and the mugs were being
refilled with beer. No one noticed the wondering faces of the animals that
gazed in at the window.

Mr. Pilkington, of Foxwood, had stood up, his mug in his hand. In a
moment, he said, he would ask the present company to drink a toast. But
before doing so, there were a few words that he felt it incumbent upon him
to say.

It was a source of great satisfaction to him, he said--and, he was sure,
to all others present--to feel that a long period of mistrust and
misunderstanding had now come to an end. There had been a time--not that
he, or any of the present company, had shared such sentiments--but there
had been a time when the respected proprietors of Animal Farm had been
regarded, he would not say with hostility, but perhaps with a certain
measure of misgiving, by their human neighbours. Unfortunate incidents had
occurred, mistaken ideas had been current. It had been felt that the
existence of a farm owned and operated by pigs was somehow abnormal and
was liable to have an unsettling effect in the neighbourhood. Too many
farmers had assumed, without due enquiry, that on such a farm a spirit of
licence and indiscipline would prevail. They had been nervous about the
effects upon their own animals, or even upon their human employees. But
all such doubts were now dispelled. Today he and his friends had visited
Animal Farm and inspected every inch of it with their own eyes, and what
did they find? Not only the most up-to-date methods, but a discipline and
an orderliness which should be an example to all farmers everywhere. He
believed that he was right in saying that the lower animals on Animal Farm
did more work and received less food than any animals in the county.
Indeed, he and his fellow-visitors today had observed many features which
they intended to introduce on their own farms immediately.

He would end his remarks, he said, by emphasising once again the friendly
feelings that subsisted, and ought to subsist, between Animal Farm and its
neighbours. Between pigs and human beings there was not, and there need
not be, any clash of interests whatever. Their struggles and their
difficulties were one. Was not the labour problem the same everywhere?
Here it became apparent that Mr. Pilkington was about to spring some
carefully prepared witticism on the company, but for a moment he was too
overcome by amusement to be able to utter it. After much choking, during
which his various chins turned purple, he managed to get it out: "If you
have your lower animals to contend with," he said, "we have our lower
classes!" This BON MOT set the table in a roar; and Mr. Pilkington once
again congratulated the pigs on the low rations, the long working hours,
and the general absence of pampering which he had observed on Animal Farm.

And now, he said finally, he would ask the company to rise to their feet
and make certain that their glasses were full. "Gentlemen," concluded
Mr. Pilkington, "gentlemen, I give you a toast: To the prosperity of
Animal Farm!"

There was enthusiastic cheering and stamping of feet. Napoleon was so
gratified that he left his place and came round the table to clink his
mug against Mr. Pilkington's before emptying it. When the cheering had
died down, Napoleon, who had remained on his feet, intimated that he too
had a few words to say.

Like all of Napoleon's speeches, it was short and to the point. He too,
he said, was happy that the period of misunderstanding was at an end. For
a long time there had been rumours--circulated, he had reason to think,
by some malignant enemy--that there was something subversive and even
revolutionary in the outlook of himself and his colleagues. They had been
credited with attempting to stir up rebellion among the animals on
neighbouring farms. Nothing could be further from the truth! Their sole
wish, now and in the past, was to live at peace and in normal business
relations with their neighbours. This farm which he had the honour to
control, he added, was a co-operative enterprise. The title-deeds, which
were in his own possession, were owned by the pigs jointly.

He did not believe, he said, that any of the old suspicions still
lingered, but certain changes had been made recently in the routine of the
farm which should have the effect of promoting confidence still further.
Hitherto the animals on the farm had had a rather foolish custom of
addressing one another as "Comrade." This was to be suppressed. There had
also been a very strange custom, whose origin was unknown, of marching
every Sunday morning past a boar's skull which was nailed to a post in the
garden. This, too, would be suppressed, and the skull had already been
buried. His visitors might have observed, too, the green flag which flew
from the masthead. If so, they would perhaps have noted that the white
hoof and horn with which it had previously been marked had now been
removed. It would be a plain green flag from now onwards.

He had only one criticism, he said, to make of Mr. Pilkington's excellent
and neighbourly speech. Mr. Pilkington had referred throughout to
"Animal Farm." He could not of course know--for he, Napoleon, was only
now for the first time announcing it--that the name "Animal Farm"
had been abolished. Henceforward the farm was to be known as "The Manor
Farm"--which, he believed, was its correct and original name.

"Gentlemen," concluded Napoleon, "I will give you the same toast as
before, but in a different form. Fill your glasses to the brim. Gentlemen,
here is my toast: To the prosperity of The Manor Farm!"

There was the same hearty cheering as before, and the mugs were emptied to
the dregs. But as the animals outside gazed at the scene, it seemed to
them that some strange thing was happening. What was it that had altered
in the faces of the pigs? Clover's old dim eyes flitted from one face to
another. Some of them had five chins, some had four, some had three. But
what was it that seemed to be melting and changing? Then, the applause
having come to an end, the company took up their cards and continued the
game that had been interrupted, and the animals crept silently away.

But they had not gone twenty yards when they stopped short. An uproar of
voices was coming from the farmhouse. They rushed back and looked through
the window again. Yes, a violent quarrel was in progress. There were
shoutings, bangings on the table, sharp suspicious glances, furious
denials. The source of the trouble appeared to be that Napoleon and
Mr. Pilkington had each played an ace of spades simultaneously.

Twelve voices were shouting in anger, and they were all alike. No question,
now, what had happened to the faces of the pigs. The creatures outside
looked from pig to man, and from man to pig, and from pig to man again;
but already it was impossible to say which was which.


November 1943-February 1944

THE END

Title: Politics and the English Language
Author: George Orwell
* A Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook *
eBook No.:  0200151.txt
Language:   English
Date first posted: February 2002
Date most recently updated: Mar 2018

This eBook was produced by: Colin Choat

Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions
which are in the public domain in Australia, unless a copyright notice
is included. We do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular
paper edition.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this
file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at
gutenberg.net.au/licence.html

To contact Project Gutenberg of Australia go to gutenberg.net.au

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title:      Politics and the English Language
Author:     George Orwell

Most people who bother with the matter at all would admit that the
English language is in a bad way, but it is generally assumed that we
cannot by conscious action do anything about it. Our civilization is
decadent, and our language--so the argument runs--must inevitably share
in the general collapse. It follows that any struggle against the abuse
of language is a sentimental archaism, like preferring candles to
electric light or hansom cabs to aeroplanes. Underneath this lies the
half-conscious belief that language is a natural growth and not an
instrument which we shape for our own purposes.

Now, it is clear that the decline of a language must ultimately have
political and economic causes: it is not due simply to the bad influence
of this or that individual writer. But an effect can become a cause,
reinforcing the original cause and producing the same effect in an
intensified form, and so on indefinitely. A man may take to drink because
he feels himself to be a failure, and then fail all the more completely
because he drinks. It is rather the same thing that is happening to the
English language. It becomes ugly and inaccurate because our thoughts are
foolish, but the slovenliness of our language makes it easier for us to
have foolish thoughts. The point is that the process is reversible.
Modern English, especially written English, is full of bad habits which
spread by imitation and which can be avoided if one is willing to take
the necessary trouble. If one gets rid of these habits one can think more
clearly, and to think clearly is a necessary first step towards political
regeneration: so that the fight against bad English is not frivolous and
is not the exclusive concern of professional writers. I will come back to
this presently, and I hope that by that time the meaning of what I have
said here will have become clearer. Meanwhile, here are five specimens of
the English language as it is now habitually written.

These five passages have not been picked out because they are especially
bad--I could have quoted far worse if I had chosen--but because they
illustrate various of the mental vices from which we now suffer. They are
a little below the average, but are fairly representative samples. I
number them so that I can refer back to them when necessary:

(1) I am not, indeed, sure whether it is not true to say that the Milton
who once seemed not unlike a seventeenth-century Shelley had not become,
out of an experience ever more bitter in each year, more alien (sic) to
the founder of that Jesuit sect which nothing could induce him to
tolerate.

PROFESSOR HAROLD LASKI (Essay in Freedom of Expression)

(2) Above all, we cannot play ducks and drakes with a native battery of
idioms which prescribes such egregious collocations of vocables as the
Basic put up with or tolerate or put at a loss or bewilder.

PROFESSOR LANCELOT HOGBEN (Interglossa)

(3) On the one side we have the free personality; by definition it is not
neurotic, for it has neither conflict nor dream. Its desires, such as
they are, are transparent, for they are just what institutional approval
keeps in the forefront of consciousness; another institutional pattern
would alter their number and intensity; there is little in them that is
natural, irreducible, or culturally dangerous. But on the other side, the
social bond itself is nothing but the mutual reflection of these
self-secure integrities. Recall the definition of love. Is not this the
very picture of a small academic? Where is there a place in this hall of
mirrors for either personality or fraternity?

ESSAY ON PSYCHOLOGY in Politics (New York)

(4) All the "best people" from the gentlemen's clubs, and all the frantic
fascist captains, united in common hatred of Socialism and bestial horror
of the rising tide of the mass revolutionary movement, have turned to
acts of provocation, to foul incendiarism, to medieval legends of
poisoned wells, to legalize their own destruction of proletarian
organizations, and rouse the agitated petty-bourgeoisie to chauvinistic
fervor on behalf of the fight against the revolutionary way out of the
crisis.

COMMUNIST PAMPHLET

(5) If a new spirit is to be infused into this old country, there is one
thorny and contentious reform which must be tackled, and that is the
humanization and galvanization of the B.B.C. Timidity here will bespeak
canker and atrophy of the soul. The heart of Britain may be sound and of
strong beat, for instance, but the British lion's roar at present is like
that of Bottom in Shakespeare's Midsummer Night's Dream--as gentle as any
sucking dove. A virile new Britain cannot continue indefinitely to be
traduced in the eyes, or rather ears, of the world by the effete languors
of Langham Place, brazenly masquerading as "standard English." When the
Voice of Britain is heard at nine o'clock, better far and infinitely less
ludicrous to hear aitches honestly dropped than the present priggish,
inflated, inhibited, school-ma'am-ish arch braying of blameless bashful
mewing maidens.

LETTER IN Tribune

Each of these passages has faults of its own, but quite apart from
avoidable ugliness, two qualities are common to all of them. The first is
staleness of imagery; the other is lack of precision. The writer either
has a meaning and cannot express it, or he inadvertently says something
else, or he is almost indifferent as to whether his words mean anything
or not. This mixture of vagueness and sheer incompetence is the most
marked characteristic of modern English prose, and especially of any kind
of political writing. As soon as certain topics are raised, the concrete
melts into the abstract and no one seems able to think of turns of speech
that are not hackneyed: prose consists less and less of words chosen for
the sake of their meaning, and more and more of phrases tacked together
like the sections of a prefabricated hen-house. I list below, with notes
and examples, various of the tricks by means of which the work of
prose-construction is habitually dodged:

Dying metaphors. A newly-invented metaphor assists thought by evoking a
visual image, while on the other hand a metaphor which is technically
"dead" (e.g., iron resolution) has in effect reverted to being an
ordinary word and can generally be used without loss of vividness. But in
between these two classes there is a huge dump of worn-out metaphors
which have lost all evocative power and are merely used because they save
people the trouble of inventing phrases for themselves. Examples are:
Ring the changes on, take up the cudgels for, toe the line, ride
roughshod over, stand shoulder to shoulder with, play into the hands of,
an axe to grind, grist to the mill, fishing in troubled waters, on the
order of the day, Achilles' heel, swan song, hotbed. Many of these are
used without knowledge of their meaning (what is a "rift," for
instance?), and incompatible metaphors are frequently mixed, a sure sign
that the writer is not interested in what he is saying. Some metaphors
now current have been twisted out of their original meaning without those
who use them even being aware of the fact. For example, toe the line is
sometimes written tow the line. Another example is the hammer and the
anvil, now always used with the implication that the anvil gets the worst
of it. In real life it is always the anvil that breaks the hammer, never
the other way about: a writer who stopped to think what he was saying
would be aware of this, and would avoid perverting the original phrase.

Operators, or verbal false limbs. These save the trouble of picking out
appropriate verbs and nouns, and at the same time pad each sentence with
extra syllables which give it an appearance of symmetry. Characteristic
phrases are: render inoperative, militate against, prove unacceptable,
make contact with, be subjected to, give rise to, give grounds for,
having the effect of, play a leading part (role) in, make itself felt,
take effect, exhibit a tendency to, serve the purpose of, etc., etc. The
keynote is the elimination of simple verbs. Instead of being a single
word, such as break, stop, spoil, mend, kill, a verb becomes a phrase,
made up of a noun or adjective tacked on to some general-purposes verb as
prove, serve, form, play, render. In addition, the passive voice is
wherever possible used in preference to the active, and noun
constructions are used instead of gerunds (by examination of instead of
by examining). The range of verbs is further cut down by means of the
'-ize' and 'de-' formations, and banal statements are given an appearance of
profundity by means of the not 'un-' formation. Simple conjunctions and
prepositions are replaced by such phrases as with respect to, having
regard to, the fact that, by dint of, in view of, in the interests of, on
the hypothesis that; and the ends of sentences are saved from anti-climax
by such resounding commonplaces as greatly to be desired, cannot be left
out of account, a development to be expected in the near future,
deserving of serious consideration, brought to a satisfactory conclusion,
and so on and so forth.

Pretentious diction. Words like phenomenon, element, individual (as
noun), objective, categorical, effective, virtual, basis, primary,
promote, constitute, exhibit, exploit, utilize, eliminate, liquidate, are
used to dress up simple statements and give an air of scientific
impartiality to biased judgments. Adjectives like epoch-making, epic,
historic, unforgettable, triumphant, age-old, inevitable, inexorable,
veritable, are used to dignify the sordid processes of international
politics, while writing that aims at glorifying war usually takes on an
archaic color, its characteristic words being: realm, throne, chariot,
mailed fist, trident, sword, shield, buckler, banner, jackboot, clarion.
Foreign words and expressions such as cul de sac, ancien regime, deus ex
machina, mutatis mutandis, status quo, gleichschaltung, weltanschauung,
are used to give an air of culture and elegance. Except for the useful
abbreviations i.e., e.g., and etc., there is no real need for any of the
hundreds of foreign phrases now current in English. Bad writers, and
especially scientific, political and sociological writers, are nearly
always haunted by the notion that Latin or Greek words are grander than
Saxon ones, and unnecessary words like expedite, ameliorate, predict,
extraneous, deracinated, clandestine, subaqueous and hundreds of others
constantly gain ground from their Anglo-Saxon opposite numbers. The
jargon peculiar to Marxist writing (hyena, hangman, cannibal, petty
bourgeois, these gentry, lackey, flunkey, mad dog, White Guard, etc.)
consists largely of words and phrases translated from Russian, German or
French; but the normal way of coining a new word is to use a Latin or
Greek root with the appropriate affix and, where necessary, the '-ize'
formation. It is often easier to make up words of this kind
(de-regionalize, impermissible, extramarital, non-fragmentary and so
forth) than to think up the English words that will cover one's meaning.
The result, in general, is an increase in slovenliness and vagueness.

1. An interesting illustration of this is the way in which the English
flower names which were in use till very recently are being ousted by
Greek ones, snap-dragon becoming antirrhinum, forget-me-not becoming
myosotis, etc. It is hard to see any practical reason for this change of
fashion: it is probably due to an instinctive turning-away from the more
homely word and a vague feeling that the Greek word is scientific.

Meaningless words. In certain kinds of writing, particularly in art
criticism and literary criticism, it is normal to come across long
passages which are almost completely lacking in meaning.2 Words like
romantic, plastic, values, human, dead, sentimental, natural, vitality,
as used in art criticism, are strictly meaningless, in the sense that
they not only do not point to any discoverable object, but are hardly
even expected to do so by the reader. When one critic writes, "The
outstanding feature of Mr. X's work is its living quality," while another
writes, "The immediately striking thing about Mr. X's work is its
peculiar deadness," the reader accepts this as a simple difference of
opinion If words like black and white were involved, instead of the
jargon words dead and living, he would see at once that language was
being used in an improper way. Many political words are similarly abused.
The word Fascism has now no meaning except in so far as it signifies
"something not desirable." The words democracy, socialism, freedom,
patriotic, realistic, justice, have each of them several different
meanings which cannot be reconciled with one another. In the case of a
word like democracy, not only is there no agreed definition, but the
attempt to make one is resisted from all sides. It is almost universally
felt that when we call a country democratic we are praising it:
consequently the defenders of every kind of regime claim that it is a
democracy, and fear that they might have to stop using the word if it
were tied down to any one meaning. Words of this kind are often used in a
consciously dishonest way. That is, the person who uses them has his own
private definition, but allows his hearer to think he means something
quite different. Statements like Marshal Petain was a true patriot, The
Soviet Press is the freest in the world, The Catholic Church is opposed
to persecution, are almost always made with intent to deceive. Other
words used in variable meanings, in most cases more or less dishonestly,
are: class, totalitarian, science, progressive, reactionary bourgeois,
equality.

2. Example: "Comfort's catholicity of perception and image, strangely
Whitmanesque in range, almost the exact opposite in aesthetic compulsion,
continues to evoke that trembling atmospheric accumulative hinting at a
cruel, an inexorably serene timelessness . . . Wrey Gardiner scores by
aiming at simple bullseyes with precision. Only they are not so simple,
and through this contented sadness runs more than the surface bittersweet
of resignation." (Poetry Quarterly.)

Now that I have made this catalogue of swindles and perversions, let me
give another example of the kind of writing that they lead to. This time
it must of its nature be an imaginary one. I am going to translate a
passage of good English into modern English of the worst sort. Here is a
well-known verse from Ecclesiastes:

I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor
the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches
to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and
chance happeneth

Here it is in modern English:

Objective consideration of contemporary phenomena compels the conclusion
that success or failure in competitive activities exhibits no tendency to
be commensurate with innate capacity, but that a considerable element of
the unpredictable must invariably be taken into account.

This is a parody, but not a very gross one. Exhibit (3), above, for
instance, contains several patches of the same kind of English. It will
be seen that I have not made a full translation. The beginning and ending
of the sentence follow the original meaning fairly closely, but in the
middle the concrete illustrations--race, battle, bread--dissolve into the
vague phrase "success or failure in competitive activities." This had to
be so, because no modern writer of the kind I am discussing--no one
capable of using phrases like "objective consideration of contemporary
phenomena"--would ever tabulate his thoughts in that precise and detailed
way. The whole tendency of modern prose is away from concreteness. Now
analyze these two sentences a little more closely. The first contains 49
words but only 60 syllables, and all its words are those of everyday
life. The second contains 38 words of 90 syllables: 18 of its words are
from Latin roots, and one from Greek. The first sentence contains six
vivid images, and only one phrase ("time and chance") that could be
called vague. The second contains not a single fresh, arresting phrase,
and in spite of its 90 syllables it gives only a shortened version of the
meaning contained in the first. Yet without a doubt it is the second kind
of sentence that is gaining ground in modern English. I do not want to
exaggerate. This kind of writing is not yet universal, and outcrops of
simplicity will occur here and there in the worst-written page. Still, if
you or I were told to write a few lines on the uncertainty of human
fortunes, we should probably come much nearer to my imaginary sentence
than to the one from Ecclesiastes.

As I have tried to show, modern writing at its worst does not consist in
picking out words for the sake of their meaning and inventing images in
order to make the meaning clearer. It consists in gumming together long
strips of words which have already been set in order by someone else, and
making the results presentable by sheer humbug. The attraction of this
way of writing, is that it is easy. It is easier--even quicker, once you
have the habit--to say In my opinion it is a not unjustifiable assumption
that than to say I think. If you use ready-made phrases, you not only
don't have to hunt about for words; you also don't have to bother with
the rhythms of your sentences, since these phrases are generally so
arranged as to be more or less euphonious. When you are composing in a
hurry--when you are dictating to a stenographer, for instance, or making
a public speech--it is natural to fall into a pretentious, Latinized
style. Tags like a consideration which we should do well to bear in mind
or a conclusion to which all of us would readily assent will save many a
sentence from coming down with a bump. By using stale metaphors, similes
and idioms, you save much mental effort at the cost of leaving your
meaning vague, not only for your reader but for yourself. This is the
significance of mixed metaphors. The sole aim of a metaphor is to call up
a visual image. When these images clash--as in The Fascist octopus has
sung its swan song, the jackboot is thrown into the melting pot--it can
be taken as certain that the writer is not seeing a mental image of the
objects he is naming; in other words he is not really thinking. Look
again at the examples I gave at the beginning of this essay. Professor
Laski (1) uses five negatives in 53 words. One of these is superfluous,
making nonsense of the whole passage, and in addition there is the slip
alien for akin, making further nonsense, and several avoidable pieces of
clumsiness which increase the general vagueness. Professor Hogben (2)
plays ducks and drakes with a battery which is able to write
prescriptions, and, while disapproving of the everyday phrase put up
with, is unwilling to look egregious up in the dictionary and see what it
means. (3), if one takes an uncharitable attitude towards it, is simply
meaningless: probably one could work out its intended meaning by reading
the whole of the article in which it occurs. In (4), the writer knows
more or less what he wants to say, but an accumulation of stale phrases
chokes him like tea leaves blocking a sink. In (5), words and meaning
have almost parted company. People who write in this manner usually have
a general emotional meaning--they dislike one thing and want to express
solidarity with another--but they are not interested in the detail of
what they are saying. A scrupulous writer, in every sentence that he
writes, will ask himself at least four questions, thus: What am I trying
to say? What words will express it? What image or idiom will make it
clearer? Is this image fresh enough to have an effect? And he will
probably ask himself two more: Could I put it more shortly? Have I said
anything that is avoidably ugly? But you are not obliged to go to all
this trouble. You can shirk it by simply throwing your mind open and
letting the ready-made phrases come crowding in. They will construct your
sentences for you--even think your thoughts for you, to a certain
extent-and at need they will perform the important service of partially
concealing your meaning even from yourself. It is at this point that the
special connection between politics and the debasement of language
becomes clear.

In our time it is broadly true that political writing is bad writing.
Where it is not true, it will generally be found that the writer is some
kind of rebel, expressing his private opinions and not a "party line."
Orthodoxy, of whatever color, seems to demand a lifeless, imitative
style. The political dialects to be found in pamphlets, leading articles,
manifestoes, White Papers and the speeches of under-secretaries do, of
course, vary from party to party, but they are all alike in that one
almost never finds in them a fresh, vivid, home-made turn of speech. When
one watches some tired hack on the platform mechanically repeating the
familiar phrases--bestial atrocities, iron heel, bloodstained tyranny,
free peoples of the world, stand shoulder to shoulder--one often has a
curious feeling that one is not watching a live human being but some kind
of dummy: a feeling which suddenly becomes stronger at moments when the
light catches the speaker's spectacles and turns them into blank discs
which seem to have no eyes behind them. And this is not altogether
fanciful. A speaker who uses that kind of phraseology has gone some
distance towards turning himself into a machine. The appropriate noises
are coming out of his larynx, but his brain is not involved as it would
be if he were choosing his words for himself. If the speech he is making
is one that he is accustomed to make over and over again, he may be
almost unconscious of what he is saying, as one is when one utters the
responses in church. And this reduced state of consciousness, if not
indispensable, is at any rate favorable to political conformity.

In our time, political speech and writing are largely the defense of the
indefensible. Things like the continuance of British rule in India, the
Russian purges and deportations, the dropping of the atom bombs on Japan,
can indeed be defended, but only by arguments which are too brutal for
most people to face, and which do not square with the professed aims of
political parties. Thus political language has to consist largely of
euphemism, question-begging and sheer cloudy vagueness. Defenseless
villages are bombarded from the air, the inhabitants driven out into the
countryside, the cattle machine-gunned, the huts set on fire with
incendiary bullets: this is called pacification. Millions of peasants are
robbed of their farms and sent trudging along the roads with no more than
they can carry: this is called transfer of population or rectification of
frontiers. People are imprisoned for years without trial, or shot in the
back of the neck or sent to die of scurvy in Arctic lumber camps: this is
called elimination of unreliable elements. Such phraseology is needed if
one wants to name things without calling up mental pictures of them.
Consider for instance some comfortable English professor defending
Russian totalitarianism. He cannot say outright, "I believe in killing
off your opponents when you can get good results by doing so." Probably,
therefore, he will say something like this:

While freely conceding that the Soviet regime exhibits certain features
which the humanitarian may be inclined to deplore, we must, I think,
agree that a certain curtailment of the right to political opposition is
an unavoidable concomitant of transitional periods, and that the rigors
which the Russian people have been called upon to undergo have been amply
justified in the sphere of concrete achievement.

The inflated style is itself a kind of euphemism. A mass of Latin words
falls upon the facts like soft snow, blurring the outlines and covering
up all the details. The great enemy of clear language is insincerity.
When there is a gap between one's real and one's declared aims, one
turns, as it were instinctively, to long words and exhausted idioms, like
a cuttlefish squirting out ink. In our age there is no such thing as
"keeping out of politics." All issues are political issues, and politics
itself is a mass of lies, evasions, folly, hatred and schizophrenia. When
the general atmosphere is bad, language must suffer. I should expect to
find--this is a guess which I have not sufficient knowledge to
verify--that the German, Russian and Italian languages have all
deteriorated in the last ten or fifteen years as a result of
dictatorship.

But if thought corrupts language, language can also corrupt thought. A
bad usage can spread by tradition and imitation, even among people who
should and do know better. The debased language that I have been
discussing is in some ways very convenient. Phrases like a not
unjustifiable assumption, leaves much to be desired, would serve no good
purpose, a consideration which we should do well to bear in mind, are a
continuous temptation, a packet of aspirins always at one's elbow. Look
back through this essay, and for certain you will find that I have again
and again committed the very faults I am protesting against. By this
morning's post I have received a pamphlet dealing with conditions in
Germany. The author tells me that he "felt impelled" to write it. I open
it at random, and here is almost the first sentence that I see: "[The
Allies] have an opportunity not only of achieving a radical
transformation of Germany's social and political structure in such a way
as to avoid a nationalistic reaction in Germany itself, but at the same
time of laying the foundations of a cooperative and unified Europe." You
see, he "feels impelled" to write--feels, presumably, that he has
something new to say--and yet his words, like cavalry horses answering
the bugle, group themselves automatically into the familiar dreary
pattern. This invasion of one's mind by ready-made phrases (lay the
foundations, achieve a radical transformation) can only be prevented if
one is constantly on guard against them, and every such phrase
anesthetizes a portion of one's brain.

I said earlier that the decadence of our language is probably curable.
Those who deny this would argue, if they produced an argument at all,
that language merely reflects existing social conditions, and that we
cannot influence its development by any direct tinkering with words and
constructions. So far as the general tone or spirit of a language goes,
this may be true, but it is not true in detail. Silly words and
expressions have often disappeared, not through any evolutionary process
but owing to the conscious action of a minority. Two recent examples were
explore every avenue and leave no stone unturned, which were killed by
the jeers of a few journalists. There is a long list of fly-blown
metaphors which could similarly be got rid of if enough people would
interest themselves in the job; and it should also be possible to laugh
the not 'un-' formation out of existence,3 to reduce the amount of Latin
and Greek in the average sentence, to drive out foreign phrases and
strayed scientific words, and, in general, to make pretentiousness
unfashionable. But all these are minor points. The defense of the English
language implies more than this, and perhaps it is best to start by
saying what it does not imply.

3. One can cure oneself of the not 'un-' formation by memorizing this
sentence: A not unblack dog was chasing a not unsmall rabbit across a not
ungreen field.

To begin with, it has nothing to do with archaism, with the salvaging of
obsolete words and turns of speech, or with the setting-up of a
"standard-English" which must never be departed from. On the contrary, it
is especially concerned with the scrapping of every word or idiom which
has outworn its usefulness. It has nothing to do with correct grammar and
syntax, which are of no importance so long as one makes one's meaning
clear, or with the avoidance of Americanisms, or with having what is
called a "good prose style." On the other hand it is not concerned with
fake simplicity and the attempt to make written English colloquial. Nor
does it even imply in every case preferring the Saxon word to the Latin
one, though it does imply using the fewest and shortest words that will
cover one's meaning. What is above all needed is to let the meaning
choose the word, and not the other way about. In prose, the worst thing
one can do with words is to surrender them. When you think of a concrete
object, you think wordlessly, and then, if you want to describe the thing
you have been visualizing, you probably hunt about till you find the
exact words that seem to fit it. When you think of something abstract you
are more inclined to use words from the start, and unless you make a
conscious effort to prevent it, the existing dialect will come rushing in
and do the job for you, at the expense of blurring or even changing your
meaning. Probably it is better to put off using words as long as possible
and get one's meaning as clear as one can through pictures or sensations.
Afterwards one can choose--not simply accept--the phrases that will best
cover the meaning, and then switch round and decide what impressions
one's words are likely to make on another person. This last effort of the
mind cuts out all stale or mixed images, all prefabricated phrases,
needless repetitions, and humbug and vagueness generally. But one can
often be in doubt about the effect of a word or a phrase, and one needs
rules that one can rely on when instinct fails. I think the following
rules will cover most cases:

(i) Never use a metaphor, simile or other figure of speech which you are
used to seeing in print.

(ii) Never use a long word where a short one will do.

(iii) If it is possible to cut a word out, always cut it out.

(iv) Never use the passive where you can use the active.

(v) Never use a foreign phrase, a scientific word or a jargon word if you
can think of an everyday English equivalent.

(vi) Break any of these rules sooner than say anything barbarous.

These rules sound elementary, and so they are, but they demand a deep
change of attitude in anyone who has grown used to writing in the style
now fashionable. One could keep all of them and still write bad English,
but one could not write the kind of stuff that I quoted in these five
specimens at the beginning of this article.

I have not here been considering the literary use of language, but merely
language as an instrument for expressing and not for concealing or
preventing thought. Stuart Chase and others have come near to claiming
that all abstract words are meaningless, and have used this as a pretext
for advocating a kind of political quietism. Since you don't know what
Fascism is, how can you struggle against Fascism? One need not swallow
such absurdities as this, but one ought to recognize that the present
political chaos is connected with the decay of language, and that one can
probably bring about some improvement by starting at the verbal end. If
you simplify your English, you are freed from the worst follies of
orthodoxy. You cannot speak any of the necessary dialects, and when you
make a stupid remark its stupidity will be obvious, even to yourself.
Political language-and with variations this is true of all political
parties, from Conservatives to Anarchists--is designed to make lies sound
truthful and murder respectable. and to give an appearance of solidity to
pure wind. One cannot change this all in a moment, but one can at least
change one's own habits, and from time to time one can even, if one jeers
loudly enough, send some worn-out and useless phrase--some jackboot,
Achilles' heel, hotbed, melting pot, acid test, veritable inferno or
other lump of verbal refuse--into the dustbin where it belongs.

THE END

Title:      Nineteen eighty-four
Author:     George Orwell (pseudonym of Eric Blair) (1903-1950)


PART ONE

Chapter 1

It was a bright cold day in April, and the clocks were striking thirteen.
Winston Smith, his chin nuzzled into his breast in an effort to escape the
vile wind, slipped quickly through the glass doors of Victory Mansions,
though not quickly enough to prevent a swirl of gritty dust from entering
along with him.

The hallway smelt of boiled cabbage and old rag mats. At one end of it a
coloured poster, too large for indoor display, had been tacked to the wall.
It depicted simply an enormous face, more than a metre wide: the face of a
man of about forty-five, with a heavy black moustache and ruggedly handsome
features. Winston made for the stairs. It was no use trying the lift. Even
at the best of times it was seldom working, and at present the electric
current was cut off during daylight hours. It was part of the economy drive
in preparation for Hate Week. The flat was seven flights up, and Winston,
who was thirty-nine and had a varicose ulcer above his right ankle, went
slowly, resting several times on the way. On each landing, opposite the
lift-shaft, the poster with the enormous face gazed from the wall. It was
one of those pictures which are so contrived that the eyes follow you about
when you move. BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, the caption beneath it ran.

Inside the flat a fruity voice was reading out a list of figures which had
something to do with the production of pig-iron. The voice came from an
oblong metal plaque like a dulled mirror which formed part of the surface
of the right-hand wall. Winston turned a switch and the voice sank
somewhat, though the words were still distinguishable. The instrument
(the telescreen, it was called) could be dimmed, but there was no way of
shutting it off completely. He moved over to the window: a smallish, frail
figure, the meagreness of his body merely emphasized by the blue overalls
which were the uniform of the party. His hair was very fair, his face
naturally sanguine, his skin roughened by coarse soap and blunt razor
blades and the cold of the winter that had just ended.

Outside, even through the shut window-pane, the world looked cold. Down in
the street little eddies of wind were whirling dust and torn paper into
spirals, and though the sun was shining and the sky a harsh blue, there
seemed to be no colour in anything, except the posters that were plastered
everywhere. The black-moustachio'd face gazed down from every commanding
corner. There was one on the house-front immediately opposite. BIG BROTHER
IS WATCHING YOU, the caption said, while the dark eyes looked deep into
Winston's own. Down at street level another poster, torn at one corner,
flapped fitfully in the wind, alternately covering and uncovering the
single word INGSOC. In the far distance a helicopter skimmed down between
the roofs, hovered for an instant like a bluebottle, and darted away again
with a curving flight. It was the police patrol, snooping into people's
windows. The patrols did not matter, however. Only the Thought Police
mattered.

Behind Winston's back the voice from the telescreen was still babbling away
about pig-iron and the overfulfilment of the Ninth Three-Year Plan. The
telescreen received and transmitted simultaneously. Any sound that Winston
made, above the level of a very low whisper, would be picked up by it,
moreover, so long as he remained within the field of vision which the metal
plaque commanded, he could be seen as well as heard. There was of course
no way of knowing whether you were being watched at any given moment. How
often, or on what system, the Thought Police plugged in on any individual
wire was guesswork. It was even conceivable that they watched everybody all
the time. But at any rate they could plug in your wire whenever they wanted
to. You had to live--did live, from habit that became instinct--in the
assumption that every sound you made was overheard, and, except in
darkness, every movement scrutinized.

Winston kept his back turned to the telescreen. It was safer; though, as he
well knew, even a back can be revealing. A kilometre away the Ministry of
Truth, his place of work, towered vast and white above the grimy landscape.
This, he thought with a sort of vague distaste--this was London, chief
city of Airstrip One, itself the third most populous of the provinces of
Oceania. He tried to squeeze out some childhood memory that should tell him
whether London had always been quite like this. Were there always these
vistas of rotting nineteenth-century houses, their sides shored up with
baulks of timber, their windows patched with cardboard and their roofs
with corrugated iron, their crazy garden walls sagging in all directions?
And the bombed sites where the plaster dust swirled in the air and the
willow-herb straggled over the heaps of rubble; and the places where the
bombs had cleared a larger patch and there had sprung up sordid colonies
of wooden dwellings like chicken-houses? But it was no use, he could not
remember: nothing remained of his childhood except a series of bright-lit
tableaux occurring against no background and mostly unintelligible.

The Ministry of Truth--Minitrue, in Newspeak [Newspeak was the official
language of Oceania. For an account of its structure and etymology see
Appendix.]--was startlingly different from any other object in sight. It
was an enormous pyramidal structure of glittering white concrete, soaring
up, terrace after terrace, 300 metres into the air. From where Winston
stood it was just possible to read, picked out on its white face in
elegant lettering, the three slogans of the Party:


  WAR IS PEACE
  FREEDOM IS SLAVERY
  IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH


The Ministry of Truth contained, it was said, three thousand rooms above
ground level, and corresponding ramifications below. Scattered about London
there were just three other buildings of similar appearance and size. So
completely did they dwarf the surrounding architecture that from the roof
of Victory Mansions you could see all four of them simultaneously. They
were the homes of the four Ministries between which the entire apparatus
of government was divided. The Ministry of Truth, which concerned itself
with news, entertainment, education, and the fine arts. The Ministry of
Peace, which concerned itself with war. The Ministry of Love, which
maintained law and order. And the Ministry of Plenty, which was responsible
for economic affairs. Their names, in Newspeak: Minitrue, Minipax, Miniluv,
and Miniplenty.

The Ministry of Love was the really frightening one. There were no windows
in it at all. Winston had never been inside the Ministry of Love, nor
within half a kilometre of it. It was a place impossible to enter except
on official business, and then only by penetrating through a maze of
barbed-wire entanglements, steel doors, and hidden machine-gun nests. Even
the streets leading up to its outer barriers were roamed by gorilla-faced
guards in black uniforms, armed with jointed truncheons.

Winston turned round abruptly. He had set his features into the
expression of quiet optimism which it was advisable to wear when facing
the telescreen. He crossed the room into the tiny kitchen. By leaving
the Ministry at this time of day he had sacrificed his lunch in the
canteen, and he was aware that there was no food in the kitchen except
a hunk of dark-coloured bread which had got to be saved for tomorrow's
breakfast. He took down from the shelf a bottle of colourless liquid
with a plain white label marked VICTORY GIN. It gave off a sickly, oily
smell, as of Chinese rice-spirit. Winston poured out nearly a teacupful,
nerved himself for a shock, and gulped it down like a dose of medicine.

Instantly his face turned scarlet and the water ran out of his eyes. The
stuff was like nitric acid, and moreover, in swallowing it one had the
sensation of being hit on the back of the head with a rubber club. The
next moment, however, the burning in his belly died down and the world
began to look more cheerful. He took a cigarette from a crumpled packet
marked VICTORY CIGARETTES and incautiously held it upright, whereupon the
tobacco fell out on to the floor. With the next he was more successful.
He went back to the living-room and sat down at a small table that stood
to the left of the telescreen. From the table drawer he took out a
penholder, a bottle of ink, and a thick, quarto-sized blank book with a
red back and a marbled cover.

For some reason the telescreen in the living-room was in an unusual
position. Instead of being placed, as was normal, in the end wall, where
it could command the whole room, it was in the longer wall, opposite the
window. To one side of it there was a shallow alcove in which Winston
was now sitting, and which, when the flats were built, had probably been
intended to hold bookshelves. By sitting in the alcove, and keeping well
back, Winston was able to remain outside the range of the telescreen, so
far as sight went. He could be heard, of course, but so long as he stayed
in his present position he could not be seen. It was partly the unusual
geography of the room that had suggested to him the thing that he was now
about to do.

But it had also been suggested by the book that he had just taken out of
the drawer. It was a peculiarly beautiful book. Its smooth creamy paper,
a little yellowed by age, was of a kind that had not been manufactured for
at least forty years past. He could guess, however, that the book was much
older than that. He had seen it lying in the window of a frowsy little
junk-shop in a slummy quarter of the town (just what quarter he did not
now remember) and had been stricken immediately by an overwhelming desire
to possess it. Party members were supposed not to go into ordinary shops
('dealing on the free market', it was called), but the rule was not
strictly kept, because there were various things, such as shoelaces and
razor blades, which it was impossible to get hold of in any other way. He
had given a quick glance up and down the street and then had slipped inside
and bought the book for two dollars fifty. At the time he was not conscious
of wanting it for any particular purpose. He had carried it guiltily home
in his briefcase. Even with nothing written in it, it was a compromising
possession.

The thing that he was about to do was to open a diary. This was not illegal
(nothing was illegal, since there were no longer any laws), but if detected
it was reasonably certain that it would be punished by death, or at least
by twenty-five years in a forced-labour camp. Winston fitted a nib into
the penholder and sucked it to get the grease off. The pen was an archaic
instrument, seldom used even for signatures, and he had procured one,
furtively and with some difficulty, simply because of a feeling that the
beautiful creamy paper deserved to be written on with a real nib instead
of being scratched with an ink-pencil. Actually he was not used to writing
by hand. Apart from very short notes, it was usual to dictate everything
into the speak-write which was of course impossible for his present
purpose. He dipped the pen into the ink and then faltered for just a
second. A tremor had gone through his bowels. To mark the paper was the
decisive act. In small clumsy letters he wrote:


   April 4th, 1984.


He sat back. A sense of complete helplessness had descended upon him. To
begin with, he did not know with any certainty that this was 1984. It
must be round about that date, since he was fairly sure that his age was
thirty-nine, and he believed that he had been born in 1944 or 1945; but
it was never possible nowadays to pin down any date within a year or two.

For whom, it suddenly occurred to him to wonder, was he writing this diary?
For the future, for the unborn. His mind hovered for a moment round the
doubtful date on the page, and then fetched up with a bump against the
Newspeak word DOUBLETHINK. For the first time the magnitude of what he had
undertaken came home to him. How could you communicate with the future? It
was of its nature impossible. Either the future would resemble the present,
in which case it would not listen to him: or it would be different from it,
and his predicament would be meaningless.

For some time he sat gazing stupidly at the paper. The telescreen had
changed over to strident military music. It was curious that he seemed
not merely to have lost the power of expressing himself, but even to have
forgotten what it was that he had originally intended to say. For weeks
past he had been making ready for this moment, and it had never crossed
his mind that anything would be needed except courage. The actual writing
would be easy. All he had to do was to transfer to paper the interminable
restless monologue that had been running inside his head, literally for
years. At this moment, however, even the monologue had dried up. Moreover
his varicose ulcer had begun itching unbearably. He dared not scratch it,
because if he did so it always became inflamed. The seconds were ticking
by. He was conscious of nothing except the blankness of the page in front
of him, the itching of the skin above his ankle, the blaring of the music,
and a slight booziness caused by the gin.

Suddenly he began writing in sheer panic, only imperfectly aware of what
he was setting down. His small but childish handwriting straggled up and
down the page, shedding first its capital letters and finally even its
full stops:


   April 4th, 1984. Last night to the flicks. All war films. One very good
one of a ship full of refugees being bombed somewhere in the Mediterranean.
Audience much amused by shots of a great huge fat man trying to swim away
with a helicopter after him, first you saw him wallowing along in the
water like a porpoise, then you saw him through the helicopters gunsights,
then he was full of holes and the sea round him turned pink and he sank as
suddenly as though the holes had let in the water, audience shouting with
laughter when he sank. then you saw a lifeboat full of children with a
helicopter hovering over it. there was a middle-aged woman might have been
a jewess sitting up in the bow with a little boy about three years old in
her arms. little boy screaming with fright and hiding his head between her
breasts as if he was trying to burrow right into her and the woman putting
her arms round him and comforting him although she was blue with fright
herself, all the time covering him up as much as possible as if she thought
her arms could keep the bullets off him. then the helicopter planted a 20
kilo bomb in among them terrific flash and the boat went all to matchwood.
then there was a wonderful shot of a child's arm going up up up right up
into the air a helicopter with a camera in its nose must have followed it
up and there was a lot of applause from the party seats but a woman down in
the prole part of the house suddenly started kicking up a fuss and shouting
they didnt oughter of showed it not in front of kids they didnt it aint
right not in front of kids it aint until the police turned her turned her
out i dont suppose anything happened to her nobody cares what the proles
say typical prole reaction they never----


Winston stopped writing, partly because he was suffering from cramp. He did
not know what had made him pour out this stream of rubbish. But the curious
thing was that while he was doing so a totally different memory had
clarified itself in his mind, to the point where he almost felt equal to
writing it down. It was, he now realized, because of this other incident
that he had suddenly decided to come home and begin the diary today.

It had happened that morning at the Ministry, if anything so nebulous could
be said to happen.

It was nearly eleven hundred, and in the Records Department, where Winston
worked, they were dragging the chairs out of the cubicles and grouping them
in the centre of the hall opposite the big telescreen, in preparation for
the Two Minutes Hate. Winston was just taking his place in one of the
middle rows when two people whom he knew by sight, but had never spoken
to, came unexpectedly into the room. One of them was a girl whom he often
passed in the corridors. He did not know her name, but he knew that she
worked in the Fiction Department. Presumably--since he had sometimes seen
her with oily hands and carrying a spanner--she had some mechanical job
on one of the novel-writing machines. She was a bold-looking girl, of
about twenty-seven, with thick hair, a freckled face, and swift, athletic
movements. A narrow scarlet sash, emblem of the Junior Anti-Sex League, was
wound several times round the waist of her overalls, just tightly enough to
bring out the shapeliness of her hips. Winston had disliked her from the
very first moment of seeing her. He knew the reason. It was because of the
atmosphere of hockey-fields and cold baths and community hikes and general
clean-mindedness which she managed to carry about with her. He disliked
nearly all women, and especially the young and pretty ones. It was always
the women, and above all the young ones, who were the most bigoted
adherents of the Party, the swallowers of slogans, the amateur spies and
nosers-out of unorthodoxy. But this particular girl gave him the impression
of being more dangerous than most. Once when they passed in the corridor
she gave him a quick sidelong glance which seemed to pierce right into
him and for a moment had filled him with black terror. The idea had even
crossed his mind that she might be an agent of the Thought Police. That,
it was true, was very unlikely. Still, he continued to feel a peculiar
uneasiness, which had fear mixed up in it as well as hostility, whenever
she was anywhere near him.

The other person was a man named O'Brien, a member of the Inner Party and
holder of some post so important and remote that Winston had only a dim
idea of its nature. A momentary hush passed over the group of people
round the chairs as they saw the black overalls of an Inner Party member
approaching. O'Brien was a large, burly man with a thick neck and a coarse,
humorous, brutal face. In spite of his formidable appearance he had a
certain charm of manner. He had a trick of resettling his spectacles on
his nose which was curiously disarming--in some indefinable way, curiously
civilized. It was a gesture which, if anyone had still thought in such
terms, might have recalled an eighteenth-century nobleman offering his
snuffbox. Winston had seen O'Brien perhaps a dozen times in almost as many
years. He felt deeply drawn to him, and not solely because he was intrigued
by the contrast between O'Brien's urbane manner and his prize-fighter's
physique. Much more it was because of a secretly held belief--or perhaps
not even a belief, merely a hope--that O'Brien's political orthodoxy was
not perfect. Something in his face suggested it irresistibly. And again,
perhaps it was not even unorthodoxy that was written in his face, but
simply intelligence. But at any rate he had the appearance of being a
person that you could talk to if somehow you could cheat the telescreen and
get him alone. Winston had never made the smallest effort to verify this
guess: indeed, there was no way of doing so. At this moment O'Brien glanced
at his wrist-watch, saw that it was nearly eleven hundred, and evidently
decided to stay in the Records Department until the Two Minutes Hate was
over. He took a chair in the same row as Winston, a couple of places away.
A small, sandy-haired woman who worked in the next cubicle to Winston was
between them. The girl with dark hair was sitting immediately behind.

The next moment a hideous, grinding screech, as of some monstrous machine
running without oil, burst from the big telescreen at the end of the room.
It was a noise that set one's teeth on edge and bristled the hair at the
back of one's neck. The Hate had started.

As usual, the face of Emmanuel Goldstein, the Enemy of the People, had
flashed on to the screen. There were hisses here and there among the
audience. The little sandy-haired woman gave a squeak of mingled fear and
disgust. Goldstein was the renegade and backslider who once, long ago
(how long ago, nobody quite remembered), had been one of the leading
figures of the Party, almost on a level with Big Brother himself, and
then had engaged in counter-revolutionary activities, had been condemned
to death, and had mysteriously escaped and disappeared. The programmes
of the Two Minutes Hate varied from day to day, but there was none in
which Goldstein was not the principal figure. He was the primal traitor,
the earliest defiler of the Party's purity. All subsequent crimes against
the Party, all treacheries, acts of sabotage, heresies, deviations,
sprang directly out of his teaching. Somewhere or other he was still
alive and hatching his conspiracies: perhaps somewhere beyond the sea,
under the protection of his foreign paymasters, perhaps even--so it was
occasionally rumoured--in some hiding-place in Oceania itself.

Winston's diaphragm was constricted. He could never see the face of
Goldstein without a painful mixture of emotions. It was a lean Jewish face,
with a great fuzzy aureole of white hair and a small goatee beard--a
clever face, and yet somehow inherently despicable, with a kind of senile
silliness in the long thin nose, near the end of which a pair of spectacles
was perched. It resembled the face of a sheep, and the voice, too, had a
sheep-like quality. Goldstein was delivering his usual venomous attack
upon the doctrines of the Party--an attack so exaggerated and perverse that
a child should have been able to see through it, and yet just plausible
enough to fill one with an alarmed feeling that other people, less
level-headed than oneself, might be taken in by it. He was abusing Big
Brother, he was denouncing the dictatorship of the Party, he was demanding
the immediate conclusion of peace with Eurasia, he was advocating freedom
of speech, freedom of the Press, freedom of assembly, freedom of thought,
he was crying hysterically that the revolution had been betrayed--and all
this in rapid polysyllabic speech which was a sort of parody of the
habitual style of the orators of the Party, and even contained Newspeak
words: more Newspeak words, indeed, than any Party member would normally
use in real life. And all the while, lest one should be in any doubt as to
the reality which Goldstein's specious claptrap covered, behind his head on
the telescreen there marched the endless columns of the Eurasian army--row
after row of solid-looking men with expressionless Asiatic faces, who swam
up to the surface of the screen and vanished, to be replaced by others
exactly similar. The dull rhythmic tramp of the soldiers' boots formed the
background to Goldstein's bleating voice.

Before the Hate had proceeded for thirty seconds, uncontrollable
exclamations of rage were breaking out from half the people in the room.
The self-satisfied sheep-like face on the screen, and the terrifying power
of the Eurasian army behind it, were too much to be borne: besides,
the sight or even the thought of Goldstein produced fear and anger
automatically. He was an object of hatred more constant than either Eurasia
or Eastasia, since when Oceania was at war with one of these Powers it was
generally at peace with the other. But what was strange was that although
Goldstein was hated and despised by everybody, although every day and a
thousand times a day, on platforms, on the telescreen, in newspapers,
in books, his theories were refuted, smashed, ridiculed, held up to the
general gaze for the pitiful rubbish that they were--in spite of all this,
his influence never seemed to grow less. Always there were fresh dupes
waiting to be seduced by him. A day never passed when spies and saboteurs
acting under his directions were not unmasked by the Thought Police.
He was the commander of a vast shadowy army, an underground network of
conspirators dedicated to the overthrow of the State. The Brotherhood, its
name was supposed to be. There were also whispered stories of a terrible
book, a compendium of all the heresies, of which Goldstein was the author
and which circulated clandestinely here and there. It was a book without a
title. People referred to it, if at all, simply as THE BOOK. But one knew
of such things only through vague rumours. Neither the Brotherhood nor
THE BOOK was a subject that any ordinary Party member would mention if
there was a way of avoiding it.

In its second minute the Hate rose to a frenzy. People were leaping up and
down in their places and shouting at the tops of their voices in an effort
to drown the maddening bleating voice that came from the screen. The little
sandy-haired woman had turned bright pink, and her mouth was opening and
shutting like that of a landed fish. Even O'Brien's heavy face was flushed.
He was sitting very straight in his chair, his powerful chest swelling and
quivering as though he were standing up to the assault of a wave. The
dark-haired girl behind Winston had begun crying out 'Swine! Swine! Swine!'
and suddenly she picked up a heavy Newspeak dictionary and flung it at the
screen. It struck Goldstein's nose and bounced off; the voice continued
inexorably. In a lucid moment Winston found that he was shouting with the
others and kicking his heel violently against the rung of his chair. The
horrible thing about the Two Minutes Hate was not that one was obliged to
act a part, but, on the contrary, that it was impossible to avoid joining
in. Within thirty seconds any pretence was always unnecessary. A hideous
ecstasy of fear and vindictiveness, a desire to kill, to torture, to smash
faces in with a sledge-hammer, seemed to flow through the whole group of
people like an electric current, turning one even against one's will into
a grimacing, screaming lunatic. And yet the rage that one felt was an
abstract, undirected emotion which could be switched from one object to
another like the flame of a blowlamp. Thus, at one moment Winston's hatred
was not turned against Goldstein at all, but, on the contrary, against
Big Brother, the Party, and the Thought Police; and at such moments his
heart went out to the lonely, derided heretic on the screen, sole guardian
of truth and sanity in a world of lies. And yet the very next instant he
was at one with the people about him, and all that was said of Goldstein
seemed to him to be true. At those moments his secret loathing of Big
Brother changed into adoration, and Big Brother seemed to tower up, an
invincible, fearless protector, standing like a rock against the hordes
of Asia, and Goldstein, in spite of his isolation, his helplessness, and
the doubt that hung about his very existence, seemed like some sinister
enchanter, capable by the mere power of his voice of wrecking the structure
of civilization.

It was even possible, at moments, to switch one's hatred this way or that
by a voluntary act. Suddenly, by the sort of violent effort with which one
wrenches one's head away from the pillow in a nightmare, Winston succeeded
in transferring his hatred from the face on the screen to the dark-haired
girl behind him. Vivid, beautiful hallucinations flashed through his mind.
He would flog her to death with a rubber truncheon. He would tie her naked
to a stake and shoot her full of arrows like Saint Sebastian. He would
ravish her and cut her throat at the moment of climax. Better than before,
moreover, he realized WHY it was that he hated her. He hated her because
she was young and pretty and sexless, because he wanted to go to bed with
her and would never do so, because round her sweet supple waist, which
seemed to ask you to encircle it with your arm, there was only the odious
scarlet sash, aggressive symbol of chastity.

The Hate rose to its climax. The voice of Goldstein had become an actual
sheep's bleat, and for an instant the face changed into that of a sheep.
Then the sheep-face melted into the figure of a Eurasian soldier who seemed
to be advancing, huge and terrible, his sub-machine gun roaring, and
seeming to spring out of the surface of the screen, so that some of the
people in the front row actually flinched backwards in their seats. But
in the same moment, drawing a deep sigh of relief from everybody, the
hostile figure melted into the face of Big Brother, black-haired,
black-moustachio'd, full of power and mysterious calm, and so vast that
it almost filled up the screen. Nobody heard what Big Brother was saying.
It was merely a few words of encouragement, the sort of words that are
uttered in the din of battle, not distinguishable individually but
restoring confidence by the fact of being spoken. Then the face of Big
Brother faded away again, and instead the three slogans of the Party stood
out in bold capitals:


  WAR IS PEACE
  FREEDOM IS SLAVERY
  IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH


But the face of Big Brother seemed to persist for several seconds on the
screen, as though the impact that it had made on everyone's eyeballs was
too vivid to wear off immediately. The little sandy-haired woman had flung
herself forward over the back of the chair in front of her. With a
tremulous murmur that sounded like 'My Saviour!' she extended her arms
towards the screen. Then she buried her face in her hands. It was apparent
that she was uttering a prayer.

At this moment the entire group of people broke into a deep, slow,
rhythmical chant of 'B-B!...B-B!'--over and over again, very slowly, with a
long pause between the first 'B' and the second--a heavy, murmurous sound,
somehow curiously savage, in the background of which one seemed to hear the
stamp of naked feet and the throbbing of tom-toms. For perhaps as much as
thirty seconds they kept it up. It was a refrain that was often heard in
moments of overwhelming emotion. Partly it was a sort of hymn to the wisdom
and majesty of Big Brother, but still more it was an act of self-hypnosis,
a deliberate drowning of consciousness by means of rhythmic noise.
Winston's entrails seemed to grow cold. In the Two Minutes Hate he could
not help sharing in the general delirium, but this sub-human chanting of
'B-B!...B-B!' always filled him with horror. Of course he chanted with the
rest: it was impossible to do otherwise. To dissemble your feelings, to
control your face, to do what everyone else was doing, was an instinctive
reaction. But there was a space of a couple of seconds during which the
expression of his eyes might conceivably have betrayed him. And it was
exactly at this moment that the significant thing happened--if, indeed,
it did happen.

Momentarily he caught O'Brien's eye. O'Brien had stood up. He had taken
off his spectacles and was in the act of resettling them on his nose with
his characteristic gesture. But there was a fraction of a second when
their eyes met, and for as long as it took to happen Winston knew--yes, he
KNEW!--that O'Brien was thinking the same thing as himself. An unmistakable
message had passed. It was as though their two minds had opened and the
thoughts were flowing from one into the other through their eyes. 'I am
with you,' O'Brien seemed to be saying to him. 'I know precisely what you
are feeling. I know all about your contempt, your hatred, your disgust.
But don't worry, I am on your side!' And then the flash of intelligence
was gone, and O'Brien's face was as inscrutable as everybody else's.

That was all, and he was already uncertain whether it had happened. Such
incidents never had any sequel. All that they did was to keep alive in him
the belief, or hope, that others besides himself were the enemies of the
Party. Perhaps the rumours of vast underground conspiracies were true after
all--perhaps the Brotherhood really existed! It was impossible, in spite
of the endless arrests and confessions and executions, to be sure that the
Brotherhood was not simply a myth. Some days he believed in it, some days
not. There was no evidence, only fleeting glimpses that might mean anything
or nothing: snatches of overheard conversation, faint scribbles on lavatory
walls--once, even, when two strangers met, a small movement of the hand
which had looked as though it might be a signal of recognition. It was all
guesswork: very likely he had imagined everything. He had gone back to his
cubicle without looking at O'Brien again. The idea of following up their
momentary contact hardly crossed his mind. It would have been inconceivably
dangerous even if he had known how to set about doing it. For a second, two
seconds, they had exchanged an equivocal glance, and that was the end of
the story. But even that was a memorable event, in the locked loneliness in
which one had to live.

Winston roused himself and sat up straighter. He let out a belch. The gin
was rising from his stomach.

His eyes re-focused on the page. He discovered that while he sat helplessly
musing he had also been writing, as though by automatic action. And it was
no longer the same cramped, awkward handwriting as before. His pen had slid
voluptuously over the smooth paper, printing in large neat capitals--


  DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER
  DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER
  DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER
  DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER
  DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER


over and over again, filling half a page.

He could not help feeling a twinge of panic. It was absurd, since the
writing of those particular words was not more dangerous than the initial
act of opening the diary, but for a moment he was tempted to tear out the
spoiled pages and abandon the enterprise altogether.

He did not do so, however, because he knew that it was useless. Whether he
wrote DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER, or whether he refrained from writing it, made
no difference. Whether he went on with the diary, or whether he did not go
on with it, made no difference. The Thought Police would get him just the
same. He had committed--would still have committed, even if he had never
set pen to paper--the essential crime that contained all others in itself.
Thoughtcrime, they called it. Thoughtcrime was not a thing that could be
concealed for ever. You might dodge successfully for a while, even for
years, but sooner or later they were bound to get you.

It was always at night--the arrests invariably happened at night. The
sudden jerk out of sleep, the rough hand shaking your shoulder, the lights
glaring in your eyes, the ring of hard faces round the bed. In the vast
majority of cases there was no trial, no report of the arrest. People
simply disappeared, always during the night. Your name was removed from the
registers, every record of everything you had ever done was wiped out, your
one-time existence was denied and then forgotten. You were abolished,
annihilated: VAPORIZED was the usual word.

For a moment he was seized by a kind of hysteria. He began writing in a
hurried untidy scrawl:


   theyll shoot me i don't care theyll shoot me in the back of the neck i
dont care down with big brother they always shoot you in the back of the
neck i dont care down with big brother----


He sat back in his chair, slightly ashamed of himself, and laid down
the pen. The next moment he started violently. There was a knocking at
the door.

Already! He sat as still as a mouse, in the futile hope that whoever it was
might go away after a single attempt. But no, the knocking was repeated.
The worst thing of all would be to delay. His heart was thumping like a
drum, but his face, from long habit, was probably expressionless. He got
up and moved heavily towards the door.




Chapter 2



As he put his hand to the door-knob Winston saw that he had left the
diary open on the table. DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER was written all over it,
in letters almost big enough to be legible across the room. It was an
inconceivably stupid thing to have done. But, he realized, even in his
panic he had not wanted to smudge the creamy paper by shutting the book
while the ink was wet.

He drew in his breath and opened the door. Instantly a warm wave of relief
flowed through him. A colourless, crushed-looking woman, with wispy hair
and a lined face, was standing outside.

'Oh, comrade,' she began in a dreary, whining sort of voice, 'I thought I
heard you come in. Do you think you could come across and have a look at
our kitchen sink? It's got blocked up and----'

It was Mrs Parsons, the wife of a neighbour on the same floor. ('Mrs' was
a word somewhat discountenanced by the Party--you were supposed to call
everyone 'comrade'--but with some women one used it instinctively.) She was
a woman of about thirty, but looking much older. One had the impression
that there was dust in the creases of her face. Winston followed her down
the passage. These amateur repair jobs were an almost daily irritation.
Victory Mansions were old flats, built in 1930 or thereabouts, and were
falling to pieces. The plaster flaked constantly from ceilings and walls,
the pipes burst in every hard frost, the roof leaked whenever there was
snow, the heating system was usually running at half steam when it was not
closed down altogether from motives of economy. Repairs, except what you
could do for yourself, had to be sanctioned by remote committees which
were liable to hold up even the mending of a window-pane for two years.

'Of course it's only because Tom isn't home,' said Mrs Parsons vaguely.

The Parsons' flat was bigger than Winston's, and dingy in a different
way. Everything had a battered, trampled-on look, as though the
place had just been visited by some large violent animal. Games
impedimenta--hockey-sticks, boxing-gloves, a burst football, a pair of
sweaty shorts turned inside out--lay all over the floor, and on the
table there was a litter of dirty dishes and dog-eared exercise-books.
On the walls were scarlet banners of the Youth League and the Spies, and
a full-sized poster of Big Brother. There was the usual boiled-cabbage
smell, common to the whole building, but it was shot through by a sharper
reek of sweat, which--one knew this at the first sniff, though it was
hard to say how--was the sweat of some person not present at the moment.
In another room someone with a comb and a piece of toilet paper was
trying to keep tune with the military music which was still issuing
from the telescreen.

'It's the children,' said Mrs Parsons, casting a half-apprehensive glance
at the door. 'They haven't been out today. And of course----'

She had a habit of breaking off her sentences in the middle. The kitchen
sink was full nearly to the brim with filthy greenish water which smelt
worse than ever of cabbage. Winston knelt down and examined the angle-joint
of the pipe. He hated using his hands, and he hated bending down, which was
always liable to start him coughing. Mrs Parsons looked on helplessly.

'Of course if Tom was home he'd put it right in a moment,' she said.
'He loves anything like that. He's ever so good with his hands, Tom is.'

Parsons was Winston's fellow-employee at the Ministry of Truth. He was
a fattish but active man of paralysing stupidity, a mass of imbecile
enthusiasms--one of those completely unquestioning, devoted drudges on
whom, more even than on the Thought Police, the stability of the Party
depended. At thirty-five he had just been unwillingly evicted from the
Youth League, and before graduating into the Youth League he had managed to
stay on in the Spies for a year beyond the statutory age. At the Ministry
he was employed in some subordinate post for which intelligence was not
required, but on the other hand he was a leading figure on the Sports
Committee and all the other committees engaged in organizing community
hikes, spontaneous demonstrations, savings campaigns, and voluntary
activities generally. He would inform you with quiet pride, between whiffs
of his pipe, that he had put in an appearance at the Community Centre every
evening for the past four years. An overpowering smell of sweat, a sort of
unconscious testimony to the strenuousness of his life, followed him about
wherever he went, and even remained behind him after he had gone.

'Have you got a spanner?' said Winston, fiddling with the nut on the
angle-joint.

'A spanner,' said Mrs Parsons, immediately becoming invertebrate. 'I don't
know, I'm sure. Perhaps the children----'

There was a trampling of boots and another blast on the comb as the
children charged into the living-room. Mrs Parsons brought the spanner.
Winston let out the water and disgustedly removed the clot of human hair
that had blocked up the pipe. He cleaned his fingers as best he could in
the cold water from the tap and went back into the other room.

'Up with your hands!' yelled a savage voice.

A handsome, tough-looking boy of nine had popped up from behind the table
and was menacing him with a toy automatic pistol, while his small sister,
about two years younger, made the same gesture with a fragment of wood.
Both of them were dressed in the blue shorts, grey shirts, and red
neckerchiefs which were the uniform of the Spies. Winston raised his hands
above his head, but with an uneasy feeling, so vicious was the boy's
demeanour, that it was not altogether a game.

'You're a traitor!' yelled the boy. 'You're a thought-criminal! You're a
Eurasian spy! I'll shoot you, I'll vaporize you, I'll send you to the salt
mines!'

Suddenly they were both leaping round him, shouting 'Traitor!' and
'Thought-criminal!' the little girl imitating her brother in every
movement. It was somehow slightly frightening, like the gambolling of
tiger cubs which will soon grow up into man-eaters. There was a sort of
calculating ferocity in the boy's eye, a quite evident desire to hit or
kick Winston and a consciousness of being very nearly big enough to do so.
It was a good job it was not a real pistol he was holding, Winston thought.

Mrs Parsons' eyes flitted nervously from Winston to the children, and back
again. In the better light of the living-room he noticed with interest
that there actually was dust in the creases of her face.

'They do get so noisy,' she said. 'They're disappointed because they
couldn't go to see the hanging, that's what it is. I'm too busy to take
them. and Tom won't be back from work in time.'

'Why can't we go and see the hanging?' roared the boy in his huge voice.

'Want to see the hanging! Want to see the hanging!' chanted the little
girl, still capering round.

Some Eurasian prisoners, guilty of war crimes, were to be hanged in the
Park that evening, Winston remembered. This happened about once a month,
and was a popular spectacle. Children always clamoured to be taken to see
it. He took his leave of Mrs Parsons and made for the door. But he had not
gone six steps down the passage when something hit the back of his neck an
agonizingly painful blow. It was as though a red-hot wire had been jabbed
into him. He spun round just in time to see Mrs Parsons dragging her son
back into the doorway while the boy pocketed a catapult.

'Goldstein!' bellowed the boy as the door closed on him. But what most
struck Winston was the look of helpless fright on the woman's greyish face.

Back in the flat he stepped quickly past the telescreen and sat down at the
table again, still rubbing his neck. The music from the telescreen had
stopped. Instead, a clipped military voice was reading out, with a sort of
brutal relish, a description of the armaments of the new Floating Fortress
which had just been anchored between Iceland and the Faroe Islands.

With those children, he thought, that wretched woman must lead a life of
terror. Another year, two years, and they would be watching her night
and day for symptoms of unorthodoxy. Nearly all children nowadays were
horrible. What was worst of all was that by means of such organizations as
the Spies they were systematically turned into ungovernable little savages,
and yet this produced in them no tendency whatever to rebel against the
discipline of the Party. On the contrary, they adored the Party and
everything connected with it. The songs, the processions, the banners, the
hiking, the drilling with dummy rifles, the yelling of slogans, the worship
of Big Brother--it was all a sort of glorious game to them. All their
ferocity was turned outwards, against the enemies of the State, against
foreigners, traitors, saboteurs, thought-criminals. It was almost normal
for people over thirty to be frightened of their own children. And with
good reason, for hardly a week passed in which 'The Times' did not carry
a paragraph describing how some eavesdropping little sneak--'child hero'
was the phrase generally used--had overheard some compromising remark
and denounced its parents to the Thought Police.

The sting of the catapult bullet had worn off. He picked up his pen
half-heartedly, wondering whether he could find something more to write
in the diary. Suddenly he began thinking of O'Brien again.

Years ago--how long was it? Seven years it must be--he had dreamed that he
was walking through a pitch-dark room. And someone sitting to one side of
him had said as he passed: 'We shall meet in the place where there is no
darkness.' It was said very quietly, almost casually--a statement, not a
command. He had walked on without pausing. What was curious was that at the
time, in the dream, the words had not made much impression on him. It was
only later and by degrees that they had seemed to take on significance. He
could not now remember whether it was before or after having the dream that
he had seen O'Brien for the first time, nor could he remember when he had
first identified the voice as O'Brien's. But at any rate the identification
existed. It was O'Brien who had spoken to him out of the dark.

Winston had never been able to feel sure--even after this morning's flash
of the eyes it was still impossible to be sure whether O'Brien was a friend
or an enemy. Nor did it even seem to matter greatly. There was a link of
understanding between them, more important than affection or partisanship.
'We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness,' he had said.
Winston did not know what it meant, only that in some way or another it
would come true.

The voice from the telescreen paused. A trumpet call, clear and beautiful,
floated into the stagnant air. The voice continued raspingly:

'Attention! Your attention, please! A newsflash has this moment arrived
from the Malabar front. Our forces in South India have won a glorious
victory. I am authorized to say that the action we are now reporting may
well bring the war within measurable distance of its end. Here is the
newsflash----'

Bad news coming, thought Winston. And sure enough, following on a gory
description of the annihilation of a Eurasian army, with stupendous figures
of killed and prisoners, came the announcement that, as from next week,
the chocolate ration would be reduced from thirty grammes to twenty.

Winston belched again. The gin was wearing off, leaving a deflated feeling.
The telescreen--perhaps to celebrate the victory, perhaps to drown the
memory of the lost chocolate--crashed into 'Oceania, 'tis for thee'. You
were supposed to stand to attention. However, in his present position he
was invisible.

'Oceania, 'tis for thee' gave way to lighter music. Winston walked over to
the window, keeping his back to the telescreen. The day was still cold and
clear. Somewhere far away a rocket bomb exploded with a dull, reverberating
roar. About twenty or thirty of them a week were falling on London at
present.

Down in the street the wind flapped the torn poster to and fro, and the
word INGSOC fitfully appeared and vanished. Ingsoc. The sacred principles
of Ingsoc. Newspeak, doublethink, the mutability of the past. He felt as
though he were wandering in the forests of the sea bottom, lost in a
monstrous world where he himself was the monster. He was alone. The past
was dead, the future was unimaginable. What certainty had he that a single
human creature now living was on his side? And what way of knowing that the
dominion of the Party would not endure FOR EVER? Like an answer, the three
slogans on the white face of the Ministry of Truth came back to him:


  WAR IS PEACE
  FREEDOM IS SLAVERY
  IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH


He took a twenty-five cent piece out of his pocket. There, too, in tiny
clear lettering, the same slogans were inscribed, and on the other face of
the coin the head of Big Brother. Even from the coin the eyes pursued you.
On coins, on stamps, on the covers of books, on banners, on posters, and on
the wrappings of a cigarette packet--everywhere. Always the eyes watching
you and the voice enveloping you. Asleep or awake, working or eating,
indoors or out of doors, in the bath or in bed--no escape. Nothing was your
own except the few cubic centimetres inside your skull.

The sun had shifted round, and the myriad windows of the Ministry of Truth,
with the light no longer shining on them, looked grim as the loopholes of a
fortress. His heart quailed before the enormous pyramidal shape. It was too
strong, it could not be stormed. A thousand rocket bombs would not batter
it down. He wondered again for whom he was writing the diary. For the
future, for the past--for an age that might be imaginary. And in front of
him there lay not death but annihilation. The diary would be reduced to
ashes and himself to vapour. Only the Thought Police would read what he had
written, before they wiped it out of existence and out of memory. How could
you make appeal to the future when not a trace of you, not even an
anonymous word scribbled on a piece of paper, could physically survive?

The telescreen struck fourteen. He must leave in ten minutes. He had to be
back at work by fourteen-thirty.

Curiously, the chiming of the hour seemed to have put new heart into him.
He was a lonely ghost uttering a truth that nobody would ever hear. But so
long as he uttered it, in some obscure way the continuity was not broken.
It was not by making yourself heard but by staying sane that you carried on
the human heritage. He went back to the table, dipped his pen, and wrote:


   To the future or to the past, to a time when thought is free, when men
are different from one another and do not live alone--to a time when truth
exists and what is done cannot be undone:
   From the age of uniformity, from the age of solitude, from the age of
Big Brother, from the age of doublethink--greetings!


He was already dead, he reflected. It seemed to him that it was only now,
when he had begun to be able to formulate his thoughts, that he had taken
the decisive step. The consequences of every act are included in the act
itself. He wrote:


   Thoughtcrime does not entail death: thoughtcrime IS death.


Now he had recognized himself as a dead man it became important to stay
alive as long as possible. Two fingers of his right hand were inkstained.
It was exactly the kind of detail that might betray you. Some nosing zealot
in the Ministry (a woman, probably: someone like the little sandy-haired
woman or the dark-haired girl from the Fiction Department) might start
wondering why he had been writing during the lunch interval, why he had
used an old-fashioned pen, WHAT he had been writing--and then drop a hint
in the appropriate quarter. He went to the bathroom and carefully scrubbed
the ink away with the gritty dark-brown soap which rasped your skin like
sandpaper and was therefore well adapted for this purpose.

He put the diary away in the drawer. It was quite useless to think of
hiding it, but he could at least make sure whether or not its existence had
been discovered. A hair laid across the page-ends was too obvious. With the
tip of his finger he picked up an identifiable grain of whitish dust and
deposited it on the corner of the cover, where it was bound to be shaken
off if the book was moved.




Chapter 3



Winston was dreaming of his mother.

He must, he thought, have been ten or eleven years old when his mother had
disappeared. She was a tall, statuesque, rather silent woman with slow
movements and magnificent fair hair. His father he remembered more vaguely
as dark and thin, dressed always in neat dark clothes (Winston remembered
especially the very thin soles of his father's shoes) and wearing
spectacles. The two of them must evidently have been swallowed up in one
of the first great purges of the fifties.

At this moment his mother was sitting in some place deep down beneath him,
with his young sister in her arms. He did not remember his sister at all,
except as a tiny, feeble baby, always silent, with large, watchful eyes.
Both of them were looking up at him. They were down in some subterranean
place--the bottom of a well, for instance, or a very deep grave--but it
was a place which, already far below him, was itself moving downwards.
They were in the saloon of a sinking ship, looking up at him through the
darkening water. There was still air in the saloon, they could still see
him and he them, but all the while they were sinking down, down into the
green waters which in another moment must hide them from sight for ever.
He was out in the light and air while they were being sucked down to death,
and they were down there because he was up here. He knew it and they knew
it, and he could see the knowledge in their faces. There was no reproach
either in their faces or in their hearts, only the knowledge that they
must die in order that he might remain alive, and that this was part of
the unavoidable order of things.

He could not remember what had happened, but he knew in his dream that in
some way the lives of his mother and his sister had been sacrificed to his
own. It was one of those dreams which, while retaining the characteristic
dream scenery, are a continuation of one's intellectual life, and in which
one becomes aware of facts and ideas which still seem new and valuable
after one is awake. The thing that now suddenly struck Winston was that his
mother's death, nearly thirty years ago, had been tragic and sorrowful in
a way that was no longer possible. Tragedy, he perceived, belonged to the
ancient time, to a time when there was still privacy, love, and friendship,
and when the members of a family stood by one another without needing to
know the reason. His mother's memory tore at his heart because she had died
loving him, when he was too young and selfish to love her in return, and
because somehow, he did not remember how, she had sacrificed herself to a
conception of loyalty that was private and unalterable. Such things, he
saw, could not happen today. Today there were fear, hatred, and pain, but
no dignity of emotion, no deep or complex sorrows. All this he seemed to
see in the large eyes of his mother and his sister, looking up at him
through the green water, hundreds of fathoms down and still sinking.

Suddenly he was standing on short springy turf, on a summer evening when
the slanting rays of the sun gilded the ground. The landscape that he was
looking at recurred so often in his dreams that he was never fully certain
whether or not he had seen it in the real world. In his waking thoughts he
called it the Golden Country. It was an old, rabbit-bitten pasture, with a
foot-track wandering across it and a molehill here and there. In the ragged
hedge on the opposite side of the field the boughs of the elm trees were
swaying very faintly in the breeze, their leaves just stirring in dense
masses like women's hair. Somewhere near at hand, though out of sight,
there was a clear, slow-moving stream where dace were swimming in the
pools under the willow trees.

The girl with dark hair was coming towards them across the field. With
what seemed a single movement she tore off her clothes and flung them
disdainfully aside. Her body was white and smooth, but it aroused no desire
in him, indeed he barely looked at it. What overwhelmed him in that instant
was admiration for the gesture with which she had thrown her clothes aside.
With its grace and carelessness it seemed to annihilate a whole culture,
a whole system of thought, as though Big Brother and the Party and the
Thought Police could all be swept into nothingness by a single splendid
movement of the arm. That too was a gesture belonging to the ancient time.
Winston woke up with the word 'Shakespeare' on his lips.

The telescreen was giving forth an ear-splitting whistle which continued on
the same note for thirty seconds. It was nought seven fifteen, getting-up
time for office workers. Winston wrenched his body out of bed--naked, for
a member of the Outer Party received only 3,000 clothing coupons annually,
and a suit of pyjamas was 600--and seized a dingy singlet and a pair of
shorts that were lying across a chair. The Physical Jerks would begin in
three minutes. The next moment he was doubled up by a violent coughing fit
which nearly always attacked him soon after waking up. It emptied his lungs
so completely that he could only begin breathing again by lying on his back
and taking a series of deep gasps. His veins had swelled with the effort of
the cough, and the varicose ulcer had started itching.

'Thirty to forty group!' yapped a piercing female voice. 'Thirty to forty
group! Take your places, please. Thirties to forties!'

Winston sprang to attention in front of the telescreen, upon which the
image of a youngish woman, scrawny but muscular, dressed in tunic and
gym-shoes, had already appeared.

'Arms bending and stretching!' she rapped out. 'Take your time by me. ONE,
two, three, four! ONE, two, three, four! Come on, comrades, put a bit of
life into it! ONE, two, three four! ONE two, three, four!...'

The pain of the coughing fit had not quite driven out of Winston's mind the
impression made by his dream, and the rhythmic movements of the exercise
restored it somewhat. As he mechanically shot his arms back and forth,
wearing on his face the look of grim enjoyment which was considered proper
during the Physical Jerks, he was struggling to think his way backward into
the dim period of his early childhood. It was extraordinarily difficult.
Beyond the late fifties everything faded. When there were no external
records that you could refer to, even the outline of your own life lost
its sharpness. You remembered huge events which had quite probably not
happened, you remembered the detail of incidents without being able to
recapture their atmosphere, and there were long blank periods to which you
could assign nothing. Everything had been different then. Even the names of
countries, and their shapes on the map, had been different. Airstrip One,
for instance, had not been so called in those days: it had been called
England or Britain, though London, he felt fairly certain, had always been
called London.

Winston could not definitely remember a time when his country had not been
at war, but it was evident that there had been a fairly long interval of
peace during his childhood, because one of his early memories was of an air
raid which appeared to take everyone by surprise. Perhaps it was the time
when the atomic bomb had fallen on Colchester. He did not remember the raid
itself, but he did remember his father's hand clutching his own as they
hurried down, down, down into some place deep in the earth, round and round
a spiral staircase which rang under his feet and which finally so wearied
his legs that he began whimpering and they had to stop and rest. His
mother, in her slow, dreamy way, was following a long way behind them. She
was carrying his baby sister--or perhaps it was only a bundle of blankets
that she was carrying: he was not certain whether his sister had been born
then. Finally they had emerged into a noisy, crowded place which he had
realized to be a Tube station.

There were people sitting all over the stone-flagged floor, and other
people, packed tightly together, were sitting on metal bunks, one above
the other. Winston and his mother and father found themselves a place on
the floor, and near them an old man and an old woman were sitting side by
side on a bunk. The old man had on a decent dark suit and a black cloth cap
pushed back from very white hair: his face was scarlet and his eyes were
blue and full of tears. He reeked of gin. It seemed to breathe out of his
skin in place of sweat, and one could have fancied that the tears welling
from his eyes were pure gin. But though slightly drunk he was also
suffering under some grief that was genuine and unbearable. In his childish
way Winston grasped that some terrible thing, something that was beyond
forgiveness and could never be remedied, had just happened. It also seemed
to him that he knew what it was. Someone whom the old man loved--a little
granddaughter, perhaps--had been killed. Every few minutes the old man kept
repeating:

'We didn't ought to 'ave trusted 'em. I said so, Ma, didn't I? That's what
comes of trusting 'em. I said so all along. We didn't ought to 'ave trusted
the buggers.'

But which buggers they didn't ought to have trusted Winston could not now
remember.

Since about that time, war had been literally continuous, though strictly
speaking it had not always been the same war. For several months during his
childhood there had been confused street fighting in London itself, some
of which he remembered vividly. But to trace out the history of the whole
period, to say who was fighting whom at any given moment, would have been
utterly impossible, since no written record, and no spoken word, ever made
mention of any other alignment than the existing one. At this moment, for
example, in 1984 (if it was 1984), Oceania was at war with Eurasia and
in alliance with Eastasia. In no public or private utterance was it ever
admitted that the three powers had at any time been grouped along different
lines. Actually, as Winston well knew, it was only four years since Oceania
had been at war with Eastasia and in alliance with Eurasia. But that was
merely a piece of furtive knowledge which he happened to possess because
his memory was not satisfactorily under control. Officially the change of
partners had never happened. Oceania was at war with Eurasia: therefore
Oceania had always been at war with Eurasia. The enemy of the moment always
represented absolute evil, and it followed that any past or future
agreement with him was impossible.

The frightening thing, he reflected for the ten thousandth time as he
forced his shoulders painfully backward (with hands on hips, they were
gyrating their bodies from the waist, an exercise that was supposed to be
good for the back muscles)--the frightening thing was that it might all be
true. If the Party could thrust its hand into the past and say of this or
that event, IT NEVER HAPPENED--that, surely, was more terrifying than mere
torture and death?

The Party said that Oceania had never been in alliance with Eurasia. He,
Winston Smith, knew that Oceania had been in alliance with Eurasia as short
a time as four years ago. But where did that knowledge exist? Only in his
own consciousness, which in any case must soon be annihilated. And if all
others accepted the lie which the Party imposed--if all records told the
same tale--then the lie passed into history and became truth. 'Who controls
the past,' ran the Party slogan, 'controls the future: who controls the
present controls the past.' And yet the past, though of its nature
alterable, never had been altered. Whatever was true now was true from
everlasting to everlasting. It was quite simple. All that was needed was
an unending series of victories over your own memory. 'Reality control',
they called it: in Newspeak, 'doublethink'.

'Stand easy!' barked the instructress, a little more genially.

Winston sank his arms to his sides and slowly refilled his lungs with air.
His mind slid away into the labyrinthine world of doublethink. To know
and not to know, to be conscious of complete truthfulness while telling
carefully constructed lies, to hold simultaneously two opinions which
cancelled out, knowing them to be contradictory and believing in both of
them, to use logic against logic, to repudiate morality while laying claim
to it, to believe that democracy was impossible and that the Party was the
guardian of democracy, to forget whatever it was necessary to forget, then
to draw it back into memory again at the moment when it was needed, and
then promptly to forget it again: and above all, to apply the same process
to the process itself. That was the ultimate subtlety: consciously to
induce unconsciousness, and then, once again, to become unconscious of
the act of hypnosis you had just performed. Even to understand the word
'doublethink' involved the use of doublethink.

The instructress had called them to attention again. 'And now let's see
which of us can touch our toes!' she said enthusiastically. 'Right over
from the hips, please, comrades. ONE-two! ONE-two!...'

Winston loathed this exercise, which sent shooting pains all the way from
his heels to his buttocks and often ended by bringing on another coughing
fit. The half-pleasant quality went out of his meditations. The past, he
reflected, had not merely been altered, it had been actually destroyed. For
how could you establish even the most obvious fact when there existed no
record outside your own memory? He tried to remember in what year he had
first heard mention of Big Brother. He thought it must have been at some
time in the sixties, but it was impossible to be certain. In the Party
histories, of course, Big Brother figured as the leader and guardian of the
Revolution since its very earliest days. His exploits had been gradually
pushed backwards in time until already they extended into the fabulous
world of the forties and the thirties, when the capitalists in their
strange cylindrical hats still rode through the streets of London in great
gleaming motor-cars or horse carriages with glass sides. There was no
knowing how much of this legend was true and how much invented. Winston
could not even remember at what date the Party itself had come into
existence. He did not believe he had ever heard the word Ingsoc before
1960, but it was possible that in its Oldspeak form--'English Socialism',
that is to say--it had been current earlier. Everything melted into mist.
Sometimes, indeed, you could put your finger on a definite lie. It was not
true, for example, as was claimed in the Party history books, that the
Party had invented aeroplanes. He remembered aeroplanes since his earliest
childhood. But you could prove nothing. There was never any evidence. Just
once in his whole life he had held in his hands unmistakable documentary
proof of the falsification of an historical fact. And on that occasion----

'Smith!' screamed the shrewish voice from the telescreen. '6079 Smith W.!
Yes, YOU! Bend lower, please! You can do better than that. You're not
trying. Lower, please! THAT'S better, comrade. Now stand at ease, the
whole squad, and watch me.'

A sudden hot sweat had broken out all over Winston's body. His face
remained completely inscrutable. Never show dismay! Never show resentment!
A single flicker of the eyes could give you away. He stood watching while
the instructress raised her arms above her head and--one could not say
gracefully, but with remarkable neatness and efficiency--bent over and
tucked the first joint of her fingers under her toes.

'THERE, comrades! THAT'S how I want to see you doing it. Watch me again.
I'm thirty-nine and I've had four children. Now look.' She bent over again.
'You see MY knees aren't bent. You can all do it if you want to,' she added
as she straightened herself up. 'Anyone under forty-five is perfectly
capable of touching his toes. We don't all have the privilege of fighting
in the front line, but at least we can all keep fit. Remember our boys on
the Malabar front! And the sailors in the Floating Fortresses! Just think
what THEY have to put up with. Now try again. That's better, comrade,
that's MUCH better,' she added encouragingly as Winston, with a violent
lunge, succeeded in touching his toes with knees unbent, for the first
time in several years.




Chapter 4



With the deep, unconscious sigh which not even the nearness of the
telescreen could prevent him from uttering when his day's work started,
Winston pulled the speakwrite towards him, blew the dust from its
mouthpiece, and put on his spectacles. Then he unrolled and clipped
together four small cylinders of paper which had already flopped out of
the pneumatic tube on the right-hand side of his desk.

In the walls of the cubicle there were three orifices. To the right of the
speakwrite, a small pneumatic tube for written messages, to the left, a
larger one for newspapers; and in the side wall, within easy reach of
Winston's arm, a large oblong slit protected by a wire grating. This last
was for the disposal of waste paper. Similar slits existed in thousands or
tens of thousands throughout the building, not only in every room but at
short intervals in every corridor. For some reason they were nicknamed
memory holes. When one knew that any document was due for destruction, or
even when one saw a scrap of waste paper lying about, it was an automatic
action to lift the flap of the nearest memory hole and drop it in,
whereupon it would be whirled away on a current of warm air to the enormous
furnaces which were hidden somewhere in the recesses of the building.

Winston examined the four slips of paper which he had unrolled. Each
contained a message of only one or two lines, in the abbreviated
jargon--not actually Newspeak, but consisting
largely of Newspeak words--which was used in the Ministry for internal
purposes. They ran:


times 17.3.84 bb speech malreported africa rectify

times 19.12.83 forecasts 3 yp 4th quarter 83 misprints verify current issue

times 14.2.84 miniplenty malquoted chocolate rectify

times 3.12.83 reporting bb dayorder doubleplusungood refs unpersons rewrite
fullwise upsub antefiling


With a faint feeling of satisfaction Winston laid the fourth message aside.
It was an intricate and responsible job and had better be dealt with last.
The other three were routine matters, though the second one would probably
mean some tedious wading through lists of figures.

Winston dialled 'back numbers' on the telescreen and called for the
appropriate issues of 'The Times', which slid out of the pneumatic tube
after only a few minutes' delay. The messages he had received referred to
articles or news items which for one reason or another it was thought
necessary to alter, or, as the official phrase had it, to rectify. For
example, it appeared from 'The Times' of the seventeenth of March that Big
Brother, in his speech of the previous day, had predicted that the South
Indian front would remain quiet but that a Eurasian offensive would shortly
be launched in North Africa. As it happened, the Eurasian Higher Command
had launched its offensive in South India and left North Africa alone. It
was therefore necessary to rewrite a paragraph of Big Brother's speech, in
such a way as to make him predict the thing that had actually happened. Or
again, 'The Times' of the nineteenth of December had published the official
forecasts of the output of various classes of consumption goods in the
fourth quarter of 1983, which was also the sixth quarter of the Ninth
Three-Year Plan. Today's issue contained a statement of the actual output,
from which it appeared that the forecasts were in every instance grossly
wrong. Winston's job was to rectify the original figures by making them
agree with the later ones. As for the third message, it referred to a very
simple error which could be set right in a couple of minutes. As short
a time ago as February, the Ministry of Plenty had issued a promise
(a 'categorical pledge' were the official words) that there would be
no reduction of the chocolate ration during 1984. Actually, as Winston
was aware, the chocolate ration was to be reduced from thirty grammes
to twenty at the end of the present week. All that was needed was to
substitute for the original promise a warning that it would probably be
necessary to reduce the ration at some time in April.

As soon as Winston had dealt with each of the messages, he clipped his
speakwritten corrections to the appropriate copy of 'The Times' and pushed
them into the pneumatic tube. Then, with a movement which was as nearly as
possible unconscious, he crumpled up the original message and any notes
that he himself had made, and dropped them into the memory hole to be
devoured by the flames.

What happened in the unseen labyrinth to which the pneumatic tubes led, he
did not know in detail, but he did know in general terms. As soon as all
the corrections which happened to be necessary in any particular number
of 'The Times' had been assembled and collated, that number would be
reprinted, the original copy destroyed, and the corrected copy placed on
the files in its stead. This process of continuous alteration was applied
not only to newspapers, but to books, periodicals, pamphlets, posters,
leaflets, films, sound-tracks, cartoons, photographs--to every kind of
literature or documentation which might conceivably hold any political or
ideological significance. Day by day and almost minute by minute the past
was brought up to date. In this way every prediction made by the Party
could be shown by documentary evidence to have been correct, nor was any
item of news, or any expression of opinion, which conflicted with the
needs of the moment, ever allowed to remain on record. All history was
a palimpsest, scraped clean and reinscribed exactly as often as was
necessary. In no case would it have been possible, once the deed was done,
to prove that any falsification had taken place. The largest section of
the Records Department, far larger than the one on which Winston worked,
consisted simply of persons whose duty it was to track down and collect all
copies of books, newspapers, and other documents which had been superseded
and were due for destruction. A number of 'The Times' which might, because
of changes in political alignment, or mistaken prophecies uttered by Big
Brother, have been rewritten a dozen times still stood on the files bearing
its original date, and no other copy existed to contradict it. Books, also,
were recalled and rewritten again and again, and were invariably reissued
without any admission that any alteration had been made. Even the written
instructions which Winston received, and which he invariably got rid of
as soon as he had dealt with them, never stated or implied that an act of
forgery was to be committed: always the reference was to slips, errors,
misprints, or misquotations which it was necessary to put right in the
interests of accuracy.

But actually, he thought as he re-adjusted the Ministry of Plenty's
figures, it was not even forgery. It was merely the substitution of one
piece of nonsense for another. Most of the material that you were dealing
with had no connexion with anything in the real world, not even the kind of
connexion that is contained in a direct lie. Statistics were just as much
a fantasy in their original version as in their rectified version. A great
deal of the time you were expected to make them up out of your head. For
example, the Ministry of Plenty's forecast had estimated the output of
boots for the quarter at 145 million pairs. The actual output was given as
sixty-two millions. Winston, however, in rewriting the forecast, marked
the figure down to fifty-seven millions, so as to allow for the usual claim
that the quota had been overfulfilled. In any case, sixty-two millions was
no nearer the truth than fifty-seven millions, or than 145 millions. Very
likely no boots had been produced at all. Likelier still, nobody knew
how many had been produced, much less cared. All one knew was that every
quarter astronomical numbers of boots were produced on paper, while perhaps
half the population of Oceania went barefoot. And so it was with every
class of recorded fact, great or small. Everything faded away into a
shadow-world in which, finally, even the date of the year had become
uncertain.

Winston glanced across the hall. In the corresponding cubicle on the other
side a small, precise-looking, dark-chinned man named Tillotson was working
steadily away, with a folded newspaper on his knee and his mouth very close
to the mouthpiece of the speakwrite. He had the air of trying to keep what
he was saying a secret between himself and the telescreen. He looked up,
and his spectacles darted a hostile flash in Winston's direction.

Winston hardly knew Tillotson, and had no idea what work he was employed
on. People in the Records Department did not readily talk about their jobs.
In the long, windowless hall, with its double row of cubicles and its
endless rustle of papers and hum of voices murmuring into speakwrites,
there were quite a dozen people whom Winston did not even know by name,
though he daily saw them hurrying to and fro in the corridors or
gesticulating in the Two Minutes Hate. He knew that in the cubicle next
to him the little woman with sandy hair toiled day in day out, simply at
tracking down and deleting from the Press the names of people who had been
vaporized and were therefore considered never to have existed. There was a
certain fitness in this, since her own husband had been vaporized a couple
of years earlier. And a few cubicles away a mild, ineffectual, dreamy
creature named Ampleforth, with very hairy ears and a surprising talent
for juggling with rhymes and metres, was engaged in producing garbled
versions--definitive texts, they were called--of poems which had become
ideologically offensive, but which for one reason or another were to be
retained in the anthologies. And this hall, with its fifty workers or
thereabouts, was only one sub-section, a single cell, as it were, in the
huge complexity of the Records Department. Beyond, above, below, were other
swarms of workers engaged in an unimaginable multitude of jobs. There were
the huge printing-shops with their sub-editors, their typography experts,
and their elaborately equipped studios for the faking of photographs. There
was the tele-programmes section with its engineers, its producers, and its
teams of actors specially chosen for their skill in imitating voices. There
were the armies of reference clerks whose job was simply to draw up lists
of books and periodicals which were due for recall. There were the vast
repositories where the corrected documents were stored, and the hidden
furnaces where the original copies were destroyed. And somewhere or other,
quite anonymous, there were the directing brains who co-ordinated the whole
effort and laid down the lines of policy which made it necessary that this
fragment of the past should be preserved, that one falsified, and the other
rubbed out of existence.

And the Records Department, after all, was itself only a single branch of
the Ministry of Truth, whose primary job was not to reconstruct the past
but to supply the citizens of Oceania with newspapers, films, textbooks,
telescreen programmes, plays, novels--with every conceivable kind of
information, instruction, or entertainment, from a statue to a slogan,
from a lyric poem to a biological treatise, and from a child's
spelling-book to a Newspeak dictionary. And the Ministry had not only to
supply the multifarious needs of the party, but also to repeat the whole
operation at a lower level for the benefit of the proletariat. There
was a whole chain of separate departments dealing with proletarian
literature, music, drama, and entertainment generally. Here were produced
rubbishy newspapers containing almost nothing except sport, crime and
astrology, sensational five-cent novelettes, films oozing with sex, and
sentimental songs which were composed entirely by mechanical means on a
special kind of kaleidoscope known as a versificator. There was even
a whole sub-section--Pornosec, it was called in Newspeak--engaged in
producing the lowest kind of pornography, which was sent out in sealed
packets and which no Party member, other than those who worked on it,
was permitted to look at.

Three messages had slid out of the pneumatic tube while Winston was
working, but they were simple matters, and he had disposed of them before
the Two Minutes Hate interrupted him. When the Hate was over he returned
to his cubicle, took the Newspeak dictionary from the shelf, pushed the
speakwrite to one side, cleaned his spectacles, and settled down to his
main job of the morning.

Winston's greatest pleasure in life was in his work. Most of it was a
tedious routine, but included in it there were also jobs so difficult and
intricate that you could lose yourself in them as in the depths of a
mathematical problem--delicate pieces of forgery in which you had nothing
to guide you except your knowledge of the principles of Ingsoc and your
estimate of what the Party wanted you to say. Winston was good at this kind
of thing. On occasion he had even been entrusted with the rectification of
'The Times' leading articles, which were written entirely in Newspeak.
He unrolled the message that he had set aside earlier. It ran:


   times 3.12.83 reporting bb dayorder doubleplusungood refs unpersons
rewrite fullwise upsub antefiling


In Oldspeak (or standard English) this might be rendered:


The reporting of Big Brother's Order for the Day in 'The Times' of December
3rd 1983 is extremely unsatisfactory and makes references to non-existent
persons. Rewrite it in full and submit your draft to higher authority
before filing.


Winston read through the offending article. Big Brother's Order for the
Day, it seemed, had been chiefly devoted to praising the work of an
organization known as FFCC, which supplied cigarettes and other comforts
to the sailors in the Floating Fortresses. A certain Comrade Withers, a
prominent member of the Inner Party, had been singled out for special
mention and awarded a decoration, the Order of Conspicuous Merit, Second
Class.

Three months later FFCC had suddenly been dissolved with no reasons given.
One could assume that Withers and his associates were now in disgrace, but
there had been no report of the matter in the Press or on the telescreen.
That was to be expected, since it was unusual for political offenders to
be put on trial or even publicly denounced. The great purges involving
thousands of people, with public trials of traitors and thought-criminals
who made abject confession of their crimes and were afterwards executed,
were special show-pieces not occurring oftener than once in a couple of
years. More commonly, people who had incurred the displeasure of the
Party simply disappeared and were never heard of again. One never had the
smallest clue as to what had happened to them. In some cases they might
not even be dead. Perhaps thirty people personally known to Winston, not
counting his parents, had disappeared at one time or another.

Winston stroked his nose gently with a paper-clip. In the cubicle
across the way Comrade Tillotson was still crouching secretively over
his speakwrite. He raised his head for a moment: again the hostile
spectacle-flash. Winston wondered whether Comrade Tillotson was engaged
on the same job as himself. It was perfectly possible. So tricky a piece
of work would never be entrusted to a single person: on the other hand,
to turn it over to a committee would be to admit openly that an act of
fabrication was taking place. Very likely as many as a dozen people were
now working away on rival versions of what Big Brother had actually said.
And presently some master brain in the Inner Party would select this
version or that, would re-edit it and set in motion the complex processes
of cross-referencing that would be required, and then the chosen lie
would pass into the permanent records and become truth.

Winston did not know why Withers had been disgraced. Perhaps it was for
corruption or incompetence. Perhaps Big Brother was merely getting rid of
a too-popular subordinate. Perhaps Withers or someone close to him had
been suspected of heretical tendencies. Or perhaps--what was likeliest of
all--the thing had simply happened because purges and vaporizations were a
necessary part of the mechanics of government. The only real clue lay in
the words 'refs unpersons', which indicated that Withers was already dead.
You could not invariably assume this to be the case when people were
arrested. Sometimes they were released and allowed to remain at liberty
for as much as a year or two years before being executed. Very occasionally
some person whom you had believed dead long since would make a ghostly
reappearance at some public trial where he would implicate hundreds of
others by his testimony before vanishing, this time for ever. Withers,
however, was already an UNPERSON. He did not exist: he had never existed.
Winston decided that it would not be enough simply to reverse the tendency
of Big Brother's speech. It was better to make it deal with something
totally unconnected with its original subject.

He might turn the speech into the usual denunciation of traitors and
thought-criminals, but that was a little too obvious, while to invent a
victory at the front, or some triumph of over-production in the Ninth
Three-Year Plan, might complicate the records too much. What was needed
was a piece of pure fantasy. Suddenly there sprang into his mind, ready
made as it were, the image of a certain Comrade Ogilvy, who had recently
died in battle, in heroic circumstances. There were occasions when Big
Brother devoted his Order for the Day to commemorating some humble,
rank-and-file Party member whose life and death he held up as an example
worthy to be followed. Today he should commemorate Comrade Ogilvy. It was
true that there was no such person as Comrade Ogilvy, but a few lines of
print and a couple of faked photographs would soon bring him into
existence.

Winston thought for a moment, then pulled the speakwrite towards him and
began dictating in Big Brother's familiar style: a style at once military
and pedantic, and, because of a trick of asking questions and then
promptly answering them ('What lessons do we learn from this fact,
comrades? The lesson--which is also one of the fundamental principles
of Ingsoc--that,' etc., etc.), easy to imitate.

At the age of three Comrade Ogilvy had refused all toys except a drum, a
sub-machine gun, and a model helicopter. At six--a year early, by a special
relaxation of the rules--he had joined the Spies, at nine he had been a
troop leader. At eleven he had denounced his uncle to the Thought Police
after overhearing a conversation which appeared to him to have criminal
tendencies. At seventeen he had been a district organizer of the Junior
Anti-Sex League. At nineteen he had designed a hand-grenade which had
been adopted by the Ministry of Peace and which, at its first trial, had
killed thirty-one Eurasian prisoners in one burst. At twenty-three he had
perished in action. Pursued by enemy jet planes while flying over the
Indian Ocean with important despatches, he had weighted his body with his
machine gun and leapt out of the helicopter into deep water, despatches
and all--an end, said Big Brother, which it was impossible to contemplate
without feelings of envy. Big Brother added a few remarks on the purity
and single-mindedness of Comrade Ogilvy's life. He was a total abstainer
and a nonsmoker, had no recreations except a daily hour in the gymnasium,
and had taken a vow of celibacy, believing marriage and the care of a
family to be incompatible with a twenty-four-hour-a-day devotion to duty.
He had no subjects of conversation except the principles of Ingsoc, and
no aim in life except the defeat of the Eurasian enemy and the hunting-down
of spies, saboteurs, thought-criminals, and traitors generally.

Winston debated with himself whether to award Comrade Ogilvy the Order of
Conspicuous Merit: in the end he decided against it because of the
unnecessary cross-referencing that it would entail.

Once again he glanced at his rival in the opposite cubicle. Something
seemed to tell him with certainty that Tillotson was busy on the same job
as himself. There was no way of knowing whose job would finally be adopted,
but he felt a profound conviction that it would be his own. Comrade Ogilvy,
unimagined an hour ago, was now a fact. It struck him as curious that you
could create dead men but not living ones. Comrade Ogilvy, who had never
existed in the present, now existed in the past, and when once the act of
forgery was forgotten, he would exist just as authentically, and upon the
same evidence, as Charlemagne or Julius Caesar.




Chapter 5



In the low-ceilinged canteen, deep underground, the lunch queue jerked
slowly forward. The room was already very full and deafeningly noisy. From
the grille at the counter the steam of stew came pouring forth, with a sour
metallic smell which did not quite overcome the fumes of Victory Gin. On
the far side of the room there was a small bar, a mere hole in the wall,
where gin could be bought at ten cents the large nip.

'Just the man I was looking for,' said a voice at Winston's back.

He turned round. It was his friend Syme, who worked in the Research
Department. Perhaps 'friend' was not exactly the right word. You did not
have friends nowadays, you had comrades: but there were some comrades whose
society was pleasanter than that of others. Syme was a philologist, a
specialist in Newspeak. Indeed, he was one of the enormous team of experts
now engaged in compiling the Eleventh Edition of the Newspeak Dictionary.
He was a tiny creature, smaller than Winston, with dark hair and large,
protuberant eyes, at once mournful and derisive, which seemed to search
your face closely while he was speaking to you.

'I wanted to ask you whether you'd got any razor blades,' he said.

'Not one!' said Winston with a sort of guilty haste. 'I've tried all over
the place. They don't exist any longer.'

Everyone kept asking you for razor blades. Actually he had two unused ones
which he was hoarding up. There had been a famine of them for months past.
At any given moment there was some necessary article which the Party shops
were unable to supply. Sometimes it was buttons, sometimes it was darning
wool, sometimes it was shoelaces; at present it was razor blades. You could
only get hold of them, if at all, by scrounging more or less furtively on
the 'free' market.

'I've been using the same blade for six weeks,' he added untruthfully.

The queue gave another jerk forward. As they halted he turned and faced
Syme again. Each of them took a greasy metal tray from a pile at the end
of the counter.

'Did you go and see the prisoners hanged yesterday?' said Syme.

'I was working,' said Winston indifferently. 'I shall see it on the
flicks, I suppose.'

'A very inadequate substitute,' said Syme.

His mocking eyes roved over Winston's face. 'I know you,' the eyes seemed
to say, 'I see through you. I know very well why you didn't go to see
those prisoners hanged.' In an intellectual way, Syme was venomously
orthodox. He would talk with a disagreeable gloating satisfaction of
helicopter raids on enemy villages, and trials and confessions of
thought-criminals, the executions in the cellars of the Ministry of Love.
Talking to him was largely a matter of getting him away from such subjects
and entangling him, if possible, in the technicalities of Newspeak, on
which he was authoritative and interesting. Winston turned his head a
little aside to avoid the scrutiny of the large dark eyes.

'It was a good hanging,' said Syme reminiscently. 'I think it spoils it
when they tie their feet together. I like to see them kicking. And above
all, at the end, the tongue sticking right out, and blue--a quite bright
blue. That's the detail that appeals to me.'

'Nex', please!' yelled the white-aproned prole with the ladle.

Winston and Syme pushed their trays beneath the grille. On to each was
dumped swiftly the regulation lunch--a metal pannikin of pinkish-grey stew,
a hunk of bread, a cube of cheese, a mug of milkless Victory Coffee, and
one saccharine tablet.

'There's a table over there, under that telescreen,' said Syme. 'Let's pick
up a gin on the way.'

The gin was served out to them in handleless china mugs. They threaded
their way across the crowded room and unpacked their trays on to the
metal-topped table, on one corner of which someone had left a pool of stew,
a filthy liquid mess that had the appearance of vomit. Winston took up his
mug of gin, paused for an instant to collect his nerve, and gulped the
oily-tasting stuff down. When he had winked the tears out of his eyes he
suddenly discovered that he was hungry. He began swallowing spoonfuls of
the stew, which, in among its general sloppiness, had cubes of spongy
pinkish stuff which was probably a preparation of meat. Neither of them
spoke again till they had emptied their pannikins. From the table at
Winston's left, a little behind his back, someone was talking rapidly and
continuously, a harsh gabble almost like the quacking of a duck, which
pierced the general uproar of the room.

'How is the Dictionary getting on?' said Winston, raising his voice to
overcome the noise.

'Slowly,' said Syme. 'I'm on the adjectives. It's fascinating.'

He had brightened up immediately at the mention of Newspeak. He pushed his
pannikin aside, took up his hunk of bread in one delicate hand and his
cheese in the other, and leaned across the table so as to be able to speak
without shouting.

'The Eleventh Edition is the definitive edition,' he said. 'We're getting
the language into its final shape--the shape it's going to have when nobody
speaks anything else. When we've finished with it, people like you will
have to learn it all over again. You think, I dare say, that our chief job
is inventing new words. But not a bit of it! We're destroying words--scores
of them, hundreds of them, every day. We're cutting the language down to
the bone. The Eleventh Edition won't contain a single word that will become
obsolete before the year 2050.'

He bit hungrily into his bread and swallowed a couple of mouthfuls, then
continued speaking, with a sort of pedant's passion. His thin dark face
had become animated, his eyes had lost their mocking expression and grown
almost dreamy.

'It's a beautiful thing, the destruction of words. Of course the great
wastage is in the verbs and adjectives, but there are hundreds of nouns
that can be got rid of as well. It isn't only the synonyms; there are also
the antonyms. After all, what justification is there for a word which is
simply the opposite of some other word? A word contains its opposite in
itself. Take "good", for instance. If you have a word like "good", what
need is there for a word like "bad"? "Ungood" will do just as well--better,
because it's an exact opposite, which the other is not. Or again, if you
want a stronger version of "good", what sense is there in having a whole
string of vague useless words like "excellent" and "splendid" and all the
rest of them? "Plusgood" covers the meaning, or "doubleplusgood" if you
want something stronger still. Of course we use those forms already. but
in the final version of Newspeak there'll be nothing else. In the end the
whole notion of goodness and badness will be covered by only six words--in
reality, only one word. Don't you see the beauty of that, Winston? It was
B.B.'s idea originally, of course,' he added as an afterthought.

A sort of vapid eagerness flitted across Winston's face at the mention of
Big Brother. Nevertheless Syme immediately detected a certain lack of
enthusiasm.

'You haven't a real appreciation of Newspeak, Winston,' he said almost
sadly. 'Even when you write it you're still thinking in Oldspeak. I've read
some of those pieces that you write in "The Times" occasionally. They're
good enough, but they're translations. In your heart you'd prefer to stick
to Oldspeak, with all its vagueness and its useless shades of meaning.
You don't grasp the beauty of the destruction of words. Do you know that
Newspeak is the only language in the world whose vocabulary gets smaller
every year?'

Winston did know that, of course. He smiled, sympathetically he hoped, not
trusting himself to speak. Syme bit off another fragment of the
dark-coloured bread, chewed it briefly, and went on:

'Don't you see that the whole aim of Newspeak is to narrow the range of
thought? In the end we shall make thoughtcrime literally impossible,
because there will be no words in which to express it. Every concept that
can ever be needed, will be expressed by exactly one word, with its meaning
rigidly defined and all its subsidiary meanings rubbed out and forgotten.
Already, in the Eleventh Edition, we're not far from that point. But the
process will still be continuing long after you and I are dead. Every year
fewer and fewer words, and the range of consciousness always a little
smaller. Even now, of course, there's no reason or excuse for committing
thoughtcrime. It's merely a question of self-discipline, reality-control.
But in the end there won't be any need even for that. The Revolution will
be complete when the language is perfect. Newspeak is Ingsoc and Ingsoc
is Newspeak,' he added with a sort of mystical satisfaction. 'Has it ever
occurred to you, Winston, that by the year 2050, at the very latest, not a
single human being will be alive who could understand such a conversation
as we are having now?'

'Except----' began Winston doubtfully, and he stopped.

It had been on the tip of his tongue to say 'Except the proles,' but he
checked himself, not feeling fully certain that this remark was not in
some way unorthodox. Syme, however, had divined what he was about to say.

'The proles are not human beings,' he said carelessly. 'By 2050--earlier,
probably--all real knowledge of Oldspeak will have disappeared. The whole
literature of the past will have been destroyed. Chaucer, Shakespeare,
Milton, Byron--they'll exist only in Newspeak versions, not merely changed
into something different, but actually changed into something contradictory
of what they used to be. Even the literature of the Party will change.
Even the slogans will change. How could you have a slogan like "freedom is
slavery" when the concept of freedom has been abolished? The whole climate
of thought will be different. In fact there will be no thought, as we
understand it now. Orthodoxy means not thinking--not needing to think.
Orthodoxy is unconsciousness.'

One of these days, thought Winston with sudden deep conviction, Syme will
be vaporized. He is too intelligent. He sees too clearly and speaks too
plainly. The Party does not like such people. One day he will disappear.
It is written in his face.

Winston had finished his bread and cheese. He turned a little sideways
in his chair to drink his mug of coffee. At the table on his left the man
with the strident voice was still talking remorselessly away. A young
woman who was perhaps his secretary, and who was sitting with her back
to Winston, was listening to him and seemed to be eagerly agreeing with
everything that he said. From time to time Winston caught some such remark
as 'I think you're so right, I do so agree with you', uttered in a youthful
and rather silly feminine voice. But the other voice never stopped for an
instant, even when the girl was speaking. Winston knew the man by sight,
though he knew no more about him than that he held some important post
in the Fiction Department. He was a man of about thirty, with a muscular
throat and a large, mobile mouth. His head was thrown back a little, and
because of the angle at which he was sitting, his spectacles caught the
light and presented to Winston two blank discs instead of eyes. What was
slightly horrible, was that from the stream of sound that poured out of
his mouth it was almost impossible to distinguish a single word. Just
once Winston caught a phrase--'complete and final elimination of
Goldsteinism'--jerked out very rapidly and, as it seemed, all in one piece,
like a line of type cast solid. For the rest it was just a noise, a
quack-quack-quacking. And yet, though you could not actually hear what the
man was saying, you could not be in any doubt about its general nature.
He might be denouncing Goldstein and demanding sterner measures against
thought-criminals and saboteurs, he might be fulminating against the
atrocities of the Eurasian army, he might be praising Big Brother or the
heroes on the Malabar front--it made no difference. Whatever it was, you
could be certain that every word of it was pure orthodoxy, pure Ingsoc.
As he watched the eyeless face with the jaw moving rapidly up and down,
Winston had a curious feeling that this was not a real human being but
some kind of dummy. It was not the man's brain that was speaking, it was
his larynx. The stuff that was coming out of him consisted of words, but
it was not speech in the true sense: it was a noise uttered in
unconsciousness, like the quacking of a duck.

Syme had fallen silent for a moment, and with the handle of his spoon was
tracing patterns in the puddle of stew. The voice from the other table
quacked rapidly on, easily audible in spite of the surrounding din.

'There is a word in Newspeak,' said Syme, 'I don't know whether you know
it: DUCKSPEAK, to quack like a duck. It is one of those interesting words
that have two contradictory meanings. Applied to an opponent, it is abuse,
applied to someone you agree with, it is praise.'

Unquestionably Syme will be vaporized, Winston thought again. He thought
it with a kind of sadness, although well knowing that Syme despised him
and slightly disliked him, and was fully capable of denouncing him as a
thought-criminal if he saw any reason for doing so. There was something
subtly wrong with Syme. There was something that he lacked: discretion,
aloofness, a sort of saving stupidity. You could not say that he was
unorthodox. He believed in the principles of Ingsoc, he venerated Big
Brother, he rejoiced over victories, he hated heretics, not merely with
sincerity but with a sort of restless zeal, an up-to-dateness of
information, which the ordinary Party member did not approach. Yet a faint
air of disreputability always clung to him. He said things that would have
been better unsaid, he had read too many books, he frequented the Chestnut
Tree Cafe, haunt of painters and musicians. There was no law, not even an
unwritten law, against frequenting the Chestnut Tree Cafe, yet the place
was somehow ill-omened. The old, discredited leaders of the Party had been
used to gather there before they were finally purged. Goldstein himself,
it was said, had sometimes been seen there, years and decades ago. Syme's
fate was not difficult to foresee. And yet it was a fact that if Syme
grasped, even for three seconds, the nature of his, Winston's, secret
opinions, he would betray him instantly to the Thought Police. So would
anybody else, for that matter: but Syme more than most. Zeal was not
enough. Orthodoxy was unconsciousness.

Syme looked up. 'Here comes Parsons,' he said.

Something in the tone of his voice seemed to add, 'that bloody fool'.
Parsons, Winston's fellow-tenant at Victory Mansions, was in fact threading
his way across the room--a tubby, middle-sized man with fair hair and a
froglike face. At thirty-five he was already putting on rolls of fat at
neck and waistline, but his movements were brisk and boyish. His whole
appearance was that of a little boy grown large, so much so that although
he was wearing the regulation overalls, it was almost impossible not to
think of him as being dressed in the blue shorts, grey shirt, and red
neckerchief of the Spies. In visualizing him one saw always a picture of
dimpled knees and sleeves rolled back from pudgy forearms. Parsons did,
indeed, invariably revert to shorts when a community hike or any other
physical activity gave him an excuse for doing so. He greeted them both
with a cheery 'Hullo, hullo!' and sat down at the table, giving off an
intense smell of sweat. Beads of moisture stood out all over his pink face.
His powers of sweating were extraordinary. At the Community Centre you
could always tell when he had been playing table-tennis by the dampness of
the bat handle. Syme had produced a strip of paper on which there was a
long column of words, and was studying it with an ink-pencil between his
fingers.

'Look at him working away in the lunch hour,' said Parsons, nudging
Winston. 'Keenness, eh? What's that you've got there, old boy? Something
a bit too brainy for me, I expect. Smith, old boy, I'll tell you why I'm
chasing you. It's that sub you forgot to give me.'

'Which sub is that?' said Winston, automatically feeling for money. About
a quarter of one's salary had to be earmarked for voluntary subscriptions,
which were so numerous that it was difficult to keep track of them.

'For Hate Week. You know--the house-by-house fund. I'm treasurer for our
block. We're making an all-out effort--going to put on a tremendous show.
I tell you, it won't be my fault if old Victory Mansions doesn't have the
biggest outfit of flags in the whole street. Two dollars you promised me.'

Winston found and handed over two creased and filthy notes, which Parsons
entered in a small notebook, in the neat handwriting of the illiterate.

'By the way, old boy,' he said. 'I hear that little beggar of mine let fly
at you with his catapult yesterday. I gave him a good dressing-down for it.
In fact I told him I'd take the catapult away if he does it again.'

'I think he was a little upset at not going to the execution,' said
Winston.

'Ah, well--what I mean to say, shows the right spirit, doesn't it?
Mischievous little beggars they are, both of them, but talk about keenness!
All they think about is the Spies, and the war, of course. D'you know what
that little girl of mine did last Saturday, when her troop was on a hike
out Berkhamsted way? She got two other girls to go with her, slipped off
from the hike, and spent the whole afternoon following a strange man. They
kept on his tail for two hours, right through the woods, and then, when
they got into Amersham, handed him over to the patrols.'

'What did they do that for?' said Winston, somewhat taken aback. Parsons
went on triumphantly:

'My kid made sure he was some kind of enemy agent--might have been dropped
by parachute, for instance. But here's the point, old boy. What do you
think put her on to him in the first place? She spotted he was wearing a
funny kind of shoes--said she'd never seen anyone wearing shoes like that
before. So the chances were he was a foreigner. Pretty smart for a nipper
of seven, eh?'

'What happened to the man?' said Winston.

'Ah, that I couldn't say, of course. But I wouldn't be altogether surprised
if----' Parsons made the motion of aiming a rifle, and clicked his tongue
for the explosion.

'Good,' said Syme abstractedly, without looking up from his strip of paper.

'Of course we can't afford to take chances,' agreed Winston dutifully.

'What I mean to say, there is a war on,' said Parsons.

As though in confirmation of this, a trumpet call floated from the
telescreen just above their heads. However, it was not the proclamation of
a military victory this time, but merely an announcement from the Ministry
of Plenty.

'Comrades!' cried an eager youthful voice. 'Attention, comrades! We have
glorious news for you. We have won the battle for production! Returns now
completed of the output of all classes of consumption goods show that the
standard of living has risen by no less than 20 per cent over the past
year. All over Oceania this morning there were irrepressible spontaneous
demonstrations when workers marched out of factories and offices and
paraded through the streets with banners voicing their gratitude to Big
Brother for the new, happy life which his wise leadership has bestowed
upon us. Here are some of the completed figures. Foodstuffs----'

The phrase 'our new, happy life' recurred several times. It had been a
favourite of late with the Ministry of Plenty. Parsons, his attention
caught by the trumpet call, sat listening with a sort of gaping solemnity,
a sort of edified boredom. He could not follow the figures, but he was
aware that they were in some way a cause for satisfaction. He had lugged
out a huge and filthy pipe which was already half full of charred tobacco.
With the tobacco ration at 100 grammes a week it was seldom possible to
fill a pipe to the top. Winston was smoking a Victory Cigarette which he
held carefully horizontal. The new ration did not start till tomorrow and
he had only four cigarettes left. For the moment he had shut his ears to
the remoter noises and was listening to the stuff that streamed out of the
telescreen. It appeared that there had even been demonstrations to thank
Big Brother for raising the chocolate ration to twenty grammes a week. And
only yesterday, he reflected, it had been announced that the ration was
to be REDUCED to twenty grammes a week. Was it possible that they could
swallow that, after only twenty-four hours? Yes, they swallowed it. Parsons
swallowed it easily, with the stupidity of an animal. The eyeless creature
at the other table swallowed it fanatically, passionately, with a furious
desire to track down, denounce, and vaporize anyone who should suggest that
last week the ration had been thirty grammes. Syme, too--in some more
complex way, involving doublethink, Syme swallowed it. Was he, then, ALONE
in the possession of a memory?

The fabulous statistics continued to pour out of the telescreen. As
compared with last year there was more food, more clothes, more houses,
more furniture, more cooking-pots, more fuel, more ships, more helicopters,
more books, more babies--more of everything except disease, crime, and
insanity. Year by year and minute by minute, everybody and everything was
whizzing rapidly upwards. As Syme had done earlier Winston had taken up
his spoon and was dabbling in the pale-coloured gravy that dribbled across
the table, drawing a long streak of it out into a pattern. He meditated
resentfully on the physical texture of life. Had it always been like
this? Had food always tasted like this? He looked round the canteen.
A low-ceilinged, crowded room, its walls grimy from the contact of
innumerable bodies; battered metal tables and chairs, placed so close
together that you sat with elbows touching; bent spoons, dented trays,
coarse white mugs; all surfaces greasy, grime in every crack; and a
sourish, composite smell of bad gin and bad coffee and metallic stew and
dirty clothes. Always in your stomach and in your skin there was a sort
of protest, a feeling that you had been cheated of something that you had
a right to. It was true that he had no memories of anything greatly
different. In any time that he could accurately remember, there had never
been quite enough to eat, one had never had socks or underclothes that
were not full of holes, furniture had always been battered and rickety,
rooms underheated, tube trains crowded, houses falling to pieces,
bread dark-coloured, tea a rarity, coffee filthy-tasting, cigarettes
insufficient--nothing cheap and plentiful except synthetic gin. And though,
of course, it grew worse as one's body aged, was it not a sign that this
was NOT the natural order of things, if one's heart sickened at the
discomfort and dirt and scarcity, the interminable winters, the stickiness
of one's socks, the lifts that never worked, the cold water, the gritty
soap, the cigarettes that came to pieces, the food with its strange evil
tastes? Why should one feel it to be intolerable unless one had some kind
of ancestral memory that things had once been different?

He looked round the canteen again. Nearly everyone was ugly, and would
still have been ugly even if dressed otherwise than in the uniform blue
overalls. On the far side of the room, sitting at a table alone, a small,
curiously beetle-like man was drinking a cup of coffee, his little eyes
darting suspicious glances from side to side. How easy it was, thought
Winston, if you did not look about you, to believe that the physical type
set up by the Party as an ideal--tall muscular youths and deep-bosomed
maidens, blond-haired, vital, sunburnt, carefree--existed and even
predominated. Actually, so far as he could judge, the majority of people
in Airstrip One were small, dark, and ill-favoured. It was curious how that
beetle-like type proliferated in the Ministries: little dumpy men, growing
stout very early in life, with short legs, swift scuttling movements, and
fat inscrutable faces with very small eyes. It was the type that seemed to
flourish best under the dominion of the Party.

The announcement from the Ministry of Plenty ended on another trumpet call
and gave way to tinny music. Parsons, stirred to vague enthusiasm by the
bombardment of figures, took his pipe out of his mouth.

'The Ministry of Plenty's certainly done a good job this year,' he said
with a knowing shake of his head. 'By the way, Smith old boy, I suppose
you haven't got any razor blades you can let me have?'

'Not one,' said Winston. 'I've been using the same blade for six weeks
myself.'

'Ah, well--just thought I'd ask you, old boy.'

'Sorry,' said Winston.

The quacking voice from the next table, temporarily silenced during the
Ministry's announcement, had started up again, as loud as ever. For some
reason Winston suddenly found himself thinking of Mrs Parsons, with her
wispy hair and the dust in the creases of her face. Within two years those
children would be denouncing her to the Thought Police. Mrs Parsons would
be vaporized. Syme would be vaporized. Winston would be vaporized. O'Brien
would be vaporized. Parsons, on the other hand, would never be vaporized.
The eyeless creature with the quacking voice would never be vaporized.
The little beetle-like men who scuttle so nimbly through the labyrinthine
corridors of Ministries they, too, would never be vaporized. And the girl
with dark hair, the girl from the Fiction Department--she would never be
vaporized either. It seemed to him that he knew instinctively who would
survive and who would perish: though just what it was that made for
survival, it was not easy to say.

At this moment he was dragged out of his reverie with a violent jerk. The
girl at the next table had turned partly round and was looking at him. It
was the girl with dark hair. She was looking at him in a sidelong way, but
with curious intensity. The instant she caught his eye she looked away
again.

The sweat started out on Winston's backbone. A horrible pang of terror
went through him. It was gone almost at once, but it left a sort of nagging
uneasiness behind. Why was she watching him? Why did she keep following him
about? Unfortunately he could not remember whether she had already been at
the table when he arrived, or had come there afterwards. But yesterday, at
any rate, during the Two Minutes Hate, she had sat immediately behind him
when there was no apparent need to do so. Quite likely her real object had
been to listen to him and make sure whether he was shouting loudly enough.

His earlier thought returned to him: probably she was not actually a member
of the Thought Police, but then it was precisely the amateur spy who was
the greatest danger of all. He did not know how long she had been looking
at him, but perhaps for as much as five minutes, and it was possible
that his features had not been perfectly under control. It was terribly
dangerous to let your thoughts wander when you were in any public place
or within range of a telescreen. The smallest thing could give you away.
A nervous tic, an unconscious look of anxiety, a habit of muttering to
yourself--anything that carried with it the suggestion of abnormality, of
having something to hide. In any case, to wear an improper expression on
your face (to look incredulous when a victory was announced, for example)
was itself a punishable offence. There was even a word for it in Newspeak:
FACECRIME, it was called.

The girl had turned her back on him again. Perhaps after all she was not
really following him about, perhaps it was coincidence that she had sat so
close to him two days running. His cigarette had gone out, and he laid it
carefully on the edge of the table. He would finish smoking it after work,
if he could keep the tobacco in it. Quite likely the person at the next
table was a spy of the Thought Police, and quite likely he would be in the
cellars of the Ministry of Love within three days, but a cigarette end
must not be wasted. Syme had folded up his strip of paper and stowed it
away in his pocket. Parsons had begun talking again.

'Did I ever tell you, old boy,' he said, chuckling round the stem of his
pipe, 'about the time when those two nippers of mine set fire to the old
market-woman's skirt because they saw her wrapping up sausages in a poster
of B.B.? Sneaked up behind her and set fire to it with a box of matches.
Burned her quite badly, I believe. Little beggars, eh? But keen as mustard!
That's a first-rate training they give them in the Spies nowadays--better
than in my day, even. What d'you think's the latest thing they've served
them out with? Ear trumpets for listening through keyholes! My little
girl brought one home the other night--tried it out on our sitting-room
door, and reckoned she could hear twice as much as with her ear to the
hole. Of course it's only a toy, mind you. Still, gives 'em the right
idea, eh?'

At this moment the telescreen let out a piercing whistle. It was the
signal to return to work. All three men sprang to their feet to join in
the struggle round the lifts, and the remaining tobacco fell out of
Winston's cigarette.




Chapter 6



Winston was writing in his diary:


   It was three years ago. It was on a dark evening, in a narrow
side-street near one of the big railway stations. She was standing near a
doorway in the wall, under a street lamp that hardly gave any light. She
had a young face, painted very thick. It was really the paint that appealed
to me, the whiteness of it, like a mask, and the bright red lips. Party
women never paint their faces. There was nobody else in the street, and no
telescreens. She said two dollars. I----


For the moment it was too difficult to go on. He shut his eyes and pressed
his fingers against them, trying to squeeze out the vision that kept
recurring. He had an almost overwhelming temptation to shout a string of
filthy words at the top of his voice. Or to bang his head against the wall,
to kick over the table, and hurl the inkpot through the window--to do any
violent or noisy or painful thing that might black out the memory that was
tormenting him.

Your worst enemy, he reflected, was your own nervous system. At any moment
the tension inside you was liable to translate itself into some visible
symptom. He thought of a man whom he had passed in the street a few weeks
back; a quite ordinary-looking man, a Party member, aged thirty-five to
forty, tallish and thin, carrying a brief-case. They were a few metres
apart when the left side of the man's face was suddenly contorted by a sort
of spasm. It happened again just as they were passing one another: it was
only a twitch, a quiver, rapid as the clicking of a camera shutter, but
obviously habitual. He remembered thinking at the time: That poor devil is
done for. And what was frightening was that the action was quite possibly
unconscious. The most deadly danger of all was talking in your sleep. There
was no way of guarding against that, so far as he could see.

He drew his breath and went on writing:


   I went with her through the doorway and across a backyard into a
basement kitchen. There was a bed against the wall, and a lamp on the
table, turned down very low. She----


His teeth were set on edge. He would have liked to spit. Simultaneously
with the woman in the basement kitchen he thought of Katharine, his wife.
Winston was married--had been married, at any rate: probably he still was
married, so far as he knew his wife was not dead. He seemed to breathe
again the warm stuffy odour of the basement kitchen, an odour compounded
of bugs and dirty clothes and villainous cheap scent, but nevertheless
alluring, because no woman of the Party ever used scent, or could be
imagined as doing so. Only the proles used scent. In his mind the smell
of it was inextricably mixed up with fornication.

When he had gone with that woman it had been his first lapse in two years
or thereabouts. Consorting with prostitutes was forbidden, of course, but
it was one of those rules that you could occasionally nerve yourself to
break. It was dangerous, but it was not a life-and-death matter. To be
caught with a prostitute might mean five years in a forced-labour camp:
not more, if you had committed no other offence. And it was easy enough,
provided that you could avoid being caught in the act. The poorer quarters
swarmed with women who were ready to sell themselves. Some could even be
purchased for a bottle of gin, which the proles were not supposed to drink.
Tacitly the Party was even inclined to encourage prostitution, as an outlet
for instincts which could not be altogether suppressed. Mere debauchery
did not matter very much, so long as it was furtive and joyless and only
involved the women of a submerged and despised class. The unforgivable
crime was promiscuity between Party members. But--though this was one
of the crimes that the accused in the great purges invariably confessed
to--it was difficult to imagine any such thing actually happening.

The aim of the Party was not merely to prevent men and women from forming
loyalties which it might not be able to control. Its real, undeclared
purpose was to remove all pleasure from the sexual act. Not love so much
as eroticism was the enemy, inside marriage as well as outside it. All
marriages between Party members had to be approved by a committee
appointed for the purpose, and--though the principle was never clearly
stated--permission was always refused if the couple concerned gave
the impression of being physically attracted to one another. The only
recognized purpose of marriage was to beget children for the service of
the Party. Sexual intercourse was to be looked on as a slightly disgusting
minor operation, like having an enema. This again was never put into plain
words, but in an indirect way it was rubbed into every Party member from
childhood onwards. There were even organizations such as the Junior
Anti-Sex League, which advocated complete celibacy for both sexes. All
children were to be begotten by artificial insemination (ARTSEM, it was
called in Newspeak) and brought up in public institutions. This, Winston
was aware, was not meant altogether seriously, but somehow it fitted in
with the general ideology of the Party. The Party was trying to kill the
sex instinct, or, if it could not be killed, then to distort it and dirty
it. He did not know why this was so, but it seemed natural that it should
be so. And as far as the women were concerned, the Party's efforts were
largely successful.

He thought again of Katharine. It must be nine, ten--nearly eleven years
since they had parted. It was curious how seldom he thought of her. For
days at a time he was capable of forgetting that he had ever been married.
They had only been together for about fifteen months. The Party did not
permit divorce, but it rather encouraged separation in cases where there
were no children.

Katharine was a tall, fair-haired girl, very straight, with splendid
movements. She had a bold, aquiline face, a face that one might have called
noble until one discovered that there was as nearly as possible nothing
behind it. Very early in her married life he had decided--though perhaps
it was only that he knew her more intimately than he knew most people--that
she had without exception the most stupid, vulgar, empty mind that he had
ever encountered. She had not a thought in her head that was not a slogan,
and there was no imbecility, absolutely none that she was not capable of
swallowing if the Party handed it out to her. 'The human sound-track' he
nicknamed her in his own mind. Yet he could have endured living with her
if it had not been for just one thing--sex.

As soon as he touched her she seemed to wince and stiffen. To embrace her
was like embracing a jointed wooden image. And what was strange was that
even when she was clasping him against her he had the feeling that she
was simultaneously pushing him away with all her strength. The rigidity
of her muscles managed to convey that impression. She would lie there
with shut eyes, neither resisting nor co-operating but SUBMITTING. It was
extraordinarily embarrassing, and, after a while, horrible. But even then
he could have borne living with her if it had been agreed that they should
remain celibate. But curiously enough it was Katharine who refused this.
They must, she said, produce a child if they could. So the performance
continued to happen, once a week quite regularly, whenever it was not
impossible. She even used to remind him of it in the morning, as something
which had to be done that evening and which must not be forgotten. She had
two names for it. One was 'making a baby', and the other was 'our duty to
the Party' (yes, she had actually used that phrase). Quite soon he grew to
have a feeling of positive dread when the appointed day came round. But
luckily no child appeared, and in the end she agreed to give up trying,
and soon afterwards they parted.

Winston sighed inaudibly. He picked up his pen again and
wrote:


   She threw herself down on the bed, and at once, without any kind of
preliminary in the most coarse, horrible way you can imagine, pulled up
her skirt. I----


He saw himself standing there in the dim lamplight, with the smell of bugs
and cheap scent in his nostrils, and in his heart a feeling of defeat and
resentment which even at that moment was mixed up with the thought of
Katharine's white body, frozen for ever by the hypnotic power of the Party.
Why did it always have to be like this? Why could he not have a woman of
his own instead of these filthy scuffles at intervals of years? But a real
love affair was an almost unthinkable event. The women of the Party were
all alike. Chastity was as deep ingrained in them as Party loyalty. By
careful early conditioning, by games and cold water, by the rubbish that
was dinned into them at school and in the Spies and the Youth League, by
lectures, parades, songs, slogans, and martial music, the natural feeling
had been driven out of them. His reason told him that there must be
exceptions, but his heart did not believe it. They were all impregnable,
as the Party intended that they should be. And what he wanted, more even
than to be loved, was to break down that wall of virtue, even if it were
only once in his whole life. The sexual act, successfully performed, was
rebellion. Desire was thoughtcrime. Even to have awakened Katharine, if he
could have achieved it, would have been like a seduction, although she was
his wife.

But the rest of the story had got to be written down. He wrote:


   I turned up the lamp. When I saw her in the light----


After the darkness the feeble light of the paraffin lamp had seemed very
bright. For the first time he could see the woman properly. He had taken a
step towards her and then halted, full of lust and terror. He was painfully
conscious of the risk he had taken in coming here. It was perfectly
possible that the patrols would catch him on the way out: for that matter
they might be waiting outside the door at this moment. If he went away
without even doing what he had come here to do----!

It had got to be written down, it had got to be confessed. What he had
suddenly seen in the lamplight was that the woman was OLD. The paint was
plastered so thick on her face that it looked as though it might crack
like a cardboard mask. There were streaks of white in her hair; but the
truly dreadful detail was that her mouth had fallen a little open,
revealing nothing except a cavernous blackness. She had no teeth at all.

He wrote hurriedly, in scrabbling handwriting:


   When I saw her in the light she was quite an old woman, fifty years old
at least. But I went ahead and did it just the same.


He pressed his fingers against his eyelids again. He had written it down
at last, but it made no difference. The therapy had not worked. The urge
to shout filthy words at the top of his voice was as strong as ever.




Chapter 7



'If there is hope,' wrote Winston, 'it lies in the proles.'

If there was hope, it MUST lie in the proles, because only there in those
swarming disregarded masses, 85 per cent of the population of Oceania,
could the force to destroy the Party ever be generated. The Party could
not be overthrown from within. Its enemies, if it had any enemies, had
no way of coming together or even of identifying one another. Even if
the legendary Brotherhood existed, as just possibly it might, it was
inconceivable that its members could ever assemble in larger numbers than
twos and threes. Rebellion meant a look in the eyes, an inflexion of the
voice, at the most, an occasional whispered word. But the proles, if only
they could somehow become conscious of their own strength. would have no
need to conspire. They needed only to rise up and shake themselves like
a horse shaking off flies. If they chose they could blow the Party to
pieces tomorrow morning. Surely sooner or later it must occur to them to
do it? And yet----!

He remembered how once he had been walking down a crowded street when a
tremendous shout of hundreds of voices women's voices--had burst from a
side-street a little way ahead. It was a great formidable cry of anger
and despair, a deep, loud 'Oh-o-o-o-oh!' that went humming on like the
reverberation of a bell. His heart had leapt. It's started! he had thought.
A riot! The proles are breaking loose at last! When he had reached the spot
it was to see a mob of two or three hundred women crowding round the stalls
of a street market, with faces as tragic as though they had been the doomed
passengers on a sinking ship. But at this moment the general despair broke
down into a multitude of individual quarrels. It appeared that one of the
stalls had been selling tin saucepans. They were wretched, flimsy things,
but cooking-pots of any kind were always difficult to get. Now the supply
had unexpectedly given out. The successful women, bumped and jostled by
the rest, were trying to make off with their saucepans while dozens of
others clamoured round the stall, accusing the stall-keeper of favouritism
and of having more saucepans somewhere in reserve. There was a fresh
outburst of yells. Two bloated women, one of them with her hair coming
down, had got hold of the same saucepan and were trying to tear it out of
one another's hands. For a moment they were both tugging, and then the
handle came off. Winston watched them disgustedly. And yet, just for a
moment, what almost frightening power had sounded in that cry from only
a few hundred throats! Why was it that they could never shout like that
about anything that mattered?

He wrote:


   Until they become conscious they will never rebel, and until after they
have rebelled they cannot become conscious.


That, he reflected, might almost have been a transcription from one of the
Party textbooks. The Party claimed, of course, to have liberated the proles
from bondage. Before the Revolution they had been hideously oppressed by
the capitalists, they had been starved and flogged, women had been forced
to work in the coal mines (women still did work in the coal mines, as a
matter of fact), children had been sold into the factories at the age
of six. But simultaneously, true to the Principles of doublethink, the
Party taught that the proles were natural inferiors who must be kept in
subjection, like animals, by the application of a few simple rules. In
reality very little was known about the proles. It was not necessary to
know much. So long as they continued to work and breed, their other
activities were without importance. Left to themselves, like cattle turned
loose upon the plains of Argentina, they had reverted to a style of life
that appeared to be natural to them, a sort of ancestral pattern. They were
born, they grew up in the gutters, they went to work at twelve, they passed
through a brief blossoming-period of beauty and sexual desire, they married
at twenty, they were middle-aged at thirty, they died, for the most part,
at sixty. Heavy physical work, the care of home and children, petty
quarrels with neighbours, films, football, beer, and above all, gambling,
filled up the horizon of their minds. To keep them in control was not
difficult. A few agents of the Thought Police moved always among them,
spreading false rumours and marking down and eliminating the few
individuals who were judged capable of becoming dangerous; but no attempt
was made to indoctrinate them with the ideology of the Party. It was not
desirable that the proles should have strong political feelings. All that
was required of them was a primitive patriotism which could be appealed to
whenever it was necessary to make them accept longer working-hours or
shorter rations. And even when they became discontented, as they sometimes
did, their discontent led nowhere, because being without general ideas,
they could only focus it on petty specific grievances. The larger evils
invariably escaped their notice. The great majority of proles did not even
have telescreens in their homes. Even the civil police interfered with them
very little. There was a vast amount of criminality in London, a whole
world-within-a-world of thieves, bandits, prostitutes, drug-peddlers, and
racketeers of every description; but since it all happened among the proles
themselves, it was of no importance. In all questions of morals they were
allowed to follow their ancestral code. The sexual puritanism of the
Party was not imposed upon them. Promiscuity went unpunished, divorce
was permitted. For that matter, even religious worship would have been
permitted if the proles had shown any sign of needing or wanting it.
They were beneath suspicion. As the Party slogan put it: 'Proles and
animals are free.'

Winston reached down and cautiously scratched his varicose ulcer. It
had begun itching again. The thing you invariably came back to was the
impossibility of knowing what life before the Revolution had really been
like. He took out of the drawer a copy of a children's history textbook
which he had borrowed from Mrs Parsons, and began copying a passage into
the diary:


   In the old days (it ran), before the glorious Revolution, London was
not the beautiful city that we know today. It was a dark, dirty, miserable
place where hardly anybody had enough to eat and where hundreds and
thousands of poor people had no boots on their feet and not even a roof to
sleep under. Children no older than you had to work twelve hours a day for
cruel masters who flogged them with whips if they worked too slowly and
fed them on nothing but stale breadcrusts and water. But in among all
this terrible poverty there were just a few great big beautiful houses
that were lived in by rich men who had as many as thirty servants to look
after them. These rich men were called capitalists. They were fat, ugly
men with wicked faces, like the one in the picture on the opposite page.
You can see that he is dressed in a long black coat which was called a
frock coat, and a queer, shiny hat shaped like a stovepipe, which was
called a top hat. This was the uniform of the capitalists, and no one else
was allowed to wear it. The capitalists owned everything in the world, and
everyone else was their slave. They owned all the land, all the houses,
all the factories, and all the money. If anyone disobeyed them they could
throw them into prison, or they could take his job away and starve him to
death. When any ordinary person spoke to a capitalist he had to cringe and
bow to him, and take off his cap and address him as 'Sir'. The chief of
all the capitalists was called the King, and----


But he knew the rest of the catalogue. There would be mention of the
bishops in their lawn sleeves, the judges in their ermine robes, the
pillory, the stocks, the treadmill, the cat-o'-nine tails, the Lord Mayor's
Banquet, and the practice of kissing the Pope's toe. There was also
something called the JUS PRIMAE NOCTIS, which would probably not be
mentioned in a textbook for children. It was the law by which every
capitalist had the right to sleep with any woman working in one of his
factories.

How could you tell how much of it was lies? It MIGHT be true that the
average human being was better off now than he had been before the
Revolution. The only evidence to the contrary was the mute protest in your
own bones, the instinctive feeling that the conditions you lived in were
intolerable and that at some other time they must have been different. It
struck him that the truly characteristic thing about modern life was not
its cruelty and insecurity, but simply its bareness, its dinginess, its
listlessness. Life, if you looked about you, bore no resemblance not only
to the lies that streamed out of the telescreens, but even to the ideals
that the Party was trying to achieve. Great areas of it, even for a Party
member, were neutral and non-political, a matter of slogging through dreary
jobs, fighting for a place on the Tube, darning a worn-out sock, cadging
a saccharine tablet, saving a cigarette end. The ideal set up by the
Party was something huge, terrible, and glittering--a world of steel
and concrete, of monstrous machines and terrifying weapons--a nation of
warriors and fanatics, marching forward in perfect unity, all thinking the
same thoughts and shouting the same slogans, perpetually working, fighting,
triumphing, persecuting--three hundred million people all with the same
face. The reality was decaying, dingy cities where underfed people shuffled
to and fro in leaky shoes, in patched-up nineteenth-century houses that
smelt always of cabbage and bad lavatories. He seemed to see a vision of
London, vast and ruinous, city of a million dustbins, and mixed up with it
was a picture of Mrs Parsons, a woman with lined face and wispy hair,
fiddling helplessly with a blocked waste-pipe.

He reached down and scratched his ankle again. Day and night the
telescreens bruised your ears with statistics proving that people today
had more food, more clothes, better houses, better recreations--that they
lived longer, worked shorter hours, were bigger, healthier, stronger,
happier, more intelligent, better educated, than the people of fifty years
ago. Not a word of it could ever be proved or disproved. The Party claimed,
for example, that today 40 per cent of adult proles were literate: before
the Revolution, it was said, the number had only been 15 per cent. The
Party claimed that the infant mortality rate was now only 160 per
thousand, whereas before the Revolution it had been 300--and so it went
on. It was like a single equation with two unknowns. It might very well be
that literally every word in the history books, even the things that one
accepted without question, was pure fantasy. For all he knew there might
never have been any such law as the JUS PRIMAE NOCTIS, or any such creature
as a capitalist, or any such garment as a top hat.

Everything faded into mist. The past was erased, the erasure was forgotten,
the lie became truth. Just once in his life he had possessed--AFTER the
event: that was what counted--concrete, unmistakable evidence of an act of
falsification. He had held it between his fingers for as long as thirty
seconds. In 1973, it must have been--at any rate, it was at about the time
when he and Katharine had parted. But the really relevant date was seven
or eight years earlier.

The story really began in the middle sixties, the period of the great
purges in which the original leaders of the Revolution were wiped out
once and for all. By 1970 none of them was left, except Big Brother
himself. All the rest had by that time been exposed as traitors and
counter-revolutionaries. Goldstein had fled and was hiding no one knew
where, and of the others, a few had simply disappeared, while the majority
had been executed after spectacular public trials at which they made
confession of their crimes. Among the last survivors were three men named
Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford. It must have been in 1965 that these three
had been arrested. As often happened, they had vanished for a year or more,
so that one did not know whether they were alive or dead, and then had
suddenly been brought forth to incriminate themselves in the usual way.
They had confessed to intelligence with the enemy (at that date, too, the
enemy was Eurasia), embezzlement of public funds, the murder of various
trusted Party members, intrigues against the leadership of Big Brother
which had started long before the Revolution happened, and acts of sabotage
causing the death of hundreds of thousands of people. After confessing to
these things they had been pardoned, reinstated in the Party, and given
posts which were in fact sinecures but which sounded important. All three
had written long, abject articles in 'The Times', analysing the reasons
for their defection and promising to make amends.

Some time after their release Winston had actually seen all three of them
in the Chestnut Tree Cafe. He remembered the sort of terrified fascination
with which he had watched them out of the corner of his eye. They were men
far older than himself, relics of the ancient world, almost the last great
figures left over from the heroic days of the Party. The glamour of the
underground struggle and the civil war still faintly clung to them. He had
the feeling, though already at that time facts and dates were growing
blurry, that he had known their names years earlier than he had known that
of Big Brother. But also they were outlaws, enemies, untouchables, doomed
with absolute certainty to extinction within a year or two. No one who had
once fallen into the hands of the Thought Police ever escaped in the end.
They were corpses waiting to be sent back to the grave.

There was no one at any of the tables nearest to them. It was not wise
even to be seen in the neighbourhood of such people. They were sitting
in silence before glasses of the gin flavoured with cloves which was the
speciality of the cafe. Of the three, it was Rutherford whose appearance
had most impressed Winston. Rutherford had once been a famous caricaturist,
whose brutal cartoons had helped to inflame popular opinion before and
during the Revolution. Even now, at long intervals, his cartoons were
appearing in The Times. They were simply an imitation of his earlier
manner, and curiously lifeless and unconvincing. Always they were a
rehashing of the ancient themes--slum tenements, starving children, street
battles, capitalists in top hats--even on the barricades the capitalists
still seemed to cling to their top hats an endless, hopeless effort to
get back into the past. He was a monstrous man, with a mane of greasy
grey hair, his face pouched and seamed, with thick negroid lips. At one
time he must have been immensely strong; now his great body was sagging,
sloping, bulging, falling away in every direction. He seemed to be breaking
up before one's eyes, like a mountain crumbling.

It was the lonely hour of fifteen. Winston could not now remember how he
had come to be in the cafe at such a time. The place was almost empty. A
tinny music was trickling from the telescreens. The three men sat in their
corner almost motionless, never speaking. Uncommanded, the waiter brought
fresh glasses of gin. There was a chessboard on the table beside them, with
the pieces set out but no game started. And then, for perhaps half a minute
in all, something happened to the telescreens. The tune that they were
playing changed, and the tone of the music changed too. There came into
it--but it was something hard to describe. It was a peculiar, cracked,
braying, jeering note: in his mind Winston called it a yellow note. And
then a voice from the telescreen was singing:


  Under the spreading chestnut tree
  I sold you and you sold me:
  There lie they, and here lie we
  Under the spreading chestnut tree.


The three men never stirred. But when Winston glanced again at Rutherford's
ruinous face, he saw that his eyes were full of tears. And for the first
time he noticed, with a kind of inward shudder, and yet not knowing
AT WHAT he shuddered, that both Aaronson and Rutherford had broken noses.

A little later all three were re-arrested. It appeared that they had
engaged in fresh conspiracies from the very moment of their release. At
their second trial they confessed to all their old crimes over again, with
a whole string of new ones. They were executed, and their fate was recorded
in the Party histories, a warning to posterity. About five years after
this, in 1973, Winston was unrolling a wad of documents which had just
flopped out of the pneumatic tube on to his desk when he came on a fragment
of paper which had evidently been slipped in among the others and then
forgotten. The instant he had flattened it out he saw its significance.
It was a half-page torn out of 'The Times' of about ten years earlier--the
top half of the page, so that it included the date--and it contained a
photograph of the delegates at some Party function in New York. Prominent
in the middle of the group were Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford. There was
no mistaking them, in any case their names were in the caption at the
bottom.

The point was that at both trials all three men had confessed that on that
date they had been on Eurasian soil. They had flown from a secret airfield
in Canada to a rendezvous somewhere in Siberia, and had conferred with
members of the Eurasian General Staff, to whom they had betrayed important
military secrets. The date had stuck in Winston's memory because it chanced
to be midsummer day; but the whole story must be on record in countless
other places as well. There was only one possible conclusion: the
confessions were lies.

Of course, this was not in itself a discovery. Even at that time Winston
had not imagined that the people who were wiped out in the purges had
actually committed the crimes that they were accused of. But this was
concrete evidence; it was a fragment of the abolished past, like a fossil
bone which turns up in the wrong stratum and destroys a geological theory.
It was enough to blow the Party to atoms, if in some way it could have
been published to the world and its significance made known.

He had gone straight on working. As soon as he saw what the photograph
was, and what it meant, he had covered it up with another sheet of paper.
Luckily, when he unrolled it, it had been upside-down from the point of
view of the telescreen.

He took his scribbling pad on his knee and pushed back his chair so as
to get as far away from the telescreen as possible. To keep your face
expressionless was not difficult, and even your breathing could be
controlled, with an effort: but you could not control the beating of your
heart, and the telescreen was quite delicate enough to pick it up. He let
what he judged to be ten minutes go by, tormented all the while by the
fear that some accident--a sudden draught blowing across his desk, for
instance--would betray him. Then, without uncovering it again, he dropped
the photograph into the memory hole, along with some other waste papers.
Within another minute, perhaps, it would have crumbled into ashes.

That was ten--eleven years ago. Today, probably, he would have kept that
photograph. It was curious that the fact of having held it in his fingers
seemed to him to make a difference even now, when the photograph itself,
as well as the event it recorded, was only memory. Was the Party's hold
upon the past less strong, he wondered, because a piece of evidence which
existed no longer HAD ONCE existed?

But today, supposing that it could be somehow resurrected from its ashes,
the photograph might not even be evidence. Already, at the time when he
made his discovery, Oceania was no longer at war with Eurasia, and it must
have been to the agents of Eastasia that the three dead men had betrayed
their country. Since then there had been other changes--two, three,
he could not remember how many. Very likely the confessions had been
rewritten and rewritten until the original facts and dates no longer
had the smallest significance. The past not only changed, but changed
continuously. What most afflicted him with the sense of nightmare was that
he had never clearly understood why the huge imposture was undertaken.
The immediate advantages of falsifying the past were obvious, but the
ultimate motive was mysterious. He took up his pen again and wrote:


   I understand HOW: I do not understand WHY.


He wondered, as he had many times wondered before, whether he himself was
a lunatic. Perhaps a lunatic was simply a minority of one. At one time it
had been a sign of madness to believe that the earth goes round the sun;
today, to believe that the past is unalterable. He might be ALONE in
holding that belief, and if alone, then a lunatic. But the thought of being
a lunatic did not greatly trouble him: the horror was that he might also
be wrong.

He picked up the children's history book and looked at the portrait of
Big Brother which formed its frontispiece. The hypnotic eyes gazed into
his own. It was as though some huge force were pressing down upon
you--something that penetrated inside your skull, battering against your
brain, frightening you out of your beliefs, persuading you, almost, to
deny the evidence of your senses. In the end the Party would announce that
two and two made five, and you would have to believe it. It was inevitable
that they should make that claim sooner or later: the logic of their
position demanded it. Not merely the validity of experience, but the very
existence of external reality, was tacitly denied by their philosophy. The
heresy of heresies was common sense. And what was terrifying was not that
they would kill you for thinking otherwise, but that they might be right.
For, after all, how do we know that two and two make four? Or that the
force of gravity works? Or that the past is unchangeable? If both the past
and the external world exist only in the mind, and if the mind itself is
controllable what then?

But no! His courage seemed suddenly to stiffen of its own accord. The face
of O'Brien, not called up by any obvious association, had floated into his
mind. He knew, with more certainty than before, that O'Brien was on his
side. He was writing the diary for O'Brien--TO O'Brien: it was like an
interminable letter which no one would ever read, but which was addressed
to a particular person and took its colour from that fact.

The Party told you to reject the evidence of your eyes and ears. It was
their final, most essential command. His heart sank as he thought of
the enormous power arrayed against him, the ease with which any Party
intellectual would overthrow him in debate, the subtle arguments which he
would not be able to understand, much less answer. And yet he was in the
right! They were wrong and he was right. The obvious, the silly, and the
true had got to be defended. Truisms are true, hold on to that! The solid
world exists, its laws do not change. Stones are hard, water is wet,
objects unsupported fall towards the earth's centre. With the feeling that
he was speaking to O'Brien, and also that he was setting forth an important
axiom, he wrote:


   Freedom is the freedom to say that two plus two make four. If that is
granted, all else follows.




Chapter 8



From somewhere at the bottom of a passage the smell of roasting
coffee--real coffee, not Victory Coffee--came floating out into the street.
Winston paused involuntarily. For perhaps two seconds he was back in the
half-forgotten world of his childhood. Then a door banged, seeming to cut
off the smell as abruptly as though it had been a sound.

He had walked several kilometres over pavements, and his varicose ulcer
was throbbing. This was the second time in three weeks that he had missed
an evening at the Community Centre: a rash act, since you could be certain
that the number of your attendances at the Centre was carefully checked.
In principle a Party member had no spare time, and was never alone except
in bed. It was assumed that when he was not working, eating, or sleeping
he would be taking part in some kind of communal recreation: to do anything
that suggested a taste for solitude, even to go for a walk by yourself,
was always slightly dangerous. There was a word for it in Newspeak:
OWNLIFE, it was called, meaning individualism and eccentricity. But this
evening as he came out of the Ministry the balminess of the April air had
tempted him. The sky was a warmer blue than he had seen it that year, and
suddenly the long, noisy evening at the Centre, the boring, exhausting
games, the lectures, the creaking camaraderie oiled by gin, had seemed
intolerable. On impulse he had turned away from the bus-stop and wandered
off into the labyrinth of London, first south, then east, then north again,
losing himself among unknown streets and hardly bothering in which
direction he was going.

'If there is hope,' he had written in the diary, 'it lies in the proles.'
The words kept coming back to him, statement of a mystical truth and a
palpable absurdity. He was somewhere in the vague, brown-coloured slums
to the north and east of what had once been Saint Pancras Station. He was
walking up a cobbled street of little two-storey houses with battered
doorways which gave straight on the pavement and which were somehow
curiously suggestive of ratholes. There were puddles of filthy water here
and there among the cobbles. In and out of the dark doorways, and down
narrow alley-ways that branched off on either side, people swarmed in
astonishing numbers--girls in full bloom, with crudely lipsticked mouths,
and youths who chased the girls, and swollen waddling women who showed you
what the girls would be like in ten years' time, and old bent creatures
shuffling along on splayed feet, and ragged barefooted children who played
in the puddles and then scattered at angry yells from their mothers.
Perhaps a quarter of the windows in the street were broken and boarded up.
Most of the people paid no attention to Winston; a few eyed him with a
sort of guarded curiosity. Two monstrous women with brick-red forearms
folded across their aprons were talking outside a doorway. Winston caught
scraps of conversation as he approached.

'"Yes," I says to 'er, "that's all very well," I says. "But if you'd of
been in my place you'd of done the same as what I done. It's easy to
criticize," I says, "but you ain't got the same problems as what I got."'

'Ah,' said the other, 'that's jest it. That's jest where it is.'

The strident voices stopped abruptly. The women studied him in hostile
silence as he went past. But it was not hostility, exactly; merely a kind
of wariness, a momentary stiffening, as at the passing of some unfamiliar
animal. The blue overalls of the Party could not be a common sight in a
street like this. Indeed, it was unwise to be seen in such places, unless
you had definite business there. The patrols might stop you if you happened
to run into them. 'May I see your papers, comrade? What are you doing here?
What time did you leave work? Is this your usual way home?'--and so on and
so forth. Not that there was any rule against walking home by an unusual
route: but it was enough to draw attention to you if the Thought Police
heard about it.

Suddenly the whole street was in commotion. There were yells of warning
from all sides. People were shooting into the doorways like rabbits. A
young woman leapt out of a doorway a little ahead of Winston, grabbed up a
tiny child playing in a puddle, whipped her apron round it, and leapt back
again, all in one movement. At the same instant a man in a concertina-like
black suit, who had emerged from a side alley, ran towards Winston,
pointing excitedly to the sky.

'Steamer!' he yelled. 'Look out, guv'nor! Bang over'ead! Lay down quick!'

'Steamer' was a nickname which, for some reason, the proles applied to
rocket bombs. Winston promptly flung himself on his face. The proles were
nearly always right when they gave you a warning of this kind. They seemed
to possess some kind of instinct which told them several seconds in advance
when a rocket was coming, although the rockets supposedly travelled faster
than sound. Winston clasped his forearms above his head. There was a roar
that seemed to make the pavement heave; a shower of light objects pattered
on to his back. When he stood up he found that he was covered with
fragments of glass from the nearest window.

He walked on. The bomb had demolished a group of houses 200 metres up the
street. A black plume of smoke hung in the sky, and below it a cloud of
plaster dust in which a crowd was already forming around the ruins. There
was a little pile of plaster lying on the pavement ahead of him, and in
the middle of it he could see a bright red streak. When he got up to it he
saw that it was a human hand severed at the wrist. Apart from the bloody
stump, the hand was so completely whitened as to resemble a plaster cast.

He kicked the thing into the gutter, and then, to avoid the crowd, turned
down a side-street to the right. Within three or four minutes he was out
of the area which the bomb had affected, and the sordid swarming life of
the streets was going on as though nothing had happened. It was nearly
twenty hours, and the drinking-shops which the proles frequented ('pubs',
they called them) were choked with customers. From their grimy swing doors,
endlessly opening and shutting, there came forth a smell of urine, sawdust,
and sour beer. In an angle formed by a projecting house-front three men
were standing very close together, the middle one of them holding a
folded-up newspaper which the other two were studying over his shoulder.
Even before he was near enough to make out the expression on their faces,
Winston could see absorption in every line of their bodies. It was
obviously some serious piece of news that they were reading. He was a few
paces away from them when suddenly the group broke up and two of the men
were in violent altercation. For a moment they seemed almost on the point
of blows.

'Can't you bleeding well listen to what I say? I tell you no number ending
in seven ain't won for over fourteen months!'

'Yes, it 'as, then!'

'No, it 'as not! Back 'ome I got the 'ole lot of 'em for over two years
wrote down on a piece of paper. I takes 'em down reg'lar as the clock. An'
I tell you, no number ending in seven----'

'Yes, a seven 'AS won! I could pretty near tell you the bleeding number.
Four oh seven, it ended in. It were in February--second week in February.'

'February your grandmother! I got it all down in black and white. An' I
tell you, no number----'

'Oh, pack it in!' said the third man.

They were talking about the Lottery. Winston looked back when he had gone
thirty metres. They were still arguing, with vivid, passionate faces.
The Lottery, with its weekly pay-out of enormous prizes, was the one public
event to which the proles paid serious attention. It was probable that
there were some millions of proles for whom the Lottery was the principal
if not the only reason for remaining alive. It was their delight, their
folly, their anodyne, their intellectual stimulant. Where the Lottery was
concerned, even people who could barely read and write seemed capable of
intricate calculations and staggering feats of memory. There was a whole
tribe of men who made a living simply by selling systems, forecasts, and
lucky amulets. Winston had nothing to do with the running of the Lottery,
which was managed by the Ministry of Plenty, but he was aware (indeed
everyone in the party was aware) that the prizes were largely imaginary.
Only small sums were actually paid out, the winners of the big prizes being
non-existent persons. In the absence of any real intercommunication between
one part of Oceania and another, this was not difficult to arrange.

But if there was hope, it lay in the proles. You had to cling on to that.
When you put it in words it sounded reasonable: it was when you looked at
the human beings passing you on the pavement that it became an act of
faith. The street into which he had turned ran downhill. He had a feeling
that he had been in this neighbourhood before, and that there was a main
thoroughfare not far away. From somewhere ahead there came a din of
shouting voices. The street took a sharp turn and then ended in a flight
of steps which led down into a sunken alley where a few stall-keepers
were selling tired-looking vegetables. At this moment Winston remembered
where he was. The alley led out into the main street, and down the next
turning, not five minutes away, was the junk-shop where he had bought the
blank book which was now his diary. And in a small stationer's shop not
far away he had bought his penholder and his bottle of ink.

He paused for a moment at the top of the steps. On the opposite side of
the alley there was a dingy little pub whose windows appeared to be frosted
over but in reality were merely coated with dust. A very old man, bent but
active, with white moustaches that bristled forward like those of a prawn,
pushed open the swing door and went in. As Winston stood watching, it
occurred to him that the old man, who must be eighty at the least, had
already been middle-aged when the Revolution happened. He and a few others
like him were the last links that now existed with the vanished world of
capitalism. In the Party itself there were not many people left whose ideas
had been formed before the Revolution. The older generation had mostly
been wiped out in the great purges of the fifties and sixties, and the few
who survived had long ago been terrified into complete intellectual
surrender. If there was any one still alive who could give you a truthful
account of conditions in the early part of the century, it could only be a
prole. Suddenly the passage from the history book that he had copied into
his diary came back into Winston's mind, and a lunatic impulse took hold
of him. He would go into the pub, he would scrape acquaintance with that
old man and question him. He would say to him: 'Tell me about your life
when you were a boy. What was it like in those days? Were things better
than they are now, or were they worse?'

Hurriedly, lest he should have time to become frightened, he descended the
steps and crossed the narrow street. It was madness of course. As usual,
there was no definite rule against talking to proles and frequenting their
pubs, but it was far too unusual an action to pass unnoticed. If the
patrols appeared he might plead an attack of faintness, but it was not
likely that they would believe him. He pushed open the door, and a hideous
cheesy smell of sour beer hit him in the face. As he entered the din of
voices dropped to about half its volume. Behind his back he could feel
everyone eyeing his blue overalls. A game of darts which was going on at
the other end of the room interrupted itself for perhaps as much as thirty
seconds. The old man whom he had followed was standing at the bar, having
some kind of altercation with the barman, a large, stout, hook-nosed young
man with enormous forearms. A knot of others, standing round with glasses
in their hands, were watching the scene.

'I arst you civil enough, didn't I?' said the old man, straightening his
shoulders pugnaciously. 'You telling me you ain't got a pint mug in the
'ole bleeding boozer?'

'And what in hell's name IS a pint?' said the barman, leaning forward with
the tips of his fingers on the counter.

''Ark at 'im! Calls 'isself a barman and don't know what a pint is! Why,
a pint's the 'alf of a quart, and there's four quarts to the gallon.
'Ave to teach you the A, B, C next.'

'Never heard of 'em,' said the barman shortly. 'Litre and half
litre--that's all we serve. There's the glasses on the shelf in front
of you.'

'I likes a pint,' persisted the old man. 'You could 'a drawed me off a pint
easy enough. We didn't 'ave these bleeding litres when I was a young man.'

'When you were a young man we were all living in the treetops,' said the
barman, with a glance at the other customers.

There was a shout of laughter, and the uneasiness caused by Winston's entry
seemed to disappear. The old man's white-stubbled face had flushed pink. He
turned away, muttering to himself, and bumped into Winston. Winston caught
him gently by the arm.

'May I offer you a drink?' he said.

'You're a gent,' said the other, straightening his shoulders again. He
appeared not to have noticed Winston's blue overalls. 'Pint!' he added
aggressively to the barman. 'Pint of wallop.'

The barman swished two half-litres of dark-brown beer into thick glasses
which he had rinsed in a bucket under the counter. Beer was the only drink
you could get in prole pubs. The proles were supposed not to drink gin,
though in practice they could get hold of it easily enough. The game of
darts was in full swing again, and the knot of men at the bar had begun
talking about lottery tickets. Winston's presence was forgotten for a
moment. There was a deal table under the window where he and the old man
could talk without fear of being overheard. It was horribly dangerous, but
at any rate there was no telescreen in the room, a point he had made sure
of as soon as he came in.

''E could 'a drawed me off a pint,' grumbled the old man as he settled down
behind a glass. 'A 'alf litre ain't enough. It don't satisfy. And a 'ole
litre's too much. It starts my bladder running. Let alone the price.'

'You must have seen great changes since you were a young man,' said
Winston tentatively.

The old man's pale blue eyes moved from the darts board to the bar, and
from the bar to the door of the Gents, as though it were in the bar-room
that he expected the changes to have occurred.

'The beer was better,' he said finally. 'And cheaper! When I was a young
man, mild beer--wallop we used to call it--was fourpence a pint. That was
before the war, of course.'

'Which war was that?' said Winston.

'It's all wars,' said the old man vaguely. He took up his glass, and his
shoulders straightened again. ''Ere's wishing you the very best of 'ealth!'

In his lean throat the sharp-pointed Adam's apple made a surprisingly rapid
up-and-down movement, and the beer vanished. Winston went to the bar and
came back with two more half-litres. The old man appeared to have forgotten
his prejudice against drinking a full litre.

'You are very much older than I am,' said Winston. 'You must have been a
grown man before I was born. You can remember what it was like in the old
days, before the Revolution. People of my age don't really know anything
about those times. We can only read about them in books, and what it says
in the books may not be true. I should like your opinion on that. The
history books say that life before the Revolution was completely different
from what it is now. There was the most terrible oppression, injustice,
poverty worse than anything we can imagine. Here in London, the great mass
of the people never had enough to eat from birth to death. Half of them
hadn't even boots on their feet. They worked twelve hours a day, they left
school at nine, they slept ten in a room. And at the same time there were
a very few people, only a few thousands--the capitalists, they were
called--who were rich and powerful. They owned everything that there was
to own. They lived in great gorgeous houses with thirty servants, they
rode about in motor-cars and four-horse carriages, they drank champagne,
they wore top hats----'

The old man brightened suddenly.

'Top 'ats!' he said. 'Funny you should mention 'em. The same thing come
into my 'ead only yesterday, I dono why. I was jest thinking, I ain't seen
a top 'at in years. Gorn right out, they 'ave. The last time I wore one
was at my sister-in-law's funeral. And that was--well, I couldn't give you
the date, but it must'a been fifty years ago. Of course it was only 'ired
for the occasion, you understand.'

'It isn't very important about the top hats,' said Winston patiently.
'The point is, these capitalists--they and a few lawyers and priests and
so forth who lived on them--were the lords of the earth. Everything existed
for their benefit. You--the ordinary people, the workers--were their
slaves. They could do what they liked with you. They could ship you off to
Canada like cattle. They could sleep with your daughters if they chose.
They could order you to be flogged with something called a cat-o'-nine
tails. You had to take your cap off when you passed them. Every capitalist
went about with a gang of lackeys who----'

The old man brightened again.

'Lackeys!' he said. 'Now there's a word I ain't 'eard since ever so long.
Lackeys! That reg'lar takes me back, that does. I recollect--oh, donkey's
years ago--I used to sometimes go to 'Yde Park of a Sunday afternoon to
'ear the blokes making speeches. Salvation Army, Roman Catholics, Jews,
Indians--all sorts there was. And there was one bloke--well, I couldn't
give you 'is name, but a real powerful speaker 'e was. 'E didn't 'alf
give it 'em! "Lackeys!" 'e says, "lackeys of the bourgeoisie! Flunkies of
the ruling class!" Parasites--that was another of them. And 'yenas--'e
definitely called 'em 'yenas. Of course 'e was referring to the Labour
Party, you understand.'

Winston had the feeling that they were talking at cross-purposes.

'What I really wanted to know was this,' he said. 'Do you feel that you
have more freedom now than you had in those days? Are you treated more
like a human being? In the old days, the rich people, the people at the
top----'

'The 'Ouse of Lords,' put in the old man reminiscently.

'The House of Lords, if you like. What I am asking is, were these people
able to treat you as an inferior, simply because they were rich and you
were poor? Is it a fact, for instance, that you had to call them "Sir" and
take off your cap when you passed them?'

The old man appeared to think deeply. He drank off about a quarter of his
beer before answering.

'Yes,' he said. 'They liked you to touch your cap to 'em. It showed
respect, like. I didn't agree with it, myself, but I done it often enough.
Had to, as you might say.'

'And was it usual--I'm only quoting what I've read in history books--was
it usual for these people and their servants to push you off the pavement
into the gutter?'

'One of 'em pushed me once,' said the old man. 'I recollect it as if it
was yesterday. It was Boat Race night--terribly rowdy they used to get on
Boat Race night--and I bumps into a young bloke on Shaftesbury Avenue.
Quite a gent, 'e was--dress shirt, top 'at, black overcoat. 'E was kind
of zig-zagging across the pavement, and I bumps into 'im accidental-like.
'E says, "Why can't you look where you're going?" 'e says. I say, "Ju think
you've bought the bleeding pavement?" 'E says, "I'll twist your bloody 'ead
off if you get fresh with me." I says, "You're drunk. I'll give you in
charge in 'alf a minute," I says. An' if you'll believe me, 'e puts 'is
'and on my chest and gives me a shove as pretty near sent me under the
wheels of a bus. Well, I was young in them days, and I was going to 'ave
fetched 'im one, only----'

A sense of helplessness took hold of Winston. The old man's memory was
nothing but a rubbish-heap of details. One could question him all day
without getting any real information. The party histories might still be
true, after a fashion: they might even be completely true. He made a last
attempt.

'Perhaps I have not made myself clear,' he said. 'What I'm trying to say
is this. You have been alive a very long time; you lived half your life
before the Revolution. In 1925, for instance, you were already grown up.
Would you say from what you can remember, that life in 1925 was better
than it is now, or worse? If you could choose, would you prefer to live
then or now?'

The old man looked meditatively at the darts board. He finished up his
beer, more slowly than before. When he spoke it was with a tolerant
philosophical air, as though the beer had mellowed him.

'I know what you expect me to say,' he said. 'You expect me to say as I'd
sooner be young again. Most people'd say they'd sooner be young, if you
arst 'em. You got your 'ealth and strength when you're young. When you
get to my time of life you ain't never well. I suffer something wicked
from my feet, and my bladder's jest terrible. Six and seven times a night
it 'as me out of bed. On the other 'and, there's great advantages in being
a old man. You ain't got the same worries. No truck with women, and that's
a great thing. I ain't 'ad a woman for near on thirty year, if you'd
credit it. Nor wanted to, what's more.'

Winston sat back against the window-sill. It was no use going on. He was
about to buy some more beer when the old man suddenly got up and shuffled
rapidly into the stinking urinal at the side of the room. The extra
half-litre was already working on him. Winston sat for a minute or two
gazing at his empty glass, and hardly noticed when his feet carried him out
into the street again. Within twenty years at the most, he reflected, the
huge and simple question, 'Was life better before the Revolution than it
is now?' would have ceased once and for all to be answerable. But in effect
it was unanswerable even now, since the few scattered survivors from the
ancient world were incapable of comparing one age with another. They
remembered a million useless things, a quarrel with a workmate, a hunt for
a lost bicycle pump, the expression on a long-dead sister's face, the
swirls of dust on a windy morning seventy years ago: but all the relevant
facts were outside the range of their vision. They were like the ant,
which can see small objects but not large ones. And when memory failed and
written records were falsified--when that happened, the claim of the Party
to have improved the conditions of human life had got to be accepted,
because there did not exist, and never again could exist, any standard
against which it could be tested.

At this moment his train of thought stopped abruptly. He halted and looked
up. He was in a narrow street, with a few dark little shops, interspersed
among dwelling-houses. Immediately above his head there hung three
discoloured metal balls which looked as if they had once been gilded. He
seemed to know the place. Of course! He was standing outside the junk-shop
where he had bought the diary.

A twinge of fear went through him. It had been a sufficiently rash act to
buy the book in the beginning, and he had sworn never to come near the
place again. And yet the instant that he allowed his thoughts to wander,
his feet had brought him back here of their own accord. It was precisely
against suicidal impulses of this kind that he had hoped to guard himself
by opening the diary. At the same time he noticed that although it was
nearly twenty-one hours the shop was still open. With the feeling that he
would be less conspicuous inside than hanging about on the pavement, he
stepped through the doorway. If questioned, he could plausibly say that
he was trying to buy razor blades.

The proprietor had just lighted a hanging oil lamp which gave off an
unclean but friendly smell. He was a man of perhaps sixty, frail and
bowed, with a long, benevolent nose, and mild eyes distorted by thick
spectacles. His hair was almost white, but his eyebrows were bushy and
still black. His spectacles, his gentle, fussy movements, and the fact
that he was wearing an aged jacket of black velvet, gave him a vague air
of intellectuality, as though he had been some kind of literary man, or
perhaps a musician. His voice was soft, as though faded, and his accent
less debased than that of the majority of proles.

'I recognized you on the pavement,' he said immediately. 'You're the
gentleman that bought the young lady's keepsake album. That was a beautiful
bit of paper, that was. Cream-laid, it used to be called. There's been no
paper like that made for--oh, I dare say fifty years.' He peered at Winston
over the top of his spectacles. 'Is there anything special I can do for
you? Or did you just want to look round?'

'I was passing,' said Winston vaguely. 'I just looked in. I don't want
anything in particular.'

'It's just as well,' said the other, 'because I don't suppose I could have
satisfied you.' He made an apologetic gesture with his softpalmed hand.
'You see how it is; an empty shop, you might say. Between you and me, the
antique trade's just about finished. No demand any longer, and no stock
either. Furniture, china, glass it's all been broken up by degrees. And
of course the metal stuff's mostly been melted down. I haven't seen a brass
candlestick in years.'

The tiny interior of the shop was in fact uncomfortably full, but there
was almost nothing in it of the slightest value. The floorspace was very
restricted, because all round the walls were stacked innumerable dusty
picture-frames. In the window there were trays of nuts and bolts, worn-out
chisels, penknives with broken blades, tarnished watches that did not even
pretend to be in going order, and other miscellaneous rubbish. Only on a
small table in the corner was there a litter of odds and ends--lacquered
snuffboxes, agate brooches, and the like--which looked as though they might
include something interesting. As Winston wandered towards the table his
eye was caught by a round, smooth thing that gleamed softly in the
lamplight, and he picked it up.

It was a heavy lump of glass, curved on one side, flat on the other, making
almost a hemisphere. There was a peculiar softness, as of rainwater, in
both the colour and the texture of the glass. At the heart of it, magnified
by the curved surface, there was a strange, pink, convoluted object that
recalled a rose or a sea anemone.

'What is it?' said Winston, fascinated.

'That's coral, that is,' said the old man. 'It must have come from the
Indian Ocean. They used to kind of embed it in the glass. That wasn't made
less than a hundred years ago. More, by the look of it.'

'It's a beautiful thing,' said Winston.

'It is a beautiful thing,' said the other appreciatively. 'But there's not
many that'd say so nowadays.' He coughed. 'Now, if it so happened that you
wanted to buy it, that'd cost you four dollars. I can remember when a thing
like that would have fetched eight pounds, and eight pounds was--well, I
can't work it out, but it was a lot of money. But who cares about genuine
antiques nowadays--even the few that's left?'

Winston immediately paid over the four dollars and slid the coveted thing
into his pocket. What appealed to him about it was not so much its beauty
as the air it seemed to possess of belonging to an age quite different
from the present one. The soft, rainwatery glass was not like any glass
that he had ever seen. The thing was doubly attractive because of its
apparent uselessness, though he could guess that it must once have been
intended as a paperweight. It was very heavy in his pocket, but fortunately
it did not make much of a bulge. It was a queer thing, even a compromising
thing, for a Party member to have in his possession. Anything old, and for
that matter anything beautiful, was always vaguely suspect. The old man had
grown noticeably more cheerful after receiving the four dollars. Winston
realized that he would have accepted three or even two.

'There's another room upstairs that you might care to take a look at,' he
said. 'There's not much in it. Just a few pieces. We'll do with a light if
we're going upstairs.'

He lit another lamp, and, with bowed back, led the way slowly up the
steep and worn stairs and along a tiny passage, into a room which did
not give on the street but looked out on a cobbled yard and a forest of
chimney-pots. Winston noticed that the furniture was still arranged as
though the room were meant to be lived in. There was a strip of carpet on
the floor, a picture or two on the walls, and a deep, slatternly arm-chair
drawn up to the fireplace. An old-fashioned glass clock with a twelve-hour
face was ticking away on the mantelpiece. Under the window, and occupying
nearly a quarter of the room, was an enormous bed with the mattress still
on it.

'We lived here till my wife died,' said the old man half apologetically.
'I'm selling the furniture off by little and little. Now that's a beautiful
mahogany bed, or at least it would be if you could get the bugs out of it.
But I dare say you'd find it a little bit cumbersome.'

He was holding the lamp high up, so as to illuminate the whole room, and
in the warm dim light the place looked curiously inviting. The thought
flitted through Winston's mind that it would probably be quite easy to
rent the room for a few dollars a week, if he dared to take the risk. It
was a wild, impossible notion, to be abandoned as soon as thought of; but
the room had awakened in him a sort of nostalgia, a sort of ancestral
memory. It seemed to him that he knew exactly what it felt like to sit in
a room like this, in an arm-chair beside an open fire with your feet in
the fender and a kettle on the hob; utterly alone, utterly secure, with
nobody watching you, no voice pursuing you, no sound except the singing
of the kettle and the friendly ticking of the clock.

'There's no telescreen!' he could not help murmuring.

'Ah,' said the old man, 'I never had one of those things. Too expensive.
And I never seemed to feel the need of it, somehow. Now that's a nice
gateleg table in the corner there. Though of course you'd have to put new
hinges on it if you wanted to use the flaps.'

There was a small bookcase in the other corner, and Winston had already
gravitated towards it. It contained nothing but rubbish. The hunting-down
and destruction of books had been done with the same thoroughness in the
prole quarters as everywhere else. It was very unlikely that there existed
anywhere in Oceania a copy of a book printed earlier than 1960. The old
man, still carrying the lamp, was standing in front of a picture in a
rosewood frame which hung on the other side of the fireplace, opposite
the bed.

'Now, if you happen to be interested in old prints at all----' he began
delicately.

Winston came across to examine the picture. It was a steel engraving of an
oval building with rectangular windows, and a small tower in front. There
was a railing running round the building, and at the rear end there was
what appeared to be a statue. Winston gazed at it for some moments. It
seemed vaguely familiar, though he did not remember the statue.

'The frame's fixed to the wall,' said the old man, 'but I could unscrew it
for you, I dare say.'

'I know that building,' said Winston finally. 'It's a ruin now. It's in
the middle of the street outside the Palace of Justice.'

'That's right. Outside the Law Courts. It was bombed in--oh, many years
ago. It was a church at one time, St Clement Danes, its name was.' He
smiled apologetically, as though conscious of saying something slightly
ridiculous, and added: 'Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's!'

'What's that?' said Winston.

'Oh--"Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's." That was a rhyme
we had when I was a little boy. How it goes on I don't remember, but I do
know it ended up, "Here comes a candle to light you to bed, Here comes a
chopper to chop off your head." It was a kind of a dance. They held out
their arms for you to pass under, and when they came to "Here comes a
chopper to chop off your head" they brought their arms down and caught you.
It was just names of churches. All the London churches were in it--all the
principal ones, that is.'

Winston wondered vaguely to what century the church belonged. It was always
difficult to determine the age of a London building. Anything large and
impressive, if it was reasonably new in appearance, was automatically
claimed as having been built since the Revolution, while anything that was
obviously of earlier date was ascribed to some dim period called the Middle
Ages. The centuries of capitalism were held to have produced nothing of any
value. One could not learn history from architecture any more than one
could learn it from books. Statues, inscriptions, memorial stones, the
names of streets--anything that might throw light upon the past had been
systematically altered.

'I never knew it had been a church,' he said.

'There's a lot of them left, really,' said the old man, 'though they've
been put to other uses. Now, how did that rhyme go? Ah! I've got it!


  "Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's,
  You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin's----"


there, now, that's as far as I can get. A farthing, that was a small copper
coin, looked something like a cent.'

'Where was St Martin's?' said Winston.

'St Martin's? That's still standing. It's in Victory Square, alongside the
picture gallery. A building with a kind of a triangular porch and pillars
in front, and a big flight of steps.'

Winston knew the place well. It was a museum used for propaganda displays
of various kinds--scale models of rocket bombs and Floating Fortresses,
waxwork tableaux illustrating enemy atrocities, and the like.

'St Martin's-in-the-Fields it used to be called,' supplemented the old man,
'though I don't recollect any fields anywhere in those parts.'

Winston did not buy the picture. It would have been an even more
incongruous possession than the glass paperweight, and impossible to carry
home, unless it were taken out of its frame. But he lingered for some
minutes more, talking to the old man, whose name, he discovered, was not
Weeks--as one might have gathered from the inscription over the
shop-front--but Charrington. Mr Charrington, it seemed, was a widower aged
sixty-three and had inhabited this shop for thirty years. Throughout that
time he had been intending to alter the name over the window, but had never
quite got to the point of doing it. All the while that they were talking
the half-remembered rhyme kept running through Winston's head. Oranges and
lemons say the bells of St Clement's, You owe me three farthings, say
the bells of St Martin's! It was curious, but when you said it to yourself
you had the illusion of actually hearing bells, the bells of a lost London
that still existed somewhere or other, disguised and forgotten. From one
ghostly steeple after another he seemed to hear them pealing forth. Yet so
far as he could remember he had never in real life heard church bells
ringing.

He got away from Mr Charrington and went down the stairs alone, so as not
to let the old man see him reconnoitring the street before stepping out of
the door. He had already made up his mind that after a suitable
interval--a month, say--he would take the risk of visiting the shop again.
It was perhaps not more dangerous than shirking an evening at the Centre.
The serious piece of folly had been to come back here in the first place,
after buying the diary and without knowing whether the proprietor of the
shop could be trusted. However----!

Yes, he thought again, he would come back. He would buy further scraps of
beautiful rubbish. He would buy the engraving of St Clement Danes, take
it out of its frame, and carry it home concealed under the jacket of his
overalls. He would drag the rest of that poem out of Mr Charrington's
memory. Even the lunatic project of renting the room upstairs flashed
momentarily through his mind again. For perhaps five seconds exaltation
made him careless, and he stepped out on to the pavement without so much
as a preliminary glance through the window. He had even started humming
to an improvised tune


  Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's,
  You owe me three farthings, say the----


Suddenly his heart seemed to turn to ice and his bowels to water. A figure
in blue overalls was coming down the pavement, not ten metres away. It was
the girl from the Fiction Department, the girl with dark hair. The light
was failing, but there was no difficulty in recognizing her. She looked
him straight in the face, then walked quickly on as though she had not
seen him.

For a few seconds Winston was too paralysed to move. Then he turned to the
right and walked heavily away, not noticing for the moment that he was
going in the wrong direction. At any rate, one question was settled. There
was no doubting any longer that the girl was spying on him. She must have
followed him here, because it was not credible that by pure chance she
should have happened to be walking on the same evening up the same obscure
backstreet, kilometres distant from any quarter where Party members lived.
It was too great a coincidence. Whether she was really an agent of the
Thought Police, or simply an amateur spy actuated by officiousness, hardly
mattered. It was enough that she was watching him. Probably she had seen
him go into the pub as well.

It was an effort to walk. The lump of glass in his pocket banged against
his thigh at each step, and he was half minded to take it out and throw it
away. The worst thing was the pain in his belly. For a couple of minutes
he had the feeling that he would die if he did not reach a lavatory soon.
But there would be no public lavatories in a quarter like this. Then the
spasm passed, leaving a dull ache behind.

The street was a blind alley. Winston halted, stood for several seconds
wondering vaguely what to do, then turned round and began to retrace his
steps. As he turned it occurred to him that the girl had only passed him
three minutes ago and that by running he could probably catch up with her.
He could keep on her track till they were in some quiet place, and then
smash her skull in with a cobblestone. The piece of glass in his pocket
would be heavy enough for the job. But he abandoned the idea immediately,
because even the thought of making any physical effort was unbearable. He
could not run, he could not strike a blow. Besides, she was young and lusty
and would defend herself. He thought also of hurrying to the Community
Centre and staying there till the place closed, so as to establish a
partial alibi for the evening. But that too was impossible. A deadly
lassitude had taken hold of him. All he wanted was to get home quickly and
then sit down and be quiet.

It was after twenty-two hours when he got back to the flat. The lights
would be switched off at the main at twenty-three thirty. He went into the
kitchen and swallowed nearly a teacupful of Victory Gin. Then he went to
the table in the alcove, sat down, and took the diary out of the drawer.
But he did not open it at once. From the telescreen a brassy female voice
was squalling a patriotic song. He sat staring at the marbled cover of the
book, trying without success to shut the voice out of his consciousness.

It was at night that they came for you, always at night. The proper thing
was to kill yourself before they got you. Undoubtedly some people did so.
Many of the disappearances were actually suicides. But it needed desperate
courage to kill yourself in a world where firearms, or any quick and
certain poison, were completely unprocurable. He thought with a kind of
astonishment of the biological uselessness of pain and fear, the treachery
of the human body which always freezes into inertia at exactly the moment
when a special effort is needed. He might have silenced the dark-haired
girl if only he had acted quickly enough: but precisely because of the
extremity of his danger he had lost the power to act. It struck him that
in moments of crisis one is never fighting against an external enemy, but
always against one's own body. Even now, in spite of the gin, the dull
ache in his belly made consecutive thought impossible. And it is the same,
he perceived, in all seemingly heroic or tragic situations. On the
battlefield, in the torture chamber, on a sinking ship, the issues that
you are fighting for are always forgotten, because the body swells up until
it fills the universe, and even when you are not paralysed by fright or
screaming with pain, life is a moment-to-moment struggle against hunger or
cold or sleeplessness, against a sour stomach or an aching tooth.

He opened the diary. It was important to write something down. The woman
on the telescreen had started a new song. Her voice seemed to stick into
his brain like jagged splinters of glass. He tried to think of O'Brien,
for whom, or to whom, the diary was written, but instead he began thinking
of the things that would happen to him after the Thought Police took him
away. It would not matter if they killed you at once. To be killed was
what you expected. But before death (nobody spoke of such things, yet
everybody knew of them) there was the routine of confession that had to
be gone through: the grovelling on the floor and screaming for mercy, the
crack of broken bones, the smashed teeth and bloody clots of hair.

Why did you have to endure it, since the end was always the same? Why was
it not possible to cut a few days or weeks out of your life? Nobody ever
escaped detection, and nobody ever failed to confess. When once you had
succumbed to thoughtcrime it was certain that by a given date you would be
dead. Why then did that horror, which altered nothing, have to lie embedded
in future time?

He tried with a little more success than before to summon up the image of
O'Brien. 'We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness,' O'Brien
had said to him. He knew what it meant, or thought he knew. The place where
there is no darkness was the imagined future, which one would never see,
but which, by foreknowledge, one could mystically share in. But with the
voice from the telescreen nagging at his ears he could not follow the train
of thought further. He put a cigarette in his mouth. Half the tobacco
promptly fell out on to his tongue, a bitter dust which was difficult to
spit out again. The face of Big Brother swam into his mind, displacing that
of O'Brien. Just as he had done a few days earlier, he slid a coin out of
his pocket and looked at it. The face gazed up at him, heavy, calm,
protecting: but what kind of smile was hidden beneath the dark moustache?
Like a leaden knell the words came back at him:


  WAR IS PEACE
  FREEDOM IS SLAVERY
  IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH





PART TWO




Chapter 1



It was the middle of the morning, and Winston had left the cubicle to go
to the lavatory.

A solitary figure was coming towards him from the other end of the long,
brightly-lit corridor. It was the girl with dark hair. Four days had gone
past since the evening when he had run into her outside the junk-shop.
As she came nearer he saw that her right arm was in a sling, not noticeable
at a distance because it was of the same colour as her overalls. Probably
she had crushed her hand while swinging round one of the big kaleidoscopes
on which the plots of novels were 'roughed in'. It was a common accident
in the Fiction Department.

They were perhaps four metres apart when the girl stumbled and fell almost
flat on her face. A sharp cry of pain was wrung out of her. She must have
fallen right on the injured arm. Winston stopped short. The girl had risen
to her knees. Her face had turned a milky yellow colour against which her
mouth stood out redder than ever. Her eyes were fixed on his, with an
appealing expression that looked more like fear than pain.

A curious emotion stirred in Winston's heart. In front of him was an enemy
who was trying to kill him: in front of him, also, was a human creature,
in pain and perhaps with a broken bone. Already he had instinctively
started forward to help her. In the moment when he had seen her fall on
the bandaged arm, it had been as though he felt the pain in his own body.

'You're hurt?' he said.

'It's nothing. My arm. It'll be all right in a second.'

She spoke as though her heart were fluttering. She had certainly turned
very pale.

'You haven't broken anything?'

'No, I'm all right. It hurt for a moment, that's all.'

She held out her free hand to him, and he helped her up. She had regained
some of her colour, and appeared very much better.

'It's nothing,' she repeated shortly. 'I only gave my wrist a bit of a
bang. Thanks, comrade!'

And with that she walked on in the direction in which she had been going,
as briskly as though it had really been nothing. The whole incident could
not have taken as much as half a minute. Not to let one's feelings appear
in one's face was a habit that had acquired the status of an instinct,
and in any case they had been standing straight in front of a telescreen
when the thing happened. Nevertheless it had been very difficult not to
betray a momentary surprise, for in the two or three seconds while he was
helping her up the girl had slipped something into his hand. There was no
question that she had done it intentionally. It was something small and
flat. As he passed through the lavatory door he transferred it to his
pocket and felt it with the tips of his fingers. It was a scrap of paper
folded into a square.

While he stood at the urinal he managed, with a little more fingering, to
get it unfolded. Obviously there must be a message of some kind written on
it. For a moment he was tempted to take it into one of the water-closets
and read it at once. But that would be shocking folly, as he well knew.
There was no place where you could be more certain that the telescreens
were watched continuously.

He went back to his cubicle, sat down, threw the fragment of paper
casually among the other papers on the desk, put on his spectacles and
hitched the speakwrite towards him. 'Five minutes,' he told himself,
'five minutes at the very least!' His heart bumped in his breast with
frightening loudness. Fortunately the piece of work he was engaged on was
mere routine, the rectification of a long list of figures, not needing
close attention.

Whatever was written on the paper, it must have some kind of political
meaning. So far as he could see there were two possibilities. One, much
the more likely, was that the girl was an agent of the Thought Police,
just as he had feared. He did not know why the Thought Police should
choose to deliver their messages in such a fashion, but perhaps they had
their reasons. The thing that was written on the paper might be a threat, a
summons, an order to commit suicide, a trap of some description. But there
was another, wilder possibility that kept raising its head, though he
tried vainly to suppress it. This was, that the message did not come from
the Thought Police at all, but from some kind of underground organization.
Perhaps the Brotherhood existed after all! Perhaps the girl was part of it!
No doubt the idea was absurd, but it had sprung into his mind in the very
instant of feeling the scrap of paper in his hand. It was not till a couple
of minutes later that the other, more probable explanation had occurred to
him. And even now, though his intellect told him that the message probably
meant death--still, that was not what he believed, and the unreasonable
hope persisted, and his heart banged, and it was with difficulty that he
kept his voice from trembling as he murmured his figures into the
speakwrite.

He rolled up the completed bundle of work and slid it into the pneumatic
tube. Eight minutes had gone by. He re-adjusted his spectacles on his nose,
sighed, and drew the next batch of work towards him, with the scrap of
paper on top of it. He flattened it out. On it was written, in a large
unformed handwriting:

I LOVE YOU.

For several seconds he was too stunned even to throw the incriminating
thing into the memory hole. When he did so, although he knew very well the
danger of showing too much interest, he could not resist reading it once
again, just to make sure that the words were really there.

For the rest of the morning it was very difficult to work. What was even
worse than having to focus his mind on a series of niggling jobs was the
need to conceal his agitation from the telescreen. He felt as though a
fire were burning in his belly. Lunch in the hot, crowded, noise-filled
canteen was torment. He had hoped to be alone for a little while during
the lunch hour, but as bad luck would have it the imbecile Parsons flopped
down beside him, the tang of his sweat almost defeating the tinny smell of
stew, and kept up a stream of talk about the preparations for Hate Week.
He was particularly enthusiastic about a papier-mache model of Big
Brother's head, two metres wide, which was being made for the occasion by
his daughter's troop of Spies. The irritating thing was that in the racket
of voices Winston could hardly hear what Parsons was saying, and was
constantly having to ask for some fatuous remark to be repeated. Just once
he caught a glimpse of the girl, at a table with two other girls at the
far end of the room. She appeared not to have seen him, and he did not
look in that direction again.

The afternoon was more bearable. Immediately after lunch there arrived a
delicate, difficult piece of work which would take several hours and
necessitated putting everything else aside. It consisted in falsifying a
series of production reports of two years ago, in such a way as to cast
discredit on a prominent member of the Inner Party, who was now under a
cloud. This was the kind of thing that Winston was good at, and for more
than two hours he succeeded in shutting the girl out of his mind
altogether. Then the memory of her face came back, and with it a raging,
intolerable desire to be alone. Until he could be alone it was impossible
to think this new development out. Tonight was one of his nights at the
Community Centre. He wolfed another tasteless meal in the canteen, hurried
off to the Centre, took part in the solemn foolery of a 'discussion group',
played two games of table tennis, swallowed several glasses of gin, and
sat for half an hour through a lecture entitled 'Ingsoc in relation to
chess'. His soul writhed with boredom, but for once he had had no impulse
to shirk his evening at the Centre. At the sight of the words I LOVE YOU
the desire to stay alive had welled up in him, and the taking of minor
risks suddenly seemed stupid. It was not till twenty-three hours, when he
was home and in bed--in the darkness, where you were safe even from the
telescreen so long as you kept silent--that he was able to think
continuously.

It was a physical problem that had to be solved: how to get in touch with
the girl and arrange a meeting. He did not consider any longer the
possibility that she might be laying some kind of trap for him. He knew
that it was not so, because of her unmistakable agitation when she handed
him the note. Obviously she had been frightened out of her wits, as well
she might be. Nor did the idea of refusing her advances even cross his
mind. Only five nights ago he had contemplated smashing her skull in with
a cobblestone, but that was of no importance. He thought of her naked,
youthful body, as he had seen it in his dream. He had imagined her a fool
like all the rest of them, her head stuffed with lies and hatred, her
belly full of ice. A kind of fever seized him at the thought that he might
lose her, the white youthful body might slip away from him! What he feared
more than anything else was that she would simply change her mind if he
did not get in touch with her quickly. But the physical difficulty of
meeting was enormous. It was like trying to make a move at chess when you
were already mated. Whichever way you turned, the telescreen faced you.
Actually, all the possible ways of communicating with her had occurred to
him within five minutes of reading the note; but now, with time to think,
he went over them one by one, as though laying out a row of instruments
on a table.

Obviously the kind of encounter that had happened this morning could not
be repeated. If she had worked in the Records Department it might have
been comparatively simple, but he had only a very dim idea whereabouts in
the building the Fiction Department lay, and he had no pretext for going
there. If he had known where she lived, and at what time she left work,
he could have contrived to meet her somewhere on her way home; but to try
to follow her home was not safe, because it would mean loitering about
outside the Ministry, which was bound to be noticed. As for sending a
letter through the mails, it was out of the question. By a routine that
was not even secret, all letters were opened in transit. Actually, few
people ever wrote letters. For the messages that it was occasionally
necessary to send, there were printed postcards with long lists of phrases,
and you struck out the ones that were inapplicable. In any case he did not
know the girl's name, let alone her address. Finally he decided that the
safest place was the canteen. If he could get her at a table by herself,
somewhere in the middle of the room, not too near the telescreens, and
with a sufficient buzz of conversation all round--if these conditions
endured for, say, thirty seconds, it might be possible to exchange a few
words.

For a week after this, life was like a restless dream. On the next day she
did not appear in the canteen until he was leaving it, the whistle having
already blown. Presumably she had been changed on to a later shift. They
passed each other without a glance. On the day after that she was in the
canteen at the usual time, but with three other girls and immediately
under a telescreen. Then for three dreadful days she did not appear at
all. His whole mind and body seemed to be afflicted with an unbearable
sensitivity, a sort of transparency, which made every movement, every
sound, every contact, every word that he had to speak or listen to, an
agony. Even in sleep he could not altogether escape from her image. He did
not touch the diary during those days. If there was any relief, it was in
his work, in which he could sometimes forget himself for ten minutes at a
stretch. He had absolutely no clue as to what had happened to her. There
was no enquiry he could make. She might have been vaporized, she might
have committed suicide, she might have been transferred to the other end
of Oceania: worst and likeliest of all, she might simply have changed her
mind and decided to avoid him.

The next day she reappeared. Her arm was out of the sling and she had a
band of sticking-plaster round her wrist. The relief of seeing her was
so great that he could not resist staring directly at her for several
seconds. On the following day he very nearly succeeded in speaking to her.
When he came into the canteen she was sitting at a table well out from the
wall, and was quite alone. It was early, and the place was not very full.
The queue edged forward till Winston was almost at the counter, then was
held up for two minutes because someone in front was complaining that he
had not received his tablet of saccharine. But the girl was still alone
when Winston secured his tray and began to make for her table. He walked
casually towards her, his eyes searching for a place at some table beyond
her. She was perhaps three metres away from him. Another two seconds would
do it. Then a voice behind him called, 'Smith!' He pretended not to hear.
'Smith!' repeated the voice, more loudly. It was no use. He turned round.
A blond-headed, silly-faced young man named Wilsher, whom he barely knew,
was inviting him with a smile to a vacant place at his table. It was not
safe to refuse. After having been recognized, he could not go and sit at
a table with an unattended girl. It was too noticeable. He sat down with
a friendly smile. The silly blond face beamed into his. Winston had a
hallucination of himself smashing a pick-axe right into the middle of it.
The girl's table filled up a few minutes later.

But she must have seen him coming towards her, and perhaps she would take
the hint. Next day he took care to arrive early. Surely enough, she was at
a table in about the same place, and again alone. The person immediately
ahead of him in the queue was a small, swiftly-moving, beetle-like man
with a flat face and tiny, suspicious eyes. As Winston turned away from
the counter with his tray, he saw that the little man was making straight
for the girl's table. His hopes sank again. There was a vacant place at a
table further away, but something in the little man's appearance suggested
that he would be sufficiently attentive to his own comfort to choose the
emptiest table. With ice at his heart Winston followed. It was no use
unless he could get the girl alone. At this moment there was a tremendous
crash. The little man was sprawling on all fours, his tray had gone flying,
two streams of soup and coffee were flowing across the floor. He started
to his feet with a malignant glance at Winston, whom he evidently
suspected of having tripped him up. But it was all right. Five seconds
later, with a thundering heart, Winston was sitting at the girl's table.

He did not look at her. He unpacked his tray and promptly began eating.
It was all-important to speak at once, before anyone else came, but now
a terrible fear had taken possession of him. A week had gone by since
she had first approached him. She would have changed her mind, she must
have changed her mind! It was impossible that this affair should end
successfully; such things did not happen in real life. He might have
flinched altogether from speaking if at this moment he had not seen
Ampleforth, the hairy-eared poet, wandering limply round the room with
a tray, looking for a place to sit down. In his vague way Ampleforth
was attached to Winston, and would certainly sit down at his table if
he caught sight of him. There was perhaps a minute in which to act. Both
Winston and the girl were eating steadily. The stuff they were eating was
a thin stew, actually a soup, of haricot beans. In a low murmur Winston
began speaking. Neither of them looked up; steadily they spooned the
watery stuff into their mouths, and between spoonfuls exchanged the few
necessary words in low expressionless voices.

'What time do you leave work?'

'Eighteen-thirty.'

'Where can we meet?'

'Victory Square, near the monument.'

'It's full of telescreens.'

'It doesn't matter if there's a crowd.'

'Any signal?'

'No. Don't come up to me until you see me among a lot of people. And don't
look at me. Just keep somewhere near me.'

'What time?'

'Nineteen hours.'

'All right.'

Ampleforth failed to see Winston and sat down at another table. They did
not speak again, and, so far as it was possible for two people sitting on
opposite sides of the same table, they did not look at one another. The
girl finished her lunch quickly and made off, while Winston stayed to
smoke a cigarette.

Winston was in Victory Square before the appointed time. He wandered round
the base of the enormous fluted column, at the top of which Big Brother's
statue gazed southward towards the skies where he had vanquished the
Eurasian aeroplanes (the Eastasian aeroplanes, it had been, a few years
ago) in the Battle of Airstrip One. In the street in front of it there was
a statue of a man on horseback which was supposed to represent Oliver
Cromwell. At five minutes past the hour the girl had still not appeared.
Again the terrible fear seized upon Winston. She was not coming, she had
changed her mind! He walked slowly up to the north side of the square and
got a sort of pale-coloured pleasure from identifying St Martin's Church,
whose bells, when it had bells, had chimed 'You owe me three farthings.'
Then he saw the girl standing at the base of the monument, reading or
pretending to read a poster which ran spirally up the column. It was not
safe to go near her until some more people had accumulated. There were
telescreens all round the pediment. But at this moment there was a din of
shouting and a zoom of heavy vehicles from somewhere to the left. Suddenly
everyone seemed to be running across the square. The girl nipped nimbly
round the lions at the base of the monument and joined in the rush.
Winston followed. As he ran, he gathered from some shouted remarks that
a convoy of Eurasian prisoners was passing.

Already a dense mass of people was blocking the south side of the square.
Winston, at normal times the kind of person who gravitates to the outer
edge of any kind of scrimmage, shoved, butted, squirmed his way forward
into the heart of the crowd. Soon he was within arm's length of the girl,
but the way was blocked by an enormous prole and an almost equally enormous
woman, presumably his wife, who seemed to form an impenetrable wall of
flesh. Winston wriggled himself sideways, and with a violent lunge managed
to drive his shoulder between them. For a moment it felt as though his
entrails were being ground to pulp between the two muscular hips, then he
had broken through, sweating a little. He was next to the girl. They were
shoulder to shoulder, both staring fixedly in front of them.

A long line of trucks, with wooden-faced guards armed with sub-machine
guns standing upright in each corner, was passing slowly down the street.
In the trucks little yellow men in shabby greenish uniforms were squatting,
jammed close together. Their sad, Mongolian faces gazed out over the sides
of the trucks utterly incurious. Occasionally when a truck jolted there
was a clank-clank of metal: all the prisoners were wearing leg-irons.
Truck-load after truck-load of the sad faces passed. Winston knew they
were there but he saw them only intermittently. The girl's shoulder, and
her arm right down to the elbow, were pressed against his. Her cheek was
almost near enough for him to feel its warmth. She had immediately taken
charge of the situation, just as she had done in the canteen. She began
speaking in the same expressionless voice as before, with lips barely
moving, a mere murmur easily drowned by the din of voices and the rumbling
of the trucks.

'Can you hear me?'

'Yes.'

'Can you get Sunday afternoon off?'

'Yes.'

'Then listen carefully. You'll have to remember this. Go to Paddington
Station----'

With a sort of military precision that astonished him, she outlined the
route that he was to follow. A half-hour railway journey; turn left outside
the station; two kilometres along the road; a gate with the top bar
missing; a path across a field; a grass-grown lane; a track between bushes;
a dead tree with moss on it. It was as though she had a map inside her
head. 'Can you remember all that?' she murmured finally.

'Yes.'

'You turn left, then right, then left again. And the gate's got no top bar.'

'Yes. What time?'

'About fifteen. You may have to wait. I'll get there by another way. Are
you sure you remember everything?'

'Yes.'

'Then get away from me as quick as you can.'

She need not have told him that. But for the moment they could not
extricate themselves from the crowd. The trucks were still filing past,
the people still insatiably gaping. At the start there had been a few boos
and hisses, but it came only from the Party members among the crowd, and
had soon stopped. The prevailing emotion was simply curiosity. Foreigners,
whether from Eurasia or from Eastasia, were a kind of strange animal. One
literally never saw them except in the guise of prisoners, and even as
prisoners one never got more than a momentary glimpse of them. Nor did
one know what became of them, apart from the few who were hanged as
war-criminals: the others simply vanished, presumably into forced-labour
camps. The round Mogol faces had given way to faces of a more European
type, dirty, bearded and exhausted. From over scrubby cheekbones eyes
looked into Winston's, sometimes with strange intensity, and flashed away
again. The convoy was drawing to an end. In the last truck he could see an
aged man, his face a mass of grizzled hair, standing upright with wrists
crossed in front of him, as though he were used to having them bound
together. It was almost time for Winston and the girl to part. But at the
last moment, while the crowd still hemmed them in, her hand felt for his
and gave it a fleeting squeeze.

It could not have been ten seconds, and yet it seemed a long time that
their hands were clasped together. He had time to learn every detail
of her hand. He explored the long fingers, the shapely nails, the
work-hardened palm with its row of callouses, the smooth flesh under the
wrist. Merely from feeling it he would have known it by sight. In the
same instant it occurred to him that he did not know what colour the
girl's eyes were. They were probably brown, but people with dark hair
sometimes had blue eyes. To turn his head and look at her would have
been inconceivable folly. With hands locked together, invisible among
the press of bodies, they stared steadily in front of them, and instead
of the eyes of the girl, the eyes of the aged prisoner gazed mournfully
at Winston out of nests of hair.




Chapter 2



Winston picked his way up the lane through dappled light and shade,
stepping out into pools of gold wherever the boughs parted. Under the
trees to the left of him the ground was misty with bluebells. The air
seemed to kiss one's skin. It was the second of May. From somewhere deeper
in the heart of the wood came the droning of ring-doves.

He was a bit early. There had been no difficulties about the journey, and
the girl was so evidently experienced that he was less frightened than he
would normally have been. Presumably she could be trusted to find a safe
place. In general you could not assume that you were much safer in the
country than in London. There were no telescreens, of course, but there
was always the danger of concealed microphones by which your voice might
be picked up and recognized; besides, it was not easy to make a journey
by yourself without attracting attention. For distances of less than
100 kilometres it was not necessary to get your passport endorsed, but
sometimes there were patrols hanging about the railway stations, who
examined the papers of any Party member they found there and asked awkward
questions. However, no patrols had appeared, and on the walk from the
station he had made sure by cautious backward glances that he was not
being followed. The train was full of proles, in holiday mood because of
the summery weather. The wooden-seated carriage in which he travelled was
filled to overflowing by a single enormous family, ranging from a toothless
great-grandmother to a month-old baby, going out to spend an afternoon
with 'in-laws' in the country, and, as they freely explained to Winston,
to get hold of a little black-market butter.

The lane widened, and in a minute he came to the footpath she had told him
of, a mere cattle-track which plunged between the bushes. He had no watch,
but it could not be fifteen yet. The bluebells were so thick underfoot
that it was impossible not to tread on them. He knelt down and began
picking some partly to pass the time away, but also from a vague idea that
he would like to have a bunch of flowers to offer to the girl when they
met. He had got together a big bunch and was smelling their faint sickly
scent when a sound at his back froze him, the unmistakable crackle of a
foot on twigs. He went on picking bluebells. It was the best thing to do.
It might be the girl, or he might have been followed after all. To look
round was to show guilt. He picked another and another. A hand fell
lightly on his shoulder.

He looked up. It was the girl. She shook her head, evidently as a warning
that he must keep silent, then parted the bushes and quickly led the way
along the narrow track into the wood. Obviously she had been that way
before, for she dodged the boggy bits as though by habit. Winston followed,
still clasping his bunch of flowers. His first feeling was relief, but as
he watched the strong slender body moving in front of him, with the scarlet
sash that was just tight enough to bring out the curve of her hips, the
sense of his own inferiority was heavy upon him. Even now it seemed quite
likely that when she turned round and looked at him she would draw back
after all. The sweetness of the air and the greenness of the leaves daunted
him. Already on the walk from the station the May sunshine had made him
feel dirty and etiolated, a creature of indoors, with the sooty dust of
London in the pores of his skin. It occurred to him that till now she had
probably never seen him in broad daylight in the open. They came to the
fallen tree that she had spoken of. The girl hopped over and forced apart
the bushes, in which there did not seem to be an opening. When Winston
followed her, he found that they were in a natural clearing, a tiny grassy
knoll surrounded by tall saplings that shut it in completely. The girl
stopped and turned.

'Here we are,' she said.

He was facing her at several paces' distance. As yet he did not dare move
nearer to her.

'I didn't want to say anything in the lane,' she went on, 'in case there's
a mike hidden there. I don't suppose there is, but there could be. There's
always the chance of one of those swine recognizing your voice. We're all
right here.'

He still had not the courage to approach her. 'We're all right here?'
he repeated stupidly.

'Yes. Look at the trees.' They were small ashes, which at some time had
been cut down and had sprouted up again into a forest of poles, none of
them thicker than one's wrist. 'There's nothing big enough to hide a mike
in. Besides, I've been here before.'

They were only making conversation. He had managed to move closer to her
now. She stood before him very upright, with a smile on her face that
looked faintly ironical, as though she were wondering why he was so slow
to act. The bluebells had cascaded on to the ground. They seemed to have
fallen of their own accord. He took her hand.

'Would you believe,' he said, 'that till this moment I didn't know what
colour your eyes were?' They were brown, he noted, a rather light shade of
brown, with dark lashes. 'Now that you've seen what I'm really like,
can you still bear to look at me?'

'Yes, easily.'

'I'm thirty-nine years old. I've got a wife that I can't get rid of. I've
got varicose veins. I've got five false teeth.'

'I couldn't care less,' said the girl.

The next moment, it was hard to say by whose act, she was in his arms.
At the beginning he had no feeling except sheer incredulity. The youthful
body was strained against his own, the mass of dark hair was against his
face, and yes! actually she had turned her face up and he was kissing the
wide red mouth. She had clasped her arms about his neck, she was calling
him darling, precious one, loved one. He had pulled her down on to the
ground, she was utterly unresisting, he could do what he liked with her.
But the truth was that he had no physical sensation, except that of mere
contact. All he felt was incredulity and pride. He was glad that this was
happening, but he had no physical desire. It was too soon, her youth and
prettiness had frightened him, he was too much used to living without
women--he did not know the reason. The girl picked herself up and pulled a
bluebell out of her hair. She sat against him, putting her arm round his
waist.

'Never mind, dear. There's no hurry. We've got the whole afternoon. Isn't
this a splendid hide-out? I found it when I got lost once on a community
hike. If anyone was coming you could hear them a hundred metres away.'

'What is your name?' said Winston.

'Julia. I know yours. It's Winston--Winston Smith.'

'How did you find that out?'

'I expect I'm better at finding things out than you are, dear. Tell me,
what did you think of me before that day I gave you the note?'

He did not feel any temptation to tell lies to her. It was even a sort of
love-offering to start off by telling the worst.

'I hated the sight of you,' he said. 'I wanted to rape you and then murder
you afterwards. Two weeks ago I thought seriously of smashing your head in
with a cobblestone. If you really want to know, I imagined that you had
something to do with the Thought Police.'

The girl laughed delightedly, evidently taking this as a
tribute to the excellence of her disguise.

'Not the Thought Police! You didn't honestly think that?'

'Well, perhaps not exactly that. But from your general appearance--merely
because you're young and fresh and healthy, you understand--I thought that
probably----'

'You thought I was a good Party member. Pure in word and deed. Banners,
processions, slogans, games, community hikes all that stuff. And you
thought that if I had a quarter of a chance I'd denounce you as a
thought-criminal and get you killed off?'

'Yes, something of that kind. A great many young girls are like that,
you know.'

'It's this bloody thing that does it,' she said, ripping off the scarlet
sash of the Junior Anti-Sex League and flinging it on to a bough. Then,
as though touching her waist had reminded her of something, she felt in
the pocket of her overalls and produced a small slab of chocolate. She
broke it in half and gave one of the pieces to Winston. Even before he had
taken it he knew by the smell that it was very unusual chocolate. It was
dark and shiny, and was wrapped in silver paper. Chocolate normally was
dull-brown crumbly stuff that tasted, as nearly as one could describe it,
like the smoke of a rubbish fire. But at some time or another he had tasted
chocolate like the piece she had given him. The first whiff of its scent
had stirred up some memory which he could not pin down, but which was
powerful and troubling.

'Where did you get this stuff?' he said.

'Black market,' she said indifferently. 'Actually I am that sort of girl,
to look at. I'm good at games. I was a troop-leader in the Spies. I do
voluntary work three evenings a week for the Junior Anti-Sex League. Hours
and hours I've spent pasting their bloody rot all over London. I always
carry one end of a banner in the processions. I always look cheerful and
I never shirk anything. Always yell with the crowd, that's what I say.
It's the only way to be safe.'

The first fragment of chocolate had melted on Winston's tongue. The taste
was delightful. But there was still that memory moving round the edges of
his consciousness, something strongly felt but not reducible to definite
shape, like an object seen out of the corner of one's eye. He pushed it
away from him, aware only that it was the memory of some action which he
would have liked to undo but could not.

'You are very young,' he said. 'You are ten or fifteen years younger than
I am. What could you see to attract you in a man like me?'

'It was something in your face. I thought I'd take a chance. I'm good at
spotting people who don't belong. As soon as I saw you I knew you were
against THEM.'

THEM, it appeared, meant the Party, and above all the Inner Party, about
whom she talked with an open jeering hatred which made Winston feel uneasy,
although he knew that they were safe here if they could be safe anywhere.
A thing that astonished him about her was the coarseness of her language.
Party members were supposed not to swear, and Winston himself very seldom
did swear, aloud, at any rate. Julia, however, seemed unable to mention
the Party, and especially the Inner Party, without using the kind of words
that you saw chalked up in dripping alley-ways. He did not dislike it. It
was merely one symptom of her revolt against the Party and all its ways,
and somehow it seemed natural and healthy, like the sneeze of a horse that
smells bad hay. They had left the clearing and were wandering again
through the chequered shade, with their arms round each other's waists
whenever it was wide enough to walk two abreast. He noticed how much
softer her waist seemed to feel now that the sash was gone. They did not
speak above a whisper. Outside the clearing, Julia said, it was better to
go quietly. Presently they had reached the edge of the little wood. She
stopped him.

'Don't go out into the open. There might be someone watching. We're all
right if we keep behind the boughs.'

They were standing in the shade of hazel bushes. The sunlight, filtering
through innumerable leaves, was still hot on their faces. Winston looked
out into the field beyond, and underwent a curious, slow shock of
recognition. He knew it by sight. An old, close-bitten pasture, with a
footpath wandering across it and a molehill here and there. In the ragged
hedge on the opposite side the boughs of the elm trees swayed just
perceptibly in the breeze, and their leaves stirred faintly in dense
masses like women's hair. Surely somewhere nearby, but out of sight,
there must be a stream with green pools where dace were swimming?

'Isn't there a stream somewhere near here?' he whispered.

'That's right, there is a stream. It's at the edge of the next field,
actually. There are fish in it, great big ones. You can watch them lying
in the pools under the willow trees, waving their tails.'

'It's the Golden Country--almost,' he murmured.

'The Golden Country?'

'It's nothing, really. A landscape I've seen sometimes in a dream.'

'Look!' whispered Julia.

A thrush had alighted on a bough not five metres away, almost at the level
of their faces. Perhaps it had not seen them. It was in the sun, they in
the shade. It spread out its wings, fitted them carefully into place
again, ducked its head for a moment, as though making a sort of obeisance
to the sun, and then began to pour forth a torrent of song. In the
afternoon hush the volume of sound was startling. Winston and Julia clung
together, fascinated. The music went on and on, minute after minute, with
astonishing variations, never once repeating itself, almost as though the
bird were deliberately showing off its virtuosity. Sometimes it stopped
for a few seconds, spread out and resettled its wings, then swelled its
speckled breast and again burst into song. Winston watched it with a sort
of vague reverence. For whom, for what, was that bird singing? No mate,
no rival was watching it. What made it sit at the edge of the lonely wood
and pour its music into nothingness? He wondered whether after all there
was a microphone hidden somewhere near. He and Julia had spoken only in
low whispers, and it would not pick up what they had said, but it would
pick up the thrush. Perhaps at the other end of the instrument some small,
beetle-like man was listening intently--listening to that. But by degrees
the flood of music drove all speculations out of his mind. It was as
though it were a kind of liquid stuff that poured all over him and got
mixed up with the sunlight that filtered through the leaves. He stopped
thinking and merely felt. The girl's waist in the bend of his arm was soft
and warm. He pulled her round so that they were breast to breast; her body
seemed to melt into his. Wherever his hands moved it was all as yielding as
water. Their mouths clung together; it was quite different from the hard
kisses they had exchanged earlier. When they moved their faces apart again
both of them sighed deeply. The bird took fright and fled with a clatter
of wings.

Winston put his lips against her ear. 'NOW,' he whispered.

'Not here,' she whispered back. 'Come back to the hide-out. It's safer.'

Quickly, with an occasional crackle of twigs, they threaded their way back
to the clearing. When they were once inside the ring of saplings she turned
and faced him. They were both breathing fast, but the smile had reappeared
round the corners of her mouth. She stood looking at him for an instant,
then felt at the zipper of her overalls. And, yes! it was almost as in his
dream. Almost as swiftly as he had imagined it, she had torn her clothes
off, and when she flung them aside it was with that same magnificent
gesture by which a whole civilization seemed to be annihilated. Her body
gleamed white in the sun. But for a moment he did not look at her body;
his eyes were anchored by the freckled face with its faint, bold smile.
He knelt down before her and took her hands in his.

'Have you done this before?'

'Of course. Hundreds of times--well, scores of times, anyway.'

'With Party members?'

'Yes, always with Party members.'

'With members of the Inner Party?'

'Not with those swine, no. But there's plenty that WOULD if they got half
a chance. They're not so holy as they make out.'

His heart leapt. Scores of times she had done it: he wished it had been
hundreds--thousands. Anything that hinted at corruption always filled him
with a wild hope. Who knew, perhaps the Party was rotten under the surface,
its cult of strenuousness and self-denial simply a sham concealing
iniquity. If he could have infected the whole lot of them with leprosy or
syphilis, how gladly he would have done so! Anything to rot, to weaken, to
undermine! He pulled her down so that they were kneeling face to face.

'Listen. The more men you've had, the more I love you. Do you understand
that?'

'Yes, perfectly.'

'I hate purity, I hate goodness! I don't want any virtue to exist anywhere.
I want everyone to be corrupt to the bones.'

'Well then, I ought to suit you, dear. I'm corrupt to the bones.'

'You like doing this? I don't mean simply me: I mean the thing in itself?'

'I adore it.'

That was above all what he wanted to hear. Not merely the love of one
person but the animal instinct, the simple undifferentiated desire: that
was the force that would tear the Party to pieces. He pressed her down
upon the grass, among the fallen bluebells. This time there was no
difficulty. Presently the rising and falling of their breasts slowed to
normal speed, and in a sort of pleasant helplessness they fell apart. The
sun seemed to have grown hotter. They were both sleepy. He reached out for
the discarded overalls and pulled them partly over her. Almost immediately
they fell asleep and slept for about half an hour.

Winston woke first. He sat up and watched the freckled face, still
peacefully asleep, pillowed on the palm of her hand. Except for her mouth,
you could not call her beautiful. There was a line or two round the eyes,
if you looked closely. The short dark hair was extraordinarily thick and
soft. It occurred to him that he still did not know her surname or where
she lived.

The young, strong body, now helpless in sleep, awoke in him a pitying,
protecting feeling. But the mindless tenderness that he had felt under
the hazel tree, while the thrush was singing, had not quite come back.
He pulled the overalls aside and studied her smooth white flank. In the
old days, he thought, a man looked at a girl's body and saw that it was
desirable, and that was the end of the story. But you could not have pure
love or pure lust nowadays. No emotion was pure, because everything was
mixed up with fear and hatred. Their embrace had been a battle, the climax
a victory. It was a blow struck against the Party. It was a political act.




Chapter 3



'We can come here once again,' said Julia. 'It's generally safe to use any
hide-out twice. But not for another month or two, of course.'

As soon as she woke up her demeanour had changed. She became alert and
business-like, put her clothes on, knotted the scarlet sash about her
waist, and began arranging the details of the journey home. It seemed
natural to leave this to her. She obviously had a practical cunning which
Winston lacked, and she seemed also to have an exhaustive knowledge of the
countryside round London, stored away from innumerable community hikes.
The route she gave him was quite different from the one by which he had
come, and brought him out at a different railway station. 'Never go home
the same way as you went out,' she said, as though enunciating an important
general principle. She would leave first, and Winston was to wait half an
hour before following her.

She had named a place where they could meet after work, four evenings
hence. It was a street in one of the poorer quarters, where there was an
open market which was generally crowded and noisy. She would be hanging
about among the stalls, pretending to be in search of shoelaces or
sewing-thread. If she judged that the coast was clear she would blow
her nose when he approached; otherwise he was to walk past her without
recognition. But with luck, in the middle of the crowd, it would be
safe to talk for a quarter of an hour and arrange another meeting.

'And now I must go,' she said as soon as he had mastered his instructions.
'I'm due back at nineteen-thirty. I've got to put in two hours for the
Junior Anti-Sex League, handing out leaflets, or something. Isn't it
bloody? Give me a brush-down, would you? Have I got any twigs in my hair?
Are you sure? Then good-bye, my love, good-bye!'

She flung herself into his arms, kissed him almost violently, and a moment
later pushed her way through the saplings and disappeared into the wood
with very little noise. Even now he had not found out her surname or her
address. However, it made no difference, for it was inconceivable that
they could ever meet indoors or exchange any kind of written communication.

As it happened, they never went back to the clearing in the wood. During
the month of May there was only one further occasion on which they actually
succeeded in making love. That was in another hiding-place known to Julia,
the belfry of a ruinous church in an almost-deserted stretch of country
where an atomic bomb had fallen thirty years earlier. It was a good
hiding-place when once you got there, but the getting there was very
dangerous. For the rest they could meet only in the streets, in a different
place every evening and never for more than half an hour at a time. In the
street it was usually possible to talk, after a fashion. As they drifted
down the crowded pavements, not quite abreast and never looking at one
another, they carried on a curious, intermittent conversation which flicked
on and off like the beams of a lighthouse, suddenly nipped into silence
by the approach of a Party uniform or the proximity of a telescreen, then
taken up again minutes later in the middle of a sentence, then abruptly
cut short as they parted at the agreed spot, then continued almost without
introduction on the following day. Julia appeared to be quite used to this
kind of conversation, which she called 'talking by instalments'. She was
also surprisingly adept at speaking without moving her lips. Just once in
almost a month of nightly meetings they managed to exchange a kiss. They
were passing in silence down a side-street (Julia would never speak when
they were away from the main streets) when there was a deafening roar, the
earth heaved, and the air darkened, and Winston found himself lying on his
side, bruised and terrified. A rocket bomb must have dropped quite near at
hand. Suddenly he became aware of Julia's face a few centimetres from his
own, deathly white, as white as chalk. Even her lips were white. She was
dead! He clasped her against him and found that he was kissing a live
warm face. But there was some powdery stuff that got in the way of his
lips. Both of their faces were thickly coated with plaster.

There were evenings when they reached their rendezvous and then had to
walk past one another without a sign, because a patrol had just come round
the corner or a helicopter was hovering overhead. Even if it had been
less dangerous, it would still have been difficult to find time to meet.
Winston's working week was sixty hours, Julia's was even longer, and
their free days varied according to the pressure of work and did not
often coincide. Julia, in any case, seldom had an evening completely free.
She spent an astonishing amount of time in attending lectures and
demonstrations, distributing literature for the junior Anti-Sex League,
preparing banners for Hate Week, making collections for the savings
campaign, and such-like activities. It paid, she said, it was camouflage.
If you kept the small rules, you could break the big ones. She even induced
Winston to mortgage yet another of his evenings by enrolling himself for
the part-time munition work which was done voluntarily by zealous Party
members. So, one evening every week, Winston spent four hours of paralysing
boredom, screwing together small bits of metal which were probably parts
of bomb fuses, in a draughty, ill-lit workshop where the knocking of
hammers mingled drearily with the music of the telescreens.

When they met in the church tower the gaps in their fragmentary
conversation were filled up. It was a blazing afternoon. The air in the
little square chamber above the bells was hot and stagnant, and smelt
overpoweringly of pigeon dung. They sat talking for hours on the dusty,
twig-littered floor, one or other of them getting up from time to time to
cast a glance through the arrowslits and make sure that no one was coming.

Julia was twenty-six years old. She lived in a hostel with thirty other
girls ('Always in the stink of women! How I hate women!' she said
parenthetically), and she worked, as he had guessed, on the novel-writing
machines in the Fiction Department. She enjoyed her work, which consisted
chiefly in running and servicing a powerful but tricky electric motor.
She was 'not clever', but was fond of using her hands and felt at home
with machinery. She could describe the whole process of composing a novel,
from the general directive issued by the Planning Committee down to the
final touching-up by the Rewrite Squad. But she was not interested in the
finished product. She 'didn't much care for reading,' she said. Books were
just a commodity that had to be produced, like jam or bootlaces.

She had no memories of anything before the early sixties and the only
person she had ever known who talked frequently of the days before the
Revolution was a grandfather who had disappeared when she was eight. At
school she had been captain of the hockey team and had won the gymnastics
trophy two years running. She had been a troop-leader in the Spies and a
branch secretary in the Youth League before joining the Junior Anti-Sex
League. She had always borne an excellent character. She had even (an
infallible mark of good reputation) been picked out to work in Pornosec,
the sub-section of the Fiction Department which turned out cheap
pornography for distribution among the proles. It was nicknamed Muck House
by the people who worked in it, she remarked. There she had remained for
a year, helping to produce booklets in sealed packets with titles like
'Spanking Stories' or 'One Night in a Girls' School', to be bought
furtively by proletarian youths who were under the impression that they
were buying something illegal.

'What are these books like?' said Winston curiously.

'Oh, ghastly rubbish. They're boring, really. They only have six plots,
but they swap them round a bit. Of course I was only on the kaleidoscopes.
I was never in the Rewrite Squad. I'm not literary, dear--not even enough
for that.'

He learned with astonishment that all the workers in Pornosec, except the
heads of the departments, were girls. The theory was that men, whose sex
instincts were less controllable than those of women, were in greater
danger of being corrupted by the filth they handled.

'They don't even like having married women there,' she added. Girls are
always supposed to be so pure. Here's one who isn't, anyway.

She had had her first love-affair when she was sixteen, with a Party member
of sixty who later committed suicide to avoid arrest. 'And a good job too,'
said Julia, 'otherwise they'd have had my name out of him when he
confessed.' Since then there had been various others. Life as she saw it
was quite simple. You wanted a good time; 'they', meaning the Party,
wanted to stop you having it; you broke the rules as best you could. She
seemed to think it just as natural that 'they' should want to rob you of
your pleasures as that you should want to avoid being caught. She hated
the Party, and said so in the crudest words, but she made no general
criticism of it. Except where it touched upon her own life she had no
interest in Party doctrine. He noticed that she never used Newspeak words
except the ones that had passed into everyday use. She had never heard of
the Brotherhood, and refused to believe in its existence. Any kind of
organized revolt against the Party, which was bound to be a failure,
struck her as stupid. The clever thing was to break the rules and stay
alive all the same. He wondered vaguely how many others like her there
might be in the younger generation people who had grown up in the world of
the Revolution, knowing nothing else, accepting the Party as something
unalterable, like the sky, not rebelling against its authority but simply
evading it, as a rabbit dodges a dog.

They did not discuss the possibility of getting married. It was too remote
to be worth thinking about. No imaginable committee would ever sanction
such a marriage even if Katharine, Winston's wife, could somehow have been
got rid of. It was hopeless even as a daydream.

'What was she like, your wife?' said Julia.

'She was--do you know the Newspeak word GOODTHINKFUL? Meaning naturally
orthodox, incapable of thinking a bad thought?'

'No, I didn't know the word, but I know the kind of person, right enough.'

He began telling her the story of his married life, but curiously enough
she appeared to know the essential parts of it already. She described
to him, almost as though she had seen or felt it, the stiffening of
Katharine's body as soon as he touched her, the way in which she still
seemed to be pushing him from her with all her strength, even when her
arms were clasped tightly round him. With Julia he felt no difficulty in
talking about such things: Katharine, in any case, had long ceased to be
a painful memory and became merely a distasteful one.

'I could have stood it if it hadn't been for one thing,' he said. He told
her about the frigid little ceremony that Katharine had forced him to go
through on the same night every week. 'She hated it, but nothing would
make her stop doing it. She used to call it--but you'll never guess.'

'Our duty to the Party,' said Julia promptly.

'How did you know that?'

'I've been at school too, dear. Sex talks once a month for the
over-sixteens. And in the Youth Movement. They rub it into you for years.
I dare say it works in a lot of cases. But of course you can never tell;
people are such hypocrites.'

She began to enlarge upon the subject. With Julia, everything came back
to her own sexuality. As soon as this was touched upon in any way she was
capable of great acuteness. Unlike Winston, she had grasped the inner
meaning of the Party's sexual puritanism. It was not merely that the sex
instinct created a world of its own which was outside the Party's control
and which therefore had to be destroyed if possible. What was more
important was that sexual privation induced hysteria, which was desirable
because it could be transformed into war-fever and leader-worship. The way
she put it was:

'When you make love you're using up energy; and afterwards you feel happy
and don't give a damn for anything. They can't bear you to feel like that.
They want you to be bursting with energy all the time. All this marching
up and down and cheering and waving flags is simply sex gone sour. If
you're happy inside yourself, why should you get excited about Big Brother
and the Three-Year Plans and the Two Minutes Hate and all the rest of
their bloody rot?'

That was very true, he thought. There was a direct intimate connexion
between chastity and political orthodoxy. For how could the fear, the
hatred, and the lunatic credulity which the Party needed in its members be
kept at the right pitch, except by bottling down some powerful instinct
and using it as a driving force? The sex impulse was dangerous to the
Party, and the Party had turned it to account. They had played a similar
trick with the instinct of parenthood. The family could not actually be
abolished, and, indeed, people were encouraged to be fond of their
children, in almost the old-fashioned way. The children, on the other hand,
were systematically turned against their parents and taught to spy on them
and report their deviations. The family had become in effect an extension
of the Thought Police. It was a device by means of which everyone could be
surrounded night and day by informers who knew him intimately.

Abruptly his mind went back to Katharine. Katharine would unquestionably
have denounced him to the Thought Police if she had not happened to be too
stupid to detect the unorthodoxy of his opinions. But what really recalled
her to him at this moment was the stifling heat of the afternoon, which
had brought the sweat out on his forehead. He began telling Julia of
something that had happened, or rather had failed to happen, on another
sweltering summer afternoon, eleven years ago.

It was three or four months after they were married. They had lost their
way on a community hike somewhere in Kent. They had only lagged behind
the others for a couple of minutes, but they took a wrong turning, and
presently found themselves pulled up short by the edge of an old chalk
quarry. It was a sheer drop of ten or twenty metres, with boulders at the
bottom. There was nobody of whom they could ask the way. As soon as she
realized that they were lost Katharine became very uneasy. To be away
from the noisy mob of hikers even for a moment gave her a feeling of
wrong-doing. She wanted to hurry back by the way they had come and start
searching in the other direction. But at this moment Winston noticed some
tufts of loosestrife growing in the cracks of the cliff beneath them.
One tuft was of two colours, magenta and brick-red, apparently growing on
the same root. He had never seen anything of the kind before, and he called
to Katharine to come and look at it.

'Look, Katharine! Look at those flowers. That clump down near the bottom.
Do you see they're two different colours?'

She had already turned to go, but she did rather fretfully come back for
a moment. She even leaned out over the cliff face to see where he was
pointing. He was standing a little behind her, and he put his hand on
her waist to steady her. At this moment it suddenly occurred to him how
completely alone they were. There was not a human creature anywhere, not a
leaf stirring, not even a bird awake. In a place like this the danger that
there would be a hidden microphone was very small, and even if there was a
microphone it would only pick up sounds. It was the hottest sleepiest hour
of the afternoon. The sun blazed down upon them, the sweat tickled his
face. And the thought struck him...

'Why didn't you give her a good shove?' said Julia. 'I would have.'

'Yes, dear, you would have. I would, if I'd been the same person then as
I am now. Or perhaps I would--I'm not certain.'

'Are you sorry you didn't?'

'Yes. On the whole I'm sorry I didn't.'

They were sitting side by side on the dusty floor. He pulled her closer
against him. Her head rested on his shoulder, the pleasant smell of her
hair conquering the pigeon dung. She was very young, he thought, she
still expected something from life, she did not understand that to push
an inconvenient person over a cliff solves nothing.

'Actually it would have made no difference,' he said.

'Then why are you sorry you didn't do it?'

'Only because I prefer a positive to a negative. In this game that we're
playing, we can't win. Some kinds of failure are better than other kinds,
that's all.'

He felt her shoulders give a wriggle of dissent. She always contradicted
him when he said anything of this kind. She would not accept it as a law
of nature that the individual is always defeated. In a way she realized
that she herself was doomed, that sooner or later the Thought Police would
catch her and kill her, but with another part of her mind she believed
that it was somehow possible to construct a secret world in which you could
live as you chose. All you needed was luck and cunning and boldness. She
did not understand that there was no such thing as happiness, that the
only victory lay in the far future, long after you were dead, that from
the moment of declaring war on the Party it was better to think of yourself
as a corpse.

'We are the dead,' he said.

'We're not dead yet,' said Julia prosaically.

'Not physically. Six months, a year--five years, conceivably. I am afraid
of death. You are young, so presumably you're more afraid of it than I am.
Obviously we shall put it off as long as we can. But it makes very little
difference. So long as human beings stay human, death and life are the
same thing.'

'Oh, rubbish! Which would you sooner sleep with, me or a skeleton? Don't
you enjoy being alive? Don't you like feeling: This is me, this is my hand,
this is my leg, I'm real, I'm solid, I'm alive! Don't you like THIS?'

She twisted herself round and pressed her bosom against him. He could feel
her breasts, ripe yet firm, through her overalls. Her body seemed to be
pouring some of its youth and vigour into his.

'Yes, I like that,' he said.

'Then stop talking about dying. And now listen, dear, we've got to fix
up about the next time we meet. We may as well go back to the place in
the wood. We've given it a good long rest. But you must get there by a
different way this time. I've got it all planned out. You take the
train--but look, I'll draw it out for you.'

And in her practical way she scraped together a small square of dust,
and with a twig from a pigeon's nest began drawing a map on the floor.




Chapter 4



Winston looked round the shabby little room above Mr Charrington's shop.
Beside the window the enormous bed was made up, with ragged blankets and
a coverless bolster. The old-fashioned clock with the twelve-hour face was
ticking away on the mantelpiece. In the corner, on the gateleg table, the
glass paperweight which he had bought on his last visit gleamed softly out
of the half-darkness.

In the fender was a battered tin oilstove, a saucepan, and two cups,
provided by Mr Charrington. Winston lit the burner and set a pan of water
to boil. He had brought an envelope full of Victory Coffee and some
saccharine tablets. The clock's hands said seventeen-twenty: it was
nineteen-twenty really. She was coming at nineteen-thirty.

Folly, folly, his heart kept saying: conscious, gratuitous, suicidal folly.
Of all the crimes that a Party member could commit, this one was the least
possible to conceal. Actually the idea had first floated into his head in
the form of a vision, of the glass paperweight mirrored by the surface
of the gateleg table. As he had foreseen, Mr Charrington had made no
difficulty about letting the room. He was obviously glad of the few dollars
that it would bring him. Nor did he seem shocked or become offensively
knowing when it was made clear that Winston wanted the room for the purpose
of a love-affair. Instead he looked into the middle distance and spoke in
generalities, with so delicate an air as to give the impression that he
had become partly invisible. Privacy, he said, was a very valuable thing.
Everyone wanted a place where they could be alone occasionally. And when
they had such a place, it was only common courtesy in anyone else who knew
of it to keep his knowledge to himself. He even, seeming almost to fade
out of existence as he did so, added that there were two entries to the
house, one of them through the back yard, which gave on an alley.

Under the window somebody was singing. Winston peeped out, secure in the
protection of the muslin curtain. The June sun was still high in the sky,
and in the sun-filled court below, a monstrous woman, solid as a Norman
pillar, with brawny red forearms and a sacking apron strapped about her
middle, was stumping to and fro between a washtub and a clothes line,
pegging out a series of square white things which Winston recognized as
babies' diapers. Whenever her mouth was not corked with clothes pegs she
was singing in a powerful contralto:


  It was only an 'opeless fancy.
  It passed like an Ipril dye,
  But a look an' a word an' the dreams they stirred!
  They 'ave stolen my 'eart awye!


The tune had been haunting London for weeks past. It was one of countless
similar songs published for the benefit of the proles by a sub-section of
the Music Department. The words of these songs were composed without any
human intervention whatever on an instrument known as a versificator.
But the woman sang so tunefully as to turn the dreadful rubbish into an
almost pleasant sound. He could hear the woman singing and the scrape of
her shoes on the flagstones, and the cries of the children in the street,
and somewhere in the far distance a faint roar of traffic, and yet the
room seemed curiously silent, thanks to the absence of a telescreen.

Folly, folly, folly! he thought again. It was inconceivable that they could
frequent this place for more than a few weeks without being caught. But
the temptation of having a hiding-place that was truly their own, indoors
and near at hand, had been too much for both of them. For some time
after their visit to the church belfry it had been impossible to arrange
meetings. Working hours had been drastically increased in anticipation of
Hate Week. It was more than a month distant, but the enormous, complex
preparations that it entailed were throwing extra work on to everybody.
Finally both of them managed to secure a free afternoon on the same day.
They had agreed to go back to the clearing in the wood. On the evening
beforehand they met briefly in the street. As usual, Winston hardly looked
at Julia as they drifted towards one another in the crowd, but from the
short glance he gave her it seemed to him that she was paler than usual.

'It's all off,' she murmured as soon as she judged it safe to speak.
'Tomorrow, I mean.'

'What?'

'Tomorrow afternoon. I can't come.'

'Why not?'

'Oh, the usual reason. It's started early this time.'

For a moment he was violently angry. During the month that he had known
her the nature of his desire for her had changed. At the beginning there
had been little true sensuality in it. Their first love-making had been
simply an act of the will. But after the second time it was different. The
smell of her hair, the taste of her mouth, the feeling of her skin seemed
to have got inside him, or into the air all round him. She had become a
physical necessity, something that he not only wanted but felt that he
had a right to. When she said that she could not come, he had the feeling
that she was cheating him. But just at this moment the crowd pressed
them together and their hands accidentally met. She gave the tips of his
fingers a quick squeeze that seemed to invite not desire but affection. It
struck him that when one lived with a woman this particular disappointment
must be a normal, recurring event; and a deep tenderness, such as he had
not felt for her before, suddenly took hold of him. He wished that they
were a married couple of ten years' standing. He wished that he were
walking through the streets with her just as they were doing now but openly
and without fear, talking of trivialities and buying odds and ends for the
household. He wished above all that they had some place where they could
be alone together without feeling the obligation to make love every time
they met. It was not actually at that moment, but at some time on the
following day, that the idea of renting Mr Charrington's room had occurred
to him. When he suggested it to Julia she had agreed with unexpected
readiness. Both of them knew that it was lunacy. It was as though they were
intentionally stepping nearer to their graves. As he sat waiting on the
edge of the bed he thought again of the cellars of the Ministry of Love.
It was curious how that predestined horror moved in and out of one's
consciousness. There it lay, fixed in future times, preceding death as
surely as 99 precedes 100. One could not avoid it, but one could perhaps
postpone it: and yet instead, every now and again, by a conscious, wilful
act, one chose to shorten the interval before it happened.

At this moment there was a quick step on the stairs. Julia burst into the
room. She was carrying a tool-bag of coarse brown canvas, such as he had
sometimes seen her carrying to and fro at the Ministry. He started forward
to take her in his arms, but she disengaged herself rather hurriedly,
partly because she was still holding the tool-bag.

'Half a second,' she said. 'Just let me show you what I've brought. Did
you bring some of that filthy Victory Coffee? I thought you would. You
can chuck it away again, because we shan't be needing it. Look here.'

She fell on her knees, threw open the bag, and tumbled out some spanners
and a screwdriver that filled the top part of it. Underneath were a number
of neat paper packets. The first packet that she passed to Winston had a
strange and yet vaguely familiar feeling. It was filled with some kind of
heavy, sand-like stuff which yielded wherever you touched it.

'It isn't sugar?' he said.

'Real sugar. Not saccharine, sugar. And here's a loaf of bread--proper
white bread, not our bloody stuff--and a little pot of jam. And here's a
tin of milk--but look! This is the one I'm really proud of. I had to wrap
a bit of sacking round it, because----'

But she did not need to tell him why she had wrapped it up. The smell was
already filling the room, a rich hot smell which seemed like an emanation
from his early childhood, but which one did occasionally meet with even
now, blowing down a passage-way before a door slammed, or diffusing itself
mysteriously in a crowded street, sniffed for an instant and then lost
again.

'It's coffee,' he murmured, 'real coffee.'

'It's Inner Party coffee. There's a whole kilo here,' she said.

'How did you manage to get hold of all these things?'

'It's all Inner Party stuff. There's nothing those swine don't have,
nothing. But of course waiters and servants and people pinch things,
and--look, I got a little packet of tea as well.'

Winston had squatted down beside her. He tore open a corner of the packet.

'It's real tea. Not blackberry leaves.'

'There's been a lot of tea about lately. They've captured India, or
something,' she said vaguely. 'But listen, dear. I want you to turn your
back on me for three minutes. Go and sit on the other side of the bed.
Don't go too near the window. And don't turn round till I tell you.'

Winston gazed abstractedly through the muslin curtain. Down in the yard
the red-armed woman was still marching to and fro between the washtub and
the line. She took two more pegs out of her mouth and sang with deep
feeling:


  They sye that time 'eals all things,
  They sye you can always forget;
  But the smiles an' the tears acrorss the years
  They twist my 'eart-strings yet!


She knew the whole drivelling song by heart, it seemed. Her voice floated
upward with the sweet summer air, very tuneful, charged with a sort of
happy melancholy. One had the feeling that she would have been perfectly
content, if the June evening had been endless and the supply of clothes
inexhaustible, to remain there for a thousand years, pegging out diapers
and singing rubbish. It struck him as a curious fact that he had never
heard a member of the Party singing alone and spontaneously. It would even
have seemed slightly unorthodox, a dangerous eccentricity, like talking to
oneself. Perhaps it was only when people were somewhere near the starvation
level that they had anything to sing about.

'You can turn round now,' said Julia.

He turned round, and for a second almost failed to recognize her. What he
had actually expected was to see her naked. But she was not naked. The
transformation that had happened was much more surprising than that. She
had painted her face.

She must have slipped into some shop in the proletarian quarters and bought
herself a complete set of make-up materials. Her lips were deeply reddened,
her cheeks rouged, her nose powdered; there was even a touch of something
under the eyes to make them brighter. It was not very skilfully done, but
Winston's standards in such matters were not high. He had never before
seen or imagined a woman of the Party with cosmetics on her face. The
improvement in her appearance was startling. With just a few dabs of colour
in the right places she had become not only very much prettier, but, above
all, far more feminine. Her short hair and boyish overalls merely added
to the effect. As he took her in his arms a wave of synthetic violets
flooded his nostrils. He remembered the half-darkness of a basement
kitchen, and a woman's cavernous mouth. It was the very same scent that
she had used; but at the moment it did not seem to matter.

'Scent too!' he said.

'Yes, dear, scent too. And do you know what I'm going to do next? I'm
going to get hold of a real woman's frock from somewhere and wear it
instead of these bloody trousers. I'll wear silk stockings and high-heeled
shoes! In this room I'm going to be a woman, not a Party comrade.'

They flung their clothes off and climbed into the huge mahogany bed. It
was the first time that he had stripped himself naked in her presence.
Until now he had been too much ashamed of his pale and meagre body, with
the varicose veins standing out on his calves and the discoloured patch
over his ankle. There were no sheets, but the blanket they lay on was
threadbare and smooth, and the size and springiness of the bed astonished
both of them. 'It's sure to be full of bugs, but who cares?' said Julia.
One never saw a double bed nowadays, except in the homes of the proles.
Winston had occasionally slept in one in his boyhood: Julia had never been
in one before, so far as she could remember.

Presently they fell asleep for a little while. When Winston woke up the
hands of the clock had crept round to nearly nine. He did not stir, because
Julia was sleeping with her head in the crook of his arm. Most of her
make-up had transferred itself to his own face or the bolster, but a light
stain of rouge still brought out the beauty of her cheekbone. A yellow ray
from the sinking sun fell across the foot of the bed and lighted up the
fireplace, where the water in the pan was boiling fast. Down in the yard
the woman had stopped singing, but the faint shouts of children floated in
from the street. He wondered vaguely whether in the abolished past it had
been a normal experience to lie in bed like this, in the cool of a summer
evening, a man and a woman with no clothes on, making love when they chose,
talking of what they chose, not feeling any compulsion to get up, simply
lying there and listening to peaceful sounds outside. Surely there could
never have been a time when that seemed ordinary? Julia woke up, rubbed
her eyes, and raised herself on her elbow to look at the oilstove.

'Half that water's boiled away,' she said. 'I'll get up and make some
coffee in another moment. We've got an hour. What time do they cut the
lights off at your flats?'

'Twenty-three thirty.'

'It's twenty-three at the hostel. But you have to get in earlier than that,
because--Hi! Get out, you filthy brute!'

She suddenly twisted herself over in the bed, seized a shoe from the floor,
and sent it hurtling into the corner with a boyish jerk of her arm, exactly
as he had seen her fling the dictionary at Goldstein, that morning during
the Two Minutes Hate.

'What was it?' he said in surprise.

'A rat. I saw him stick his beastly nose out of the wainscoting. There's a
hole down there. I gave him a good fright, anyway.'

'Rats!' murmured Winston. 'In this room!'

'They're all over the place,' said Julia indifferently as she lay down
again. 'We've even got them in the kitchen at the hostel. Some parts of
London are swarming with them. Did you know they attack children? Yes,
they do. In some of these streets a woman daren't leave a baby alone for
two minutes. It's the great huge brown ones that do it. And the nasty
thing is that the brutes always----'

'DON'T GO ON!' said Winston, with his eyes tightly shut.

'Dearest! You've gone quite pale. What's the matter? Do they make you feel
sick?'

'Of all horrors in the world--a rat!'

She pressed herself against him and wound her limbs round him, as though
to reassure him with the warmth of her body. He did not reopen his eyes
immediately. For several moments he had had the feeling of being back in a
nightmare which had recurred from time to time throughout his life. It was
always very much the same. He was standing in front of a wall of darkness,
and on the other side of it there was something unendurable, something too
dreadful to be faced. In the dream his deepest feeling was always one of
self-deception, because he did in fact know what was behind the wall of
darkness. With a deadly effort, like wrenching a piece out of his own
brain, he could even have dragged the thing into the open. He always woke
up without discovering what it was: but somehow it was connected with what
Julia had been saying when he cut her short.

'I'm sorry,' he said, 'it's nothing. I don't like rats, that's all.'

'Don't worry, dear, we're not going to have the filthy brutes in here.
I'll stuff the hole with a bit of sacking before we go. And next time we
come here I'll bring some plaster and bung it up properly.'

Already the black instant of panic was half-forgotten. Feeling slightly
ashamed of himself, he sat up against the bedhead. Julia got out of bed,
pulled on her overalls, and made the coffee. The smell that rose from the
saucepan was so powerful and exciting that they shut the window lest
anybody outside should notice it and become inquisitive. What was even
better than the taste of the coffee was the silky texture given to it by
the sugar, a thing Winston had almost forgotten after years of saccharine.
With one hand in her pocket and a piece of bread and jam in the other,
Julia wandered about the room, glancing indifferently at the bookcase,
pointing out the best way of repairing the gateleg table, plumping herself
down in the ragged arm-chair to see if it was comfortable, and examining
the absurd twelve-hour clock with a sort of tolerant amusement. She brought
the glass paperweight over to the bed to have a look at it in a better
light. He took it out of her hand, fascinated, as always, by the soft,
rainwatery appearance of the glass.

'What is it, do you think?' said Julia.

'I don't think it's anything--I mean, I don't think it was ever put to any
use. That's what I like about it. It's a little chunk of history that
they've forgotten to alter. It's a message from a hundred years ago, if
one knew how to read it.'

'And that picture over there'--she nodded at the engraving on the opposite
wall--'would that be a hundred years old?'

'More. Two hundred, I dare say. One can't tell. It's impossible to discover
the age of anything nowadays.'

She went over to look at it. 'Here's where that brute stuck his nose out,'
she said, kicking the wainscoting immediately below the picture. 'What is
this place? I've seen it before somewhere.'

'It's a church, or at least it used to be. St Clement Danes its name was.'
The fragment of rhyme that Mr Charrington had taught him came back into
his head, and he added half-nostalgically: "Oranges and lemons, say the
bells of St Clement's!"

To his astonishment she capped the line:


  'You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin's,
  When will you pay me? say the bells of Old Bailey----'


'I can't remember how it goes on after that. But anyway I remember it ends
up, "Here comes a candle to light you to bed, here comes a chopper to chop
off your head!"'

It was like the two halves of a countersign. But there must be another
line after 'the bells of Old Bailey'. Perhaps it could be dug out of
Mr Charrington's memory, if he were suitably prompted.

'Who taught you that?' he said.

'My grandfather. He used to say it to me when I was a little girl. He was
vaporized when I was eight--at any rate, he disappeared. I wonder what a
lemon was,' she added inconsequently. 'I've seen oranges. They're a kind
of round yellow fruit with a thick skin.'

'I can remember lemons,' said Winston. 'They were quite common in the
fifties. They were so sour that it set your teeth on edge even to smell
them.'

'I bet that picture's got bugs behind it,' said Julia. 'I'll take it down
and give it a good clean some day. I suppose it's almost time we were
leaving. I must start washing this paint off. What a bore! I'll get the
lipstick off your face afterwards.'

Winston did not get up for a few minutes more. The room was darkening. He
turned over towards the light and lay gazing into the glass paperweight.
The inexhaustibly interesting thing was not the fragment of coral but the
interior of the glass itself. There was such a depth of it, and yet it was
almost as transparent as air. It was as though the surface of the glass
had been the arch of the sky, enclosing a tiny world with its atmosphere
complete. He had the feeling that he could get inside it, and that in
fact he was inside it, along with the mahogany bed and the gateleg table,
and the clock and the steel engraving and the paperweight itself. The
paperweight was the room he was in, and the coral was Julia's life and his
own, fixed in a sort of eternity at the heart of the crystal.




Chapter 5



Syme had vanished. A morning came, and he was missing from work: a few
thoughtless people commented on his absence. On the next day nobody
mentioned him. On the third day Winston went into the vestibule of the
Records Department to look at the notice-board. One of the notices carried
a printed list of the members of the Chess Committee, of whom Syme had
been one. It looked almost exactly as it had looked before--nothing had
been crossed out--but it was one name shorter. It was enough. Syme had
ceased to exist: he had never existed.

The weather was baking hot. In the labyrinthine Ministry the windowless,
air-conditioned rooms kept their normal temperature, but outside the
pavements scorched one's feet and the stench of the Tubes at the rush hours
was a horror. The preparations for Hate Week were in full swing, and the
staffs of all the Ministries were working overtime. Processions, meetings,
military parades, lectures, waxworks, displays, film shows, telescreen
programmes all had to be organized; stands had to be erected, effigies
built, slogans coined, songs written, rumours circulated, photographs
faked. Julia's unit in the Fiction Department had been taken off the
production of novels and was rushing out a series of atrocity pamphlets.
Winston, in addition to his regular work, spent long periods every day in
going through back files of 'The Times' and altering and embellishing news
items which were to be quoted in speeches. Late at night, when crowds of
rowdy proles roamed the streets, the town had a curiously febrile air. The
rocket bombs crashed oftener than ever, and sometimes in the far distance
there were enormous explosions which no one could explain and about which
there were wild rumours.

The new tune which was to be the theme-song of Hate Week (the Hate Song,
it was called) had already been composed and was being endlessly plugged
on the telescreens. It had a savage, barking rhythm which could not exactly
be called music, but resembled the beating of a drum. Roared out by
hundreds of voices to the tramp of marching feet, it was terrifying. The
proles had taken a fancy to it, and in the midnight streets it competed
with the still-popular 'It was only a hopeless fancy'. The Parsons children
played it at all hours of the night and day, unbearably, on a comb and a
piece of toilet paper. Winston's evenings were fuller than ever. Squads of
volunteers, organized by Parsons, were preparing the street for Hate Week,
stitching banners, painting posters, erecting flagstaffs on the roofs, and
perilously slinging wires across the street for the reception of streamers.
Parsons boasted that Victory Mansions alone would display four hundred
metres of bunting. He was in his native element and as happy as a lark.
The heat and the manual work had even given him a pretext for reverting
to shorts and an open shirt in the evenings. He was everywhere at once,
pushing, pulling, sawing, hammering, improvising, jollying everyone along
with comradely exhortations and giving out from every fold of his body what
seemed an inexhaustible supply of acrid-smelling sweat.

A new poster had suddenly appeared all over London. It had no caption,
and represented simply the monstrous figure of a Eurasian soldier, three
or four metres high, striding forward with expressionless Mongolian face
and enormous boots, a submachine gun pointed from his hip. From whatever
angle you looked at the poster, the muzzle of the gun, magnified by the
foreshortening, seemed to be pointed straight at you. The thing had been
plastered on every blank space on every wall, even outnumbering the
portraits of Big Brother. The proles, normally apathetic about the war,
were being lashed into one of their periodical frenzies of patriotism.
As though to harmonize with the general mood, the rocket bombs had been
killing larger numbers of people than usual. One fell on a crowded film
theatre in Stepney, burying several hundred victims among the ruins. The
whole population of the neighbourhood turned out for a long, trailing
funeral which went on for hours and was in effect an indignation meeting.
Another bomb fell on a piece of waste ground which was used as a playground
and several dozen children were blown to pieces. There were further angry
demonstrations, Goldstein was burned in effigy, hundreds of copies of the
poster of the Eurasian soldier were torn down and added to the flames, and
a number of shops were looted in the turmoil; then a rumour flew round
that spies were directing the rocket bombs by means of wireless waves, and
an old couple who were suspected of being of foreign extraction had their
house set on fire and perished of suffocation.

In the room over Mr Charrington's shop, when they could get there, Julia
and Winston lay side by side on a stripped bed under the open window,
naked for the sake of coolness. The rat had never come back, but the bugs
had multiplied hideously in the heat. It did not seem to matter. Dirty or
clean, the room was paradise. As soon as they arrived they would sprinkle
everything with pepper bought on the black market, tear off their clothes,
and make love with sweating bodies, then fall asleep and wake to find that
the bugs had rallied and were massing for the counter-attack.

Four, five, six--seven times they met during the month of June. Winston
had dropped his habit of drinking gin at all hours. He seemed to have lost
the need for it. He had grown fatter, his varicose ulcer had subsided,
leaving only a brown stain on the skin above his ankle, his fits of
coughing in the early morning had stopped. The process of life had ceased
to be intolerable, he had no longer any impulse to make faces at the
telescreen or shout curses at the top of his voice. Now that they had a
secure hiding-place, almost a home, it did not even seem a hardship that
they could only meet infrequently and for a couple of hours at a time.
What mattered was that the room over the junk-shop should exist. To know
that it was there, inviolate, was almost the same as being in it. The room
was a world, a pocket of the past where extinct animals could walk.
Mr Charrington, thought Winston, was another extinct animal. He usually
stopped to talk with Mr Charrington for a few minutes on his way upstairs.
The old man seemed seldom or never to go out of doors, and on the other
hand to have almost no customers. He led a ghostlike existence between the
tiny, dark shop, and an even tinier back kitchen where he prepared his
meals and which contained, among other things, an unbelievably ancient
gramophone with an enormous horn. He seemed glad of the opportunity to
talk. Wandering about among his worthless stock, with his long nose and
thick spectacles and his bowed shoulders in the velvet jacket, he had
always vaguely the air of being a collector rather than a tradesman.
With a sort of faded enthusiasm he would finger this scrap of rubbish or
that--a china bottle-stopper, the painted lid of a broken snuffbox, a
pinchbeck locket containing a strand of some long-dead baby's hair--never
asking that Winston should buy it, merely that he should admire it. To
talk to him was like listening to the tinkling of a worn-out musical-box.
He had dragged out from the corners of his memory some more fragments of
forgotten rhymes. There was one about four and twenty blackbirds, and
another about a cow with a crumpled horn, and another about the death
of poor Cock Robin. 'It just occurred to me you might be interested,' he
would say with a deprecating little laugh whenever he produced a new
fragment. But he could never recall more than a few lines of any one
rhyme.

Both of them knew--in a way, it was never out of their minds that what
was now happening could not last long. There were times when the fact of
impending death seemed as palpable as the bed they lay on, and they would
cling together with a sort of despairing sensuality, like a damned soul
grasping at his last morsel of pleasure when the clock is within five
minutes of striking. But there were also times when they had the illusion
not only of safety but of permanence. So long as they were actually in
this room, they both felt, no harm could come to them. Getting there was
difficult and dangerous, but the room itself was sanctuary. It was as when
Winston had gazed into the heart of the paperweight, with the feeling that
it would be possible to get inside that glassy world, and that once inside
it time could be arrested. Often they gave themselves up to daydreams of
escape. Their luck would hold indefinitely, and they would carry on their
intrigue, just like this, for the remainder of their natural lives. Or
Katharine would die, and by subtle manoeuvrings Winston and Julia would
succeed in getting married. Or they would commit suicide together. Or
they would disappear, alter themselves out of recognition, learn to speak
with proletarian accents, get jobs in a factory and live out their lives
undetected in a back-street. It was all nonsense, as they both knew. In
reality there was no escape. Even the one plan that was practicable,
suicide, they had no intention of carrying out. To hang on from day to day
and from week to week, spinning out a present that had no future, seemed
an unconquerable instinct, just as one's lungs will always draw the next
breath so long as there is air available.

Sometimes, too, they talked of engaging in active rebellion against the
Party, but with no notion of how to take the first step. Even if the
fabulous Brotherhood was a reality, there still remained the difficulty
of finding one's way into it. He told her of the strange intimacy that
existed, or seemed to exist, between himself and O'Brien, and of the
impulse he sometimes felt, simply to walk into O'Brien's presence, announce
that he was the enemy of the Party, and demand his help. Curiously enough,
this did not strike her as an impossibly rash thing to do. She was used to
judging people by their faces, and it seemed natural to her that Winston
should believe O'Brien to be trustworthy on the strength of a single flash
of the eyes. Moreover she took it for granted that everyone, or nearly
everyone, secretly hated the Party and would break the rules if he thought
it safe to do so. But she refused to believe that widespread, organized
opposition existed or could exist. The tales about Goldstein and his
underground army, she said, were simply a lot of rubbish which the Party
had invented for its own purposes and which you had to pretend to believe
in. Times beyond number, at Party rallies and spontaneous demonstrations,
she had shouted at the top of her voice for the execution of people whose
names she had never heard and in whose supposed crimes she had not the
faintest belief. When public trials were happening she had taken her place
in the detachments from the Youth League who surrounded the courts from
morning to night, chanting at intervals 'Death to the traitors!' During
the Two Minutes Hate she always excelled all others in shouting insults
at Goldstein. Yet she had only the dimmest idea of who Goldstein was and
what doctrines he was supposed to represent. She had grown up since the
Revolution and was too young to remember the ideological battles of the
fifties and sixties. Such a thing as an independent political movement was
outside her imagination: and in any case the Party was invincible. It
would always exist, and it would always be the same. You could only rebel
against it by secret disobedience or, at most, by isolated acts of
violence such as killing somebody or blowing something up.

In some ways she was far more acute than Winston, and far less susceptible
to Party propaganda. Once when he happened in some connexion to mention
the war against Eurasia, she startled him by saying casually that in her
opinion the war was not happening. The rocket bombs which fell daily on
London were probably fired by the Government of Oceania itself, 'just to
keep people frightened'. This was an idea that had literally never occurred
to him. She also stirred a sort of envy in him by telling him that during
the Two Minutes Hate her great difficulty was to avoid bursting out
laughing. But she only questioned the teachings of the Party when they
in some way touched upon her own life. Often she was ready to accept
the official mythology, simply because the difference between truth and
falsehood did not seem important to her. She believed, for instance, having
learnt it at school, that the Party had invented aeroplanes. (In his own
schooldays, Winston remembered, in the late fifties, it was only the
helicopter that the Party claimed to have invented; a dozen years later,
when Julia was at school, it was already claiming the aeroplane; one
generation more, and it would be claiming the steam engine.) And when he
told her that aeroplanes had been in existence before he was born and long
before the Revolution, the fact struck her as totally uninteresting. After
all, what did it matter who had invented aeroplanes? It was rather more
of a shock to him when he discovered from some chance remark that she did
not remember that Oceania, four years ago, had been at war with Eastasia
and at peace with Eurasia. It was true that she regarded the whole war as
a sham: but apparently she had not even noticed that the name of the enemy
had changed. 'I thought we'd always been at war with Eurasia,' she said
vaguely. It frightened him a little. The invention of aeroplanes dated
from long before her birth, but the switchover in the war had happened
only four years ago, well after she was grown up. He argued with her about
it for perhaps a quarter of an hour. In the end he succeeded in forcing
her memory back until she did dimly recall that at one time Eastasia and
not Eurasia had been the enemy. But the issue still struck her as
unimportant. 'Who cares?' she said impatiently. 'It's always one bloody
war after another, and one knows the news is all lies anyway.'

Sometimes he talked to her of the Records Department and the impudent
forgeries that he committed there. Such things did not appear to horrify
her. She did not feel the abyss opening beneath her feet at the thought
of lies becoming truths. He told her the story of Jones, Aaronson, and
Rutherford and the momentous slip of paper which he had once held between
his fingers. It did not make much impression on her. At first, indeed, she
failed to grasp the point of the story.

'Were they friends of yours?' she said.

'No, I never knew them. They were Inner Party members. Besides, they were
far older men than I was. They belonged to the old days, before the
Revolution. I barely knew them by sight.'

'Then what was there to worry about? People are being killed off all the
time, aren't they?'

He tried to make her understand. 'This was an exceptional case. It wasn't
just a question of somebody being killed. Do you realize that the past,
starting from yesterday, has been actually abolished? If it survives
anywhere, it's in a few solid objects with no words attached to them, like
that lump of glass there. Already we know almost literally nothing about
the Revolution and the years before the Revolution. Every record has been
destroyed or falsified, every book has been rewritten, every picture has
been repainted, every statue and street and building has been renamed,
every date has been altered. And that process is continuing day by day and
minute by minute. History has stopped. Nothing exists except an endless
present in which the Party is always right. I know, of course, that the
past is falsified, but it would never be possible for me to prove it, even
when I did the falsification myself. After the thing is done, no evidence
ever remains. The only evidence is inside my own mind, and I don't know
with any certainty that any other human being shares my memories. Just in
that one instance, in my whole life, I did possess actual concrete evidence
after the event--years after it.'

'And what good was that?'

'It was no good, because I threw it away a few minutes later. But if the
same thing happened today, I should keep it.'

'Well, I wouldn't!' said Julia. 'I'm quite ready to take risks, but only
for something worth while, not for bits of old newspaper. What could you
have done with it even if you had kept it?'

'Not much, perhaps. But it was evidence. It might have planted a few doubts
here and there, supposing that I'd dared to show it to anybody. I don't
imagine that we can alter anything in our own lifetime. But one can imagine
little knots of resistance springing up here and there--small groups of
people banding themselves together, and gradually growing, and even leaving
a few records behind, so that the next generations can carry on where we
leave off.'

'I'm not interested in the next generation, dear. I'm interested in US.'

'You're only a rebel from the waist downwards,' he told her.

She thought this brilliantly witty and flung her arms round him in delight.

In the ramifications of party doctrine she had not the faintest interest.
Whenever he began to talk of the principles of Ingsoc, doublethink, the
mutability of the past, and the denial of objective reality, and to use
Newspeak words, she became bored and confused and said that she never paid
any attention to that kind of thing. One knew that it was all rubbish, so
why let oneself be worried by it? She knew when to cheer and when to boo,
and that was all one needed. If he persisted in talking of such subjects,
she had a disconcerting habit of falling asleep. She was one of those
people who can go to sleep at any hour and in any position. Talking to her,
he realized how easy it was to present an appearance of orthodoxy while
having no grasp whatever of what orthodoxy meant. In a way, the world-view
of the Party imposed itself most successfully on people incapable of
understanding it. They could be made to accept the most flagrant violations
of reality, because they never fully grasped the enormity of what was
demanded of them, and were not sufficiently interested in public events to
notice what was happening. By lack of understanding they remained sane.
They simply swallowed everything, and what they swallowed did them no harm,
because it left no residue behind, just as a grain of corn will pass
undigested through the body of a bird.




Chapter 6



It had happened at last. The expected message had come. All his life, it
seemed to him, he had been waiting for this to happen.

He was walking down the long corridor at the Ministry and he was almost
at the spot where Julia had slipped the note into his hand when he became
aware that someone larger than himself was walking just behind him. The
person, whoever it was, gave a small cough, evidently as a prelude to
speaking. Winston stopped abruptly and turned. It was O'Brien.

At last they were face to face, and it seemed that his only impulse was
to run away. His heart bounded violently. He would have been incapable of
speaking. O'Brien, however, had continued forward in the same movement,
laying a friendly hand for a moment on Winston's arm, so that the two of
them were walking side by side. He began speaking with the peculiar grave
courtesy that differentiated him from the majority of Inner Party members.

'I had been hoping for an opportunity of talking to you,' he said. 'I was
reading one of your Newspeak articles in 'The Times' the other day. You
take a scholarly interest in Newspeak, I believe?'

Winston had recovered part of his self-possession. 'Hardly scholarly,' he
said. 'I'm only an amateur. It's not my subject. I have never had anything
to do with the actual construction of the language.'

'But you write it very elegantly,' said O'Brien. 'That is not only my own
opinion. I was talking recently to a friend of yours who is certainly an
expert. His name has slipped my memory for the moment.'

Again Winston's heart stirred painfully. It was inconceivable that this
was anything other than a reference to Syme. But Syme was not only dead,
he was abolished, an unperson. Any identifiable reference to him would have
been mortally dangerous. O'Brien's remark must obviously have been intended
as a signal, a codeword. By sharing a small act of thoughtcrime he had
turned the two of them into accomplices. They had continued to stroll
slowly down the corridor, but now O'Brien halted. With the curious,
disarming friendliness that he always managed to put in to the gesture he
resettled his spectacles on his nose. Then he went on:

'What I had really intended to say was that in your article I noticed you
had used two words which have become obsolete. But they have only become
so very recently. Have you seen the tenth edition of the Newspeak
Dictionary?'

'No,' said Winston. 'I didn't think it had been issued yet. We are still
using the ninth in the Records Department.'

'The tenth edition is not due to appear for some months, I believe. But a
few advance copies have been circulated. I have one myself. It might
interest you to look at it, perhaps?'

'Very much so,' said Winston, immediately seeing where this tended.

'Some of the new developments are most ingenious. The reduction in the
number of verbs--that is the point that will appeal to you, I think. Let
me see, shall I send a messenger to you with the dictionary? But I am
afraid I invariably forget anything of that kind. Perhaps you could pick
it up at my flat at some time that suited you? Wait. Let me give you my
address.'

They were standing in front of a telescreen. Somewhat absent-mindedly
O'Brien felt two of his pockets and then produced a small leather-covered
notebook and a gold ink-pencil. Immediately beneath the telescreen, in
such a position that anyone who was watching at the other end of the
instrument could read what he was writing, he scribbled an address, tore
out the page and handed it to Winston.

'I am usually at home in the evenings,' he said. 'If not, my servant will
give you the dictionary.'

He was gone, leaving Winston holding the scrap of paper, which this time
there was no need to conceal. Nevertheless he carefully memorized what was
written on it, and some hours later dropped it into the memory hole along
with a mass of other papers.

They had been talking to one another for a couple of minutes at the most.
There was only one meaning that the episode could possibly have. It had
been contrived as a way of letting Winston know O'Brien's address. This
was necessary, because except by direct enquiry it was never possible to
discover where anyone lived. There were no directories of any kind. 'If
you ever want to see me, this is where I can be found,' was what O'Brien
had been saying to him. Perhaps there would even be a message concealed
somewhere in the dictionary. But at any rate, one thing was certain. The
conspiracy that he had dreamed of did exist, and he had reached the outer
edges of it.

He knew that sooner or later he would obey O'Brien's summons. Perhaps
tomorrow, perhaps after a long delay--he was not certain. What was
happening was only the working-out of a process that had started years
ago. The first step had been a secret, involuntary thought, the second
had been the opening of the diary. He had moved from thoughts to words,
and now from words to actions. The last step was something that would
happen in the Ministry of Love. He had accepted it. The end was contained
in the beginning. But it was frightening: or, more exactly, it was like
a foretaste of death, like being a little less alive. Even while he was
speaking to O'Brien, when the meaning of the words had sunk in, a chilly
shuddering feeling had taken possession of his body. He had the sensation
of stepping into the dampness of a grave, and it was not much better
because he had always known that the grave was there and waiting for him.




Chapter 7



Winston had woken up with his eyes full of tears. Julia rolled sleepily
against him, murmuring something that might have been 'What's the matter?'

'I dreamt--' he began, and stopped short. It was too complex to be put
into words. There was the dream itself, and there was a memory connected
with it that had swum into his mind in the few seconds after waking.

He lay back with his eyes shut, still sodden in the atmosphere of the
dream. It was a vast, luminous dream in which his whole life seemed to
stretch out before him like a landscape on a summer evening after rain.
It had all occurred inside the glass paperweight, but the surface of the
glass was the dome of the sky, and inside the dome everything was flooded
with clear soft light in which one could see into interminable distances.
The dream had also been comprehended by--indeed, in some sense it had
consisted in--a gesture of the arm made by his mother, and made again
thirty years later by the Jewish woman he had seen on the news film,
trying to shelter the small boy from the bullets, before the helicopter
blew them both to pieces.

'Do you know,' he said, 'that until this moment I believed I had murdered
my mother?'

'Why did you murder her?' said Julia, almost asleep.

'I didn't murder her. Not physically.'

In the dream he had remembered his last glimpse of his mother, and within
a few moments of waking the cluster of small events surrounding it had all
come back. It was a memory that he must have deliberately pushed out of
his consciousness over many years. He was not certain of the date, but he
could not have been less than ten years old, possibly twelve, when it had
happened.

His father had disappeared some time earlier, how much earlier he could
not remember. He remembered better the rackety, uneasy circumstances of
the time: the periodical panics about air-raids and the sheltering in Tube
stations, the piles of rubble everywhere, the unintelligible proclamations
posted at street corners, the gangs of youths in shirts all the same
colour, the enormous queues outside the bakeries, the intermittent
machine-gun fire in the distance--above all, the fact that there was
never enough to eat. He remembered long afternoons spent with other boys
in scrounging round dustbins and rubbish heaps, picking out the ribs of
cabbage leaves, potato peelings, sometimes even scraps of stale breadcrust
from which they carefully scraped away the cinders; and also in waiting
for the passing of trucks which travelled over a certain route and were
known to carry cattle feed, and which, when they jolted over the bad
patches in the road, sometimes spilt a few fragments of oil-cake.

When his father disappeared, his mother did not show any surprise or any
violent grief, but a sudden change came over her. She seemed to have
become completely spiritless. It was evident even to Winston that she was
waiting for something that she knew must happen. She did everything that
was needed--cooked, washed, mended, made the bed, swept the floor, dusted
the mantelpiece--always very slowly and with a curious lack of superfluous
motion, like an artist's lay-figure moving of its own accord. Her large
shapely body seemed to relapse naturally into stillness. For hours at a
time she would sit almost immobile on the bed, nursing his young sister,
a tiny, ailing, very silent child of two or three, with a face made simian
by thinness. Very occasionally she would take Winston in her arms and
press him against her for a long time without saying anything. He was
aware, in spite of his youthfulness and selfishness, that this was somehow
connected with the never-mentioned thing that was about to happen.

He remembered the room where they lived, a dark, close-smelling room that
seemed half filled by a bed with a white counterpane. There was a gas ring
in the fender, and a shelf where food was kept, and on the landing outside
there was a brown earthenware sink, common to several rooms. He remembered
his mother's statuesque body bending over the gas ring to stir at something
in a saucepan. Above all he remembered his continuous hunger, and the
fierce sordid battles at mealtimes. He would ask his mother naggingly,
over and over again, why there was not more food, he would shout and storm
at her (he even remembered the tones of his voice, which was beginning to
break prematurely and sometimes boomed in a peculiar way), or he would
attempt a snivelling note of pathos in his efforts to get more than his
share. His mother was quite ready to give him more than his share. She
took it for granted that he, 'the boy', should have the biggest portion;
but however much she gave him he invariably demanded more. At every meal
she would beseech him not to be selfish and to remember that his little
sister was sick and also needed food, but it was no use. He would cry out
with rage when she stopped ladling, he would try to wrench the saucepan
and spoon out of her hands, he would grab bits from his sister's plate.
He knew that he was starving the other two, but he could not help it; he
even felt that he had a right to do it. The clamorous hunger in his belly
seemed to justify him. Between meals, if his mother did not stand guard,
he was constantly pilfering at the wretched store of food on the shelf.

One day a chocolate ration was issued. There had been no such issue for
weeks or months past. He remembered quite clearly that precious little
morsel of chocolate. It was a two-ounce slab (they still talked about
ounces in those days) between the three of them. It was obvious that it
ought to be divided into three equal parts. Suddenly, as though he were
listening to somebody else, Winston heard himself demanding in a loud
booming voice that he should be given the whole piece. His mother told him
not to be greedy. There was a long, nagging argument that went round and
round, with shouts, whines, tears, remonstrances, bargainings. His tiny
sister, clinging to her mother with both hands, exactly like a baby monkey,
sat looking over her shoulder at him with large, mournful eyes. In the
end his mother broke off three-quarters of the chocolate and gave it to
Winston, giving the other quarter to his sister. The little girl took hold
of it and looked at it dully, perhaps not knowing what it was. Winston
stood watching her for a moment. Then with a sudden swift spring he had
snatched the piece of chocolate out of his sister's hand and was fleeing
for the door.

'Winston, Winston!' his mother called after him. 'Come back! Give your
sister back her chocolate!'

He stopped, but did not come back. His mother's anxious eyes were fixed on
his face. Even now he was thinking about the thing, he did not know what
it was that was on the point of happening. His sister, conscious of having
been robbed of something, had set up a feeble wail. His mother drew her
arm round the child and pressed its face against her breast. Something in
the gesture told him that his sister was dying. He turned and fled down
the stairs, with the chocolate growing sticky in his hand.

He never saw his mother again. After he had devoured the chocolate he felt
somewhat ashamed of himself and hung about in the streets for several
hours, until hunger drove him home. When he came back his mother had
disappeared. This was already becoming normal at that time. Nothing was
gone from the room except his mother and his sister. They had not taken
any clothes, not even his mother's overcoat. To this day he did not know
with any certainty that his mother was dead. It was perfectly possible
that she had merely been sent to a forced-labour camp. As for his sister,
she might have been removed, like Winston himself, to one of the colonies
for homeless children (Reclamation Centres, they were called) which had
grown up as a result of the civil war, or she might have been sent to the
labour camp along with his mother, or simply left somewhere or other
to die.

The dream was still vivid in his mind, especially the enveloping protecting
gesture of the arm in which its whole meaning seemed to be contained. His
mind went back to another dream of two months ago. Exactly as his mother
had sat on the dingy white-quilted bed, with the child clinging to her, so
she had sat in the sunken ship, far underneath him, and drowning deeper
every minute, but still looking up at him through the darkening water.

He told Julia the story of his mother's disappearance. Without opening her
eyes she rolled over and settled herself into a more comfortable position.

'I expect you were a beastly little swine in those days,' she said
indistinctly. 'All children are swine.'

'Yes. But the real point of the story----'

From her breathing it was evident that she was going off to sleep again.
He would have liked to continue talking about his mother. He did not
suppose, from what he could remember of her, that she had been an unusual
woman, still less an intelligent one; and yet she had possessed a kind of
nobility, a kind of purity, simply because the standards that she obeyed
were private ones. Her feelings were her own, and could not be altered
from outside. It would not have occurred to her that an action which is
ineffectual thereby becomes meaningless. If you loved someone, you loved
him, and when you had nothing else to give, you still gave him love. When
the last of the chocolate was gone, his mother had clasped the child in
her arms. It was no use, it changed nothing, it did not produce more
chocolate, it did not avert the child's death or her own; but it seemed
natural to her to do it. The refugee woman in the boat had also covered
the little boy with her arm, which was no more use against the bullets
than a sheet of paper. The terrible thing that the Party had done was to
persuade you that mere impulses, mere feelings, were of no account, while
at the same time robbing you of all power over the material world. When
once you were in the grip of the Party, what you felt or did not feel,
what you did or refrained from doing, made literally no difference.
Whatever happened you vanished, and neither you nor your actions were ever
heard of again. You were lifted clean out of the stream of history. And
yet to the people of only two generations ago this would not have seemed
all-important, because they were not attempting to alter history. They
were governed by private loyalties which they did not question. What
mattered were individual relationships, and a completely helpless gesture,
an embrace, a tear, a word spoken to a dying man, could have value in
itself. The proles, it suddenly occurred to him, had remained in this
condition. They were not loyal to a party or a country or an idea, they
were loyal to one another. For the first time in his life he did not
despise the proles or think of them merely as an inert force which would
one day spring to life and regenerate the world. The proles had stayed
human. They had not become hardened inside. They had held on to the
primitive emotions which he himself had to re-learn by conscious effort.
And in thinking this he remembered, without apparent relevance, how a few
weeks ago he had seen a severed hand lying on the pavement and had kicked
it into the gutter as though it had been a cabbage-stalk.

'The proles are human beings,' he said aloud. 'We are not human.'

'Why not?' said Julia, who had woken up again.

He thought for a little while. 'Has it ever occurred to you,' he said,
'that the best thing for us to do would be simply to walk out of here
before it's too late, and never see each other again?'

'Yes, dear, it has occurred to me, several times. But I'm not going to do
it, all the same.'

'We've been lucky,' he said 'but it can't last much longer. You're young.
You look normal and innocent. If you keep clear of people like me, you
might stay alive for another fifty years.'

'No. I've thought it all out. What you do, I'm going to do. And don't be
too downhearted. I'm rather good at staying alive.'

'We may be together for another six months--a year--there's no knowing.
At the end we're certain to be apart. Do you realize how utterly alone we
shall be? When once they get hold of us there will be nothing, literally
nothing, that either of us can do for the other. If I confess, they'll
shoot you, and if I refuse to confess, they'll shoot you just the same.
Nothing that I can do or say, or stop myself from saying, will put off
your death for as much as five minutes. Neither of us will even know
whether the other is alive or dead. We shall be utterly without power of
any kind. The one thing that matters is that we shouldn't betray one
another, although even that can't make the slightest difference.'

'If you mean confessing,' she said, 'we shall do that, right enough.
Everybody always confesses. You can't help it. They torture you.'

'I don't mean confessing. Confession is not betrayal. What you say or do
doesn't matter: only feelings matter. If they could make me stop loving
you--that would be the real betrayal.'

She thought it over. 'They can't do that,' she said finally. 'It's the one
thing they can't do. They can make you say anything--ANYTHING--but they
can't make you believe it. They can't get inside you.'

'No,' he said a little more hopefully, 'no; that's quite true. They can't
get inside you. If you can FEEL that staying human is worth while, even
when it can't have any result whatever, you've beaten them.'

He thought of the telescreen with its never-sleeping ear. They could spy
upon you night and day, but if you kept your head you could still outwit
them. With all their cleverness they had never mastered the secret of
finding out what another human being was thinking. Perhaps that was less
true when you were actually in their hands. One did not know what happened
inside the Ministry of Love, but it was possible to guess: tortures, drugs,
delicate instruments that registered your nervous reactions, gradual
wearing-down by sleeplessness and solitude and persistent questioning.
Facts, at any rate, could not be kept hidden. They could be tracked down
by enquiry, they could be squeezed out of you by torture. But if the object
was not to stay alive but to stay human, what difference did it ultimately
make? They could not alter your feelings: for that matter you could not
alter them yourself, even if you wanted to. They could lay bare in the
utmost detail everything that you had done or said or thought; but the
inner heart, whose workings were mysterious even to yourself, remained
impregnable.




Chapter 8



They had done it, they had done it at last!

The room they were standing in was long-shaped and softly lit. The
telescreen was dimmed to a low murmur; the richness of the dark-blue carpet
gave one the impression of treading on velvet. At the far end of the room
O'Brien was sitting at a table under a green-shaded lamp, with a mass of
papers on either side of him. He had not bothered to look up when the
servant showed Julia and Winston in.

Winston's heart was thumping so hard that he doubted whether he would be
able to speak. They had done it, they had done it at last, was all he
could think. It had been a rash act to come here at all, and sheer folly
to arrive together; though it was true that they had come by different
routes and only met on O'Brien's doorstep. But merely to walk into such a
place needed an effort of the nerve. It was only on very rare occasions
that one saw inside the dwelling-places of the Inner Party, or even
penetrated into the quarter of the town where they lived. The whole
atmosphere of the huge block of flats, the richness and spaciousness of
everything, the unfamiliar smells of good food and good tobacco, the
silent and incredibly rapid lifts sliding up and down, the white-jacketed
servants hurrying to and fro--everything was intimidating. Although he had
a good pretext for coming here, he was haunted at every step by the fear
that a black-uniformed guard would suddenly appear from round the corner,
demand his papers, and order him to get out. O'Brien's servant, however,
had admitted the two of them without demur. He was a small, dark-haired
man in a white jacket, with a diamond-shaped, completely expressionless
face which might have been that of a Chinese. The passage down which he
led them was softly carpeted, with cream-papered walls and white
wainscoting, all exquisitely clean. That too was intimidating. Winston
could not remember ever to have seen a passageway whose walls were not
grimy from the contact of human bodies.

O'Brien had a slip of paper between his fingers and seemed to be studying
it intently. His heavy face, bent down so that one could see the line of
the nose, looked both formidable and intelligent. For perhaps twenty
seconds he sat without stirring. Then he pulled the speakwrite towards
him and rapped out a message in the hybrid jargon of the Ministries:

'Items one comma five comma seven approved fullwise stop suggestion
contained item six doubleplus ridiculous verging crimethink cancel stop
unproceed constructionwise antegetting plusfull estimates machinery
overheads stop end message.'

He rose deliberately from his chair and came towards them across the
soundless carpet. A little of the official atmosphere seemed to have fallen
away from him with the Newspeak words, but his expression was grimmer than
usual, as though he were not pleased at being disturbed. The terror that
Winston already felt was suddenly shot through by a streak of ordinary
embarrassment. It seemed to him quite possible that he had simply made a
stupid mistake. For what evidence had he in reality that O'Brien was any
kind of political conspirator? Nothing but a flash of the eyes and a single
equivocal remark: beyond that, only his own secret imaginings, founded on
a dream. He could not even fall back on the pretence that he had come to
borrow the dictionary, because in that case Julia's presence was impossible
to explain. As O'Brien passed the telescreen a thought seemed to strike
him. He stopped, turned aside and pressed a switch on the wall. There was
a sharp snap. The voice had stopped.

Julia uttered a tiny sound, a sort of squeak of surprise. Even in the midst
of his panic, Winston was too much taken aback to be able to hold his
tongue.

'You can turn it off!' he said.

'Yes,' said O'Brien, 'we can turn it off. We have that privilege.'

He was opposite them now. His solid form towered over the pair of them,
and the expression on his face was still indecipherable. He was waiting,
somewhat sternly, for Winston to speak, but about what? Even now it was
quite conceivable that he was simply a busy man wondering irritably why he
had been interrupted. Nobody spoke. After the stopping of the telescreen
the room seemed deadly silent. The seconds marched past, enormous. With
difficulty Winston continued to keep his eyes fixed on O'Brien's. Then
suddenly the grim face broke down into what might have been the beginnings
of a smile. With his characteristic gesture O'Brien resettled his
spectacles on his nose.

'Shall I say it, or will you?' he said.

'I will say it,' said Winston promptly. 'That thing is really turned off?'

'Yes, everything is turned off. We are alone.'

'We have come here because----'

He paused, realizing for the first time the vagueness of
his own motives. Since he did not in fact know what kind of
help he expected from O'Brien, it was not easy to say why he
had come here. He went on, conscious that what he was saying
must sound both feeble and pretentious:

'We believe that there is some kind of conspiracy, some kind of secret
organization working against the Party, and that you are involved in it.
We want to join it and work for it. We are enemies of the Party. We
disbelieve in the principles of Ingsoc. We are thought-criminals. We are
also adulterers. I tell you this because we want to put ourselves at your
mercy. If you want us to incriminate ourselves in any other way, we are
ready.'

He stopped and glanced over his shoulder, with the feeling that the door
had opened. Sure enough, the little yellow-faced servant had come in
without knocking. Winston saw that he was carrying a tray with a decanter
and glasses.

'Martin is one of us,' said O'Brien impassively. 'Bring the drinks over
here, Martin. Put them on the round table. Have we enough chairs? Then
we may as well sit down and talk in comfort. Bring a chair for yourself,
Martin. This is business. You can stop being a servant for the next ten
minutes.'

The little man sat down, quite at his ease, and yet still with a
servant-like air, the air of a valet enjoying a privilege. Winston
regarded him out of the corner of his eye. It struck him that the man's
whole life was playing a part, and that he felt it to be dangerous to
drop his assumed personality even for a moment. O'Brien took the decanter
by the neck and filled up the glasses with a dark-red liquid. It aroused
in Winston dim memories of something seen long ago on a wall or a
hoarding--a vast bottle composed of electric lights which seemed to move
up and down and pour its contents into a glass. Seen from the top the
stuff looked almost black, but in the decanter it gleamed like a ruby.
It had a sour-sweet smell. He saw Julia pick up her glass and sniff at
it with frank curiosity.

'It is called wine,' said O'Brien with a faint smile. 'You will have read
about it in books, no doubt. Not much of it gets to the Outer Party, I am
afraid.' His face grew solemn again, and he raised his glass: 'I think it
is fitting that we should begin by drinking a health. To our Leader: To
Emmanuel Goldstein.'

Winston took up his glass with a certain eagerness. Wine was a thing he
had read and dreamed about. Like the glass paperweight or Mr Charrington's
half-remembered rhymes, it belonged to the vanished, romantic past, the
olden time as he liked to call it in his secret thoughts. For some reason
he had always thought of wine as having an intensely sweet taste, like
that of blackberry jam and an immediate intoxicating effect. Actually,
when he came to swallow it, the stuff was distinctly disappointing. The
truth was that after years of gin-drinking he could barely taste it. He
set down the empty glass.

'Then there is such a person as Goldstein?' he said.

'Yes, there is such a person, and he is alive. Where, I do not know.'

'And the conspiracy--the organization? Is it real? It is not simply an
invention of the Thought Police?'

'No, it is real. The Brotherhood, we call it. You will never learn much
more about the Brotherhood than that it exists and that you belong to it.
I will come back to that presently.' He looked at his wrist-watch. 'It is
unwise even for members of the Inner Party to turn off the telescreen for
more than half an hour. You ought not to have come here together, and
you will have to leave separately. You, comrade'--he bowed his head to
Julia--'will leave first. We have about twenty minutes at our disposal.
You will understand that I must start by asking you certain questions.
In general terms, what are you prepared to do?'

'Anything that we are capable of,' said Winston.

O'Brien had turned himself a little in his chair so that he was facing
Winston. He almost ignored Julia, seeming to take it for granted that
Winston could speak for her. For a moment the lids flitted down over his
eyes. He began asking his questions in a low, expressionless voice, as
though this were a routine, a sort of catechism, most of whose answers
were known to him already.

'You are prepared to give your lives?'

'Yes.'

'You are prepared to commit murder?'

'Yes.'

'To commit acts of sabotage which may cause the death of hundreds of
innocent people?'

'Yes.'

'To betray your country to foreign powers?'

'Yes.'

'You are prepared to cheat, to forge, to blackmail, to corrupt the minds
of children, to distribute habit-forming drugs, to encourage prostitution,
to disseminate venereal diseases--to do anything which is likely to cause
demoralization and weaken the power of the Party?'

'Yes.'

'If, for example, it would somehow serve our interests to throw sulphuric
acid in a child's face--are you prepared to do that?'

'Yes.'

'You are prepared to lose your identity and live out the rest of your life
as a waiter or a dock-worker?'

'Yes.'

'You are prepared to commit suicide, if and when we order you to do so?'

'Yes.'

'You are prepared, the two of you, to separate and never see one another
again?'

'No!' broke in Julia.

It appeared to Winston that a long time passed before he answered. For a
moment he seemed even to have been deprived of the power of speech. His
tongue worked soundlessly, forming the opening syllables first of one word,
then of the other, over and over again. Until he had said it, he did not
know which word he was going to say. 'No,' he said finally.

'You did well to tell me,' said O'Brien. 'It is necessary for us to know
everything.'

He turned himself toward Julia and added in a voice with somewhat more
expression in it:

'Do you understand that even if he survives, it may be as a different
person? We may be obliged to give him a new identity. His face, his
movements, the shape of his hands, the colour of his hair--even his voice
would be different. And you yourself might have become a different person.
Our surgeons can alter people beyond recognition. Sometimes it is
necessary. Sometimes we even amputate a limb.'

Winston could not help snatching another sidelong glance at Martin's
Mongolian face. There were no scars that he could see. Julia had turned a
shade paler, so that her freckles were showing, but she faced O'Brien
boldly. She murmured something that seemed to be assent.

'Good. Then that is settled.'

There was a silver box of cigarettes on the table. With a rather
absent-minded air O'Brien pushed them towards the others, took one himself,
then stood up and began to pace slowly to and fro, as though he could think
better standing. They were very good cigarettes, very thick and
well-packed, with an unfamiliar silkiness in the paper. O'Brien looked at
his wrist-watch again.

'You had better go back to your Pantry, Martin,' he said. 'I shall switch
on in a quarter of an hour. Take a good look at these comrades' faces
before you go. You will be seeing them again. I may not.'

Exactly as they had done at the front door, the little man's dark eyes
flickered over their faces. There was not a trace of friendliness in his
manner. He was memorizing their appearance, but he felt no interest in
them, or appeared to feel none. It occurred to Winston that a synthetic
face was perhaps incapable of changing its expression. Without speaking
or giving any kind of salutation, Martin went out, closing the door
silently behind him. O'Brien was strolling up and down, one hand in the
pocket of his black overalls, the other holding his cigarette.

'You understand,' he said, 'that you will be fighting in the dark. You
will always be in the dark. You will receive orders and you will obey them,
without knowing why. Later I shall send you a book from which you will
learn the true nature of the society we live in, and the strategy by which
we shall destroy it. When you have read the book, you will be full members
of the Brotherhood. But between the general aims that we are fighting for
and the immediate tasks of the moment, you will never know anything. I
tell you that the Brotherhood exists, but I cannot tell you whether it
numbers a hundred members, or ten million. From your personal knowledge
you will never be able to say that it numbers even as many as a dozen. You
will have three or four contacts, who will be renewed from time to time as
they disappear. As this was your first contact, it will be preserved. When
you receive orders, they will come from me. If we find it necessary to
communicate with you, it will be through Martin. When you are finally
caught, you will confess. That is unavoidable. But you will have very
little to confess, other than your own actions. You will not be able to
betray more than a handful of unimportant people. Probably you will not
even betray me. By that time I may be dead, or I shall have become a
different person, with a different face.'

He continued to move to and fro over the soft carpet. In spite of the
bulkiness of his body there was a remarkable grace in his movements. It
came out even in the gesture with which he thrust a hand into his pocket,
or manipulated a cigarette. More even than of strength, he gave an
impression of confidence and of an understanding tinged by irony. However
much in earnest he might be, he had nothing of the single-mindedness that
belongs to a fanatic. When he spoke of murder, suicide, venereal disease,
amputated limbs, and altered faces, it was with a faint air of persiflage.
'This is unavoidable,' his voice seemed to say; 'this is what we have got
to do, unflinchingly. But this is not what we shall be doing when life is
worth living again.' A wave of admiration, almost of worship, flowed out
from Winston towards O'Brien. For the moment he had forgotten the shadowy
figure of Goldstein. When you looked at O'Brien's powerful shoulders and
his blunt-featured face, so ugly and yet so civilized, it was impossible
to believe that he could be defeated. There was no stratagem that he was
not equal to, no danger that he could not foresee. Even Julia seemed to
be impressed. She had let her cigarette go out and was listening intently.
O'Brien went on:

'You will have heard rumours of the existence of the Brotherhood. No doubt
you have formed your own picture of it. You have imagined, probably, a
huge underworld of conspirators, meeting secretly in cellars, scribbling
messages on walls, recognizing one another by codewords or by special
movements of the hand. Nothing of the kind exists. The members of the
Brotherhood have no way of recognizing one another, and it is impossible
for any one member to be aware of the identity of more than a few others.
Goldstein himself, if he fell into the hands of the Thought Police, could
not give them a complete list of members, or any information that would
lead them to a complete list. No such list exists. The Brotherhood cannot
be wiped out because it is not an organization in the ordinary sense.
Nothing holds it together except an idea which is indestructible. You
will never have anything to sustain you, except the idea. You will get no
comradeship and no encouragement. When finally you are caught, you will
get no help. We never help our members. At most, when it is absolutely
necessary that someone should be silenced, we are occasionally able to
smuggle a razor blade into a prisoner's cell. You will have to get used
to living without results and without hope. You will work for a while,
you will be caught, you will confess, and then you will die. Those are
the only results that you will ever see. There is no possibility that any
perceptible change will happen within our own lifetime. We are the dead.
Our only true life is in the future. We shall take part in it as handfuls
of dust and splinters of bone. But how far away that future may be, there
is no knowing. It might be a thousand years. At present nothing is possible
except to extend the area of sanity little by little. We cannot act
collectively. We can only spread our knowledge outwards from individual to
individual, generation after generation. In the face of the Thought Police
there is no other way.'

He halted and looked for the third time at his wrist-watch.

'It is almost time for you to leave, comrade,' he said to Julia. 'Wait.
The decanter is still half full.'

He filled the glasses and raised his own glass by the stem.

'What shall it be this time?' he said, still with the same faint
suggestion of irony. 'To the confusion of the Thought Police? To the
death of Big Brother? To humanity? To the future?'

'To the past,' said Winston.

'The past is more important,' agreed O'Brien gravely.

They emptied their glasses, and a moment later Julia stood up to go.
O'Brien took a small box from the top of a cabinet and handed her a flat
white tablet which he told her to place on her tongue. It was important,
he said, not to go out smelling of wine: the lift attendants were very
observant. As soon as the door had shut behind her he appeared to forget
her existence. He took another pace or two up and down, then stopped.

'There are details to be settled,' he said. 'I assume that you have a
hiding-place of some kind?'

Winston explained about the room over Mr Charrington's shop.

'That will do for the moment. Later we will arrange something else for you.
It is important to change one's hiding-place frequently. Meanwhile I shall
send you a copy of THE BOOK'--even O'Brien, Winston noticed, seemed to
pronounce the words as though they were in italics--'Goldstein's book, you
understand, as soon as possible. It may be some days before I can get hold
of one. There are not many in existence, as you can imagine. The Thought
Police hunt them down and destroy them almost as fast as we can produce
them. It makes very little difference. The book is indestructible. If
the last copy were gone, we could reproduce it almost word for word. Do
you carry a brief-case to work with you?' he added.

'As a rule, yes.'

'What is it like?'

'Black, very shabby. With two straps.'

'Black, two straps, very shabby--good. One day in the fairly near
future--I cannot give a date--one of the messages among your morning's
work will contain a misprinted word, and you will have to ask for a
repeat. On the following day you will go to work without your brief-case.
At some time during the day, in the street, a man will touch you on the
arm and say "I think you have dropped your brief-case." The one he gives
you will contain a copy of Goldstein's book. You will return it within
fourteen days.'

They were silent for a moment.

'There are a couple of minutes before you need go,' said O'Brien. 'We
shall meet again--if we do meet again----'

Winston looked up at him. 'In the place where there is no darkness?'
he said hesitantly.

O'Brien nodded without appearance of surprise. 'In the place where there
is no darkness,' he said, as though he had recognized the allusion. 'And
in the meantime, is there anything that you wish to say before you leave?
Any message? Any question?.'

Winston thought. There did not seem to be any further question that he
wanted to ask: still less did he feel any impulse to utter high-sounding
generalities. Instead of anything directly connected with O'Brien or the
Brotherhood, there came into his mind a sort of composite picture of the
dark bedroom where his mother had spent her last days, and the little room
over Mr Charrington's shop, and the glass paperweight, and the steel
engraving in its rosewood frame. Almost at random he said:

'Did you ever happen to hear an old rhyme that begins "Oranges and lemons,
say the bells of St Clement's"?'

Again O'Brien nodded. With a sort of grave courtesy he completed the
stanza:


  'Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's,
  You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin's,
  When will you pay me? say the bells of Old Bailey,
  When I grow rich, say the bells of Shoreditch.'


'You knew the last line!' said Winston.

'Yes, I knew the last line. And now, I am afraid, it is time for you to go.
But wait. You had better let me give you one of these tablets.'

As Winston stood up O'Brien held out a hand. His powerful grip crushed
the bones of Winston's palm. At the door Winston looked back, but O'Brien
seemed already to be in process of putting him out of mind. He was waiting
with his hand on the switch that controlled the telescreen. Beyond him
Winston could see the writing-table with its green-shaded lamp and the
speakwrite and the wire baskets deep-laden with papers. The incident was
closed. Within thirty seconds, it occurred to him, O'Brien would be back
at his interrupted and important work on behalf of the Party.




Chapter 9



Winston was gelatinous with fatigue. Gelatinous was the right word. It had
come into his head spontaneously. His body seemed to have not only the
weakness of a jelly, but its translucency. He felt that if he held up his
hand he would be able to see the light through it. All the blood and
lymph had been drained out of him by an enormous debauch of work, leaving
only a frail structure of nerves, bones, and skin. All sensations seemed
to be magnified. His overalls fretted his shoulders, the pavement tickled
his feet, even the opening and closing of a hand was an effort that made
his joints creak.

He had worked more than ninety hours in five days. So had everyone else in
the Ministry. Now it was all over, and he had literally nothing to do, no
Party work of any description, until tomorrow morning. He could spend six
hours in the hiding-place and another nine in his own bed. Slowly, in
mild afternoon sunshine, he walked up a dingy street in the direction
of Mr Charrington's shop, keeping one eye open for the patrols, but
irrationally convinced that this afternoon there was no danger of anyone
interfering with him. The heavy brief-case that he was carrying bumped
against his knee at each step, sending a tingling sensation up and down
the skin of his leg. Inside it was the book, which he had now had in his
possession for six days and had not yet opened, nor even looked at.

On the sixth day of Hate Week, after the processions, the speeches, the
shouting, the singing, the banners, the posters, the films, the waxworks,
the rolling of drums and squealing of trumpets, the tramp of marching feet,
the grinding of the caterpillars of tanks, the roar of massed planes,
the booming of guns--after six days of this, when the great orgasm was
quivering to its climax and the general hatred of Eurasia had boiled up
into such delirium that if the crowd could have got their hands on the
2,000 Eurasian war-criminals who were to be publicly hanged on the last
day of the proceedings, they would unquestionably have torn them to
pieces--at just this moment it had been announced that Oceania was not
after all at war with Eurasia. Oceania was at war with Eastasia. Eurasia
was an ally.

There was, of course, no admission that any change had taken place. Merely
it became known, with extreme suddenness and everywhere at once, that
Eastasia and not Eurasia was the enemy. Winston was taking part in a
demonstration in one of the central London squares at the moment when it
happened. It was night, and the white faces and the scarlet banners were
luridly floodlit. The square was packed with several thousand people,
including a block of about a thousand schoolchildren in the uniform of the
Spies. On a scarlet-draped platform an orator of the Inner Party, a small
lean man with disproportionately long arms and a large bald skull over
which a few lank locks straggled, was haranguing the crowd. A little
Rumpelstiltskin figure, contorted with hatred, he gripped the neck of the
microphone with one hand while the other, enormous at the end of a bony
arm, clawed the air menacingly above his head. His voice, made metallic by
the amplifiers, boomed forth an endless catalogue of atrocities, massacres,
deportations, lootings, rapings, torture of prisoners, bombing of
civilians, lying propaganda, unjust aggressions, broken treaties. It was
almost impossible to listen to him without being first convinced and then
maddened. At every few moments the fury of the crowd boiled over and the
voice of the speaker was drowned by a wild beast-like roaring that rose
uncontrollably from thousands of throats. The most savage yells of all
came from the schoolchildren. The speech had been proceeding for perhaps
twenty minutes when a messenger hurried on to the platform and a scrap of
paper was slipped into the speaker's hand. He unrolled and read it without
pausing in his speech. Nothing altered in his voice or manner, or in the
content of what he was saying, but suddenly the names were different.
Without words said, a wave of understanding rippled through the crowd.
Oceania was at war with Eastasia! The next moment there was a tremendous
commotion. The banners and posters with which the square was decorated
were all wrong! Quite half of them had the wrong faces on them. It was
sabotage! The agents of Goldstein had been at work! There was a riotous
interlude while posters were ripped from the walls, banners torn to shreds
and trampled underfoot. The Spies performed prodigies of activity in
clambering over the rooftops and cutting the streamers that fluttered from
the chimneys. But within two or three minutes it was all over. The orator,
still gripping the neck of the microphone, his shoulders hunched forward,
his free hand clawing at the air, had gone straight on with his speech.
One minute more, and the feral roars of rage were again bursting from the
crowd. The Hate continued exactly as before, except that the target had
been changed.

The thing that impressed Winston in looking back was that the speaker had
switched from one line to the other actually in midsentence, not only
without a pause, but without even breaking the syntax. But at the moment
he had other things to preoccupy him. It was during the moment of disorder
while the posters were being torn down that a man whose face he did not
see had tapped him on the shoulder and said, 'Excuse me, I think you've
dropped your brief-case.' He took the brief-case abstractedly, without
speaking. He knew that it would be days before he had an opportunity to
look inside it. The instant that the demonstration was over he went
straight to the Ministry of Truth, though the time was now nearly
twenty-three hours. The entire staff of the Ministry had done likewise.
The orders already issuing from the telescreen, recalling them to their
posts, were hardly necessary.

Oceania was at war with Eastasia: Oceania had always been at war with
Eastasia. A large part of the political literature of five years was now
completely obsolete. Reports and records of all kinds, newspapers, books,
pamphlets, films, sound-tracks, photographs--all had to be rectified at
lightning speed. Although no directive was ever issued, it was known that
the chiefs of the Department intended that within one week no reference
to the war with Eurasia, or the alliance with Eastasia, should remain in
existence anywhere. The work was overwhelming, all the more so because
the processes that it involved could not be called by their true
names. Everyone in the Records Department worked eighteen hours in the
twenty-four, with two three-hour snatches of sleep. Mattresses were brought
up from the cellars and pitched all over the corridors: meals consisted of
sandwiches and Victory Coffee wheeled round on trolleys by attendants from
the canteen. Each time that Winston broke off for one of his spells of
sleep he tried to leave his desk clear of work, and each time that he
crawled back sticky-eyed and aching, it was to find that another shower
of paper cylinders had covered the desk like a snowdrift, half-burying the
speakwrite and overflowing on to the floor, so that the first job was
always to stack them into a neat enough pile to give him room to work.
What was worst of all was that the work was by no means purely mechanical.
Often it was enough merely to substitute one name for another, but any
detailed report of events demanded care and imagination. Even the
geographical knowledge that one needed in transferring the war from one
part of the world to another was considerable.

By the third day his eyes ached unbearably and his spectacles needed wiping
every few minutes. It was like struggling with some crushing physical task,
something which one had the right to refuse and which one was nevertheless
neurotically anxious to accomplish. In so far as he had time to remember
it, he was not troubled by the fact that every word he murmured into the
speakwrite, every stroke of his ink-pencil, was a deliberate lie. He was
as anxious as anyone else in the Department that the forgery should be
perfect. On the morning of the sixth day the dribble of cylinders slowed
down. For as much as half an hour nothing came out of the tube; then one
more cylinder, then nothing. Everywhere at about the same time the work
was easing off. A deep and as it were secret sigh went through the
Department. A mighty deed, which could never be mentioned, had been
achieved. It was now impossible for any human being to prove by documentary
evidence that the war with Eurasia had ever happened. At twelve hundred it
was unexpectedly announced that all workers in the Ministry were free till
tomorrow morning. Winston, still carrying the brief-case containing the
book, which had remained between his feet while he worked and under his
body while he slept, went home, shaved himself, and almost fell asleep in
his bath, although the water was barely more than tepid.

With a sort of voluptuous creaking in his joints he climbed the stair above
Mr Charrington's shop. He was tired, but not sleepy any longer. He opened
the window, lit the dirty little oilstove and put on a pan of water for
coffee. Julia would arrive presently: meanwhile there was the book. He
sat down in the sluttish armchair and undid the straps of the brief-case.

A heavy black volume, amateurishly bound, with no name or title on the
cover. The print also looked slightly irregular. The pages were worn at
the edges, and fell apart, easily, as though the book had passed through
many hands. The inscription on the title-page ran:


  THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF
  OLIGARCHICAL COLLECTIVISM
  by
  Emmanuel Goldstein


Winston began reading:


Chapter I
Ignorance is Strength

Throughout recorded time, and probably since the end of the Neolithic Age,
there have been three kinds of people in the world, the High, the Middle,
and the Low. They have been subdivided in many ways, they have borne
countless different names, and their relative numbers, as well as their
attitude towards one another, have varied from age to age: but the
essential structure of society has never altered. Even after enormous
upheavals and seemingly irrevocable changes, the same pattern has always
reasserted itself, just as a gyroscope will always return to equilibrium,
however far it is pushed one way or the other.

The aims of these groups are entirely irreconcilable...


Winston stopped reading, chiefly in order to appreciate the fact that he
was reading, in comfort and safety. He was alone: no telescreen, no ear at
the keyhole, no nervous impulse to glance over his shoulder or cover the
page with his hand. The sweet summer air played against his cheek. From
somewhere far away there floated the faint shouts of children: in the room
itself there was no sound except the insect voice of the clock. He settled
deeper into the arm-chair and put his feet up on the fender. It was bliss,
it was eternity. Suddenly, as one sometimes does with a book of which one
knows that one will ultimately read and re-read every word, he opened it
at a different place and found himself at Chapter III. He went on reading:


Chapter III
War is Peace

The splitting up of the world into three great super-states was an event
which could be and indeed was foreseen before the middle of the twentieth
century. With the absorption of Europe by Russia and of the British Empire
by the United States, two of the three existing powers, Eurasia and
Oceania, were already effectively in being. The third, Eastasia, only
emerged as a distinct unit after another decade of confused fighting. The
frontiers between the three super-states are in some places arbitrary, and
in others they fluctuate according to the fortunes of war, but in general
they follow geographical lines. Eurasia comprises the whole of the northern
part of the European and Asiatic land-mass, from Portugal to the Bering
Strait. Oceania comprises the Americas, the Atlantic islands including the
British Isles, Australasia, and the southern portion of Africa. Eastasia,
smaller than the others and with a less definite western frontier,
comprises China and the countries to the south of it, the Japanese islands
and a large but fluctuating portion of Manchuria, Mongolia, and Tibet.

In one combination or another, these three super-states are permanently at
war, and have been so for the past twenty-five years. War, however, is no
longer the desperate, annihilating struggle that it was in the early
decades of the twentieth century. It is a warfare of limited aims between
combatants who are unable to destroy one another, have no material cause
for fighting and are not divided by any genuine ideological difference.
This is not to say that either the conduct of war, or the prevailing
attitude towards it, has become less bloodthirsty or more chivalrous.
On the contrary, war hysteria is continuous and universal in all countries,
and such acts as raping, looting, the slaughter of children, the reduction
of whole populations to slavery, and reprisals against prisoners which
extend even to boiling and burying alive, are looked upon as normal,
and, when they are committed by one's own side and not by the enemy,
meritorious. But in a physical sense war involves very small numbers of
people, mostly highly-trained specialists, and causes comparatively few
casualties. The fighting, when there is any, takes place on the vague
frontiers whose whereabouts the average man can only guess at, or round
the Floating Fortresses which guard strategic spots on the sea lanes. In
the centres of civilization war means no more than a continuous shortage
of consumption goods, and the occasional crash of a rocket bomb which may
cause a few scores of deaths. War has in fact changed its character. More
exactly, the reasons for which war is waged have changed in their order of
importance. Motives which were already present to some small extent in the
great wars of the early twentieth century have now become dominant and
are consciously recognized and acted upon.

To understand the nature of the present war--for in spite of the regrouping
which occurs every few years, it is always the same war--one must realize
in the first place that it is impossible for it to be decisive. None of
the three super-states could be definitively conquered even by the other
two in combination. They are too evenly matched, and their natural defences
are too formidable. Eurasia is protected by its vast land spaces, Oceania
by the width of the Atlantic and the Pacific, Eastasia by the fecundity
and industriousness of its inhabitants. Secondly, there is no longer, in
a material sense, anything to fight about. With the establishment of
self-contained economies, in which production and consumption are geared
to one another, the scramble for markets which was a main cause of
previous wars has come to an end, while the competition for raw materials
is no longer a matter of life and death. In any case each of the three
super-states is so vast that it can obtain almost all the materials that
it needs within its own boundaries. In so far as the war has a direct
economic purpose, it is a war for labour power. Between the frontiers of
the super-states, and not permanently in the possession of any of them,
there lies a rough quadrilateral with its corners at Tangier, Brazzaville,
Darwin, and Hong Kong, containing within it about a fifth of the population
of the earth. It is for the possession of these thickly-populated regions,
and of the northern ice-cap, that the three powers are constantly
struggling. In practice no one power ever controls the whole of the
disputed area. Portions of it are constantly changing hands, and it is the
chance of seizing this or that fragment by a sudden stroke of treachery
that dictates the endless changes of alignment.

All of the disputed territories contain valuable minerals, and some of
them yield important vegetable products such as rubber which in colder
climates it is necessary to synthesize by comparatively expensive methods.
But above all they contain a bottomless reserve of cheap labour. Whichever
power controls equatorial Africa, or the countries of the Middle East, or
Southern India, or the Indonesian Archipelago, disposes also of the bodies
of scores or hundreds of millions of ill-paid and hard-working coolies.
The inhabitants of these areas, reduced more or less openly to the status
of slaves, pass continually from conqueror to conqueror, and are expended
like so much coal or oil in the race to turn out more armaments, to capture
more territory, to control more labour power, to turn out more armaments,
to capture more territory, and so on indefinitely. It should be noted that
the fighting never really moves beyond the edges of the disputed areas.
The frontiers of Eurasia flow back and forth between the basin of the Congo
and the northern shore of the Mediterranean; the islands of the Indian
Ocean and the Pacific are constantly being captured and recaptured by
Oceania or by Eastasia; in Mongolia the dividing line between Eurasia and
Eastasia is never stable; round the Pole all three powers lay claim to
enormous territories which in fact are largely uninhabited and unexplored:
but the balance of power always remains roughly even, and the territory
which forms the heartland of each super-state always remains inviolate.
Moreover, the labour of the exploited peoples round the Equator is not
really necessary to the world's economy. They add nothing to the wealth of
the world, since whatever they produce is used for purposes of war, and
the object of waging a war is always to be in a better position in which
to wage another war. By their labour the slave populations allow the tempo
of continuous warfare to be speeded up. But if they did not exist, the
structure of world society, and the process by which it maintains itself,
would not be essentially different.

The primary aim of modern warfare (in accordance with the principles of
DOUBLETHINK, this aim is simultaneously recognized and not recognized by
the directing brains of the Inner Party) is to use up the products of the
machine without raising the general standard of living. Ever since the end
of the nineteenth century, the problem of what to do with the surplus of
consumption goods has been latent in industrial society. At present, when
few human beings even have enough to eat, this problem is obviously not
urgent, and it might not have become so, even if no artificial processes
of destruction had been at work. The world of today is a bare, hungry,
dilapidated place compared with the world that existed before 1914, and
still more so if compared with the imaginary future to which the people of
that period looked forward. In the early twentieth century, the vision of
a future society unbelievably rich, leisured, orderly, and efficient--a
glittering antiseptic world of glass and steel and snow-white concrete--was
part of the consciousness of nearly every literate person. Science and
technology were developing at a prodigious speed, and it seemed natural to
assume that they would go on developing. This failed to happen, partly
because of the impoverishment caused by a long series of wars and
revolutions, partly because scientific and technical progress depended on
the empirical habit of thought, which could not survive in a strictly
regimented society. As a whole the world is more primitive today than it
was fifty years ago. Certain backward areas have advanced, and various
devices, always in some way connected with warfare and police espionage,
have been developed, but experiment and invention have largely stopped,
and the ravages of the atomic war of the nineteen-fifties have never been
fully repaired. Nevertheless the dangers inherent in the machine are still
there. From the moment when the machine first made its appearance it
was clear to all thinking people that the need for human drudgery, and
therefore to a great extent for human inequality, had disappeared. If the
machine were used deliberately for that end, hunger, overwork, dirt,
illiteracy, and disease could be eliminated within a few generations.
And in fact, without being used for any such purpose, but by a sort of
automatic process--by producing wealth which it was sometimes impossible
not to distribute--the machine did raise the living standards of the
average human being very greatly over a period of about fifty years at
the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth centuries.

But it was also clear that an all-round increase in wealth threatened the
destruction--indeed, in some sense was the destruction--of a hierarchical
society. In a world in which everyone worked short hours, had enough to
eat, lived in a house with a bathroom and a refrigerator, and possessed
a motor-car or even an aeroplane, the most obvious and perhaps the most
important form of inequality would already have disappeared. If it once
became general, wealth would confer no distinction. It was possible, no
doubt, to imagine a society in which WEALTH, in the sense of personal
possessions and luxuries, should be evenly distributed, while POWER
remained in the hands of a small privileged caste. But in practice such
a society could not long remain stable. For if leisure and security were
enjoyed by all alike, the great mass of human beings who are normally
stupefied by poverty would become literate and would learn to think for
themselves; and when once they had done this, they would sooner or later
realize that the privileged minority had no function, and they would sweep
it away. In the long run, a hierarchical society was only possible on a
basis of poverty and ignorance. To return to the agricultural past, as
some thinkers about the beginning of the twentieth century dreamed of
doing, was not a practicable solution. It conflicted with the tendency
towards mechanization which had become quasi-instinctive throughout almost
the whole world, and moreover, any country which remained industrially
backward was helpless in a military sense and was bound to be dominated,
directly or indirectly, by its more advanced rivals.

Nor was it a satisfactory solution to keep the masses in poverty by
restricting the output of goods. This happened to a great extent during
the final phase of capitalism, roughly between 1920 and 1940. The economy
of many countries was allowed to stagnate, land went out of cultivation,
capital equipment was not added to, great blocks of the population were
prevented from working and kept half alive by State charity. But this,
too, entailed military weakness, and since the privations it inflicted
were obviously unnecessary, it made opposition inevitable. The problem was
how to keep the wheels of industry turning without increasing the real
wealth of the world. Goods must be produced, but they must not be
distributed. And in practice the only way of achieving this was by
continuous warfare.

The essential act of war is destruction, not necessarily of human lives,
but of the products of human labour. War is a way of shattering to pieces,
or pouring into the stratosphere, or sinking in the depths of the sea,
materials which might otherwise be used to make the masses too comfortable,
and hence, in the long run, too intelligent. Even when weapons of war are
not actually destroyed, their manufacture is still a convenient way of
expending labour power without producing anything that can be consumed.
A Floating Fortress, for example, has locked up in it the labour that
would build several hundred cargo-ships. Ultimately it is scrapped as
obsolete, never having brought any material benefit to anybody, and with
further enormous labours another Floating Fortress is built. In principle
the war effort is always so planned as to eat up any surplus that might
exist after meeting the bare needs of the population. In practice the needs
of the population are always underestimated, with the result that there is
a chronic shortage of half the necessities of life; but this is looked on
as an advantage. It is deliberate policy to keep even the favoured groups
somewhere near the brink of hardship, because a general state of scarcity
increases the importance of small privileges and thus magnifies the
distinction between one group and another. By the standards of the early
twentieth century, even a member of the Inner Party lives an austere,
laborious kind of life. Nevertheless, the few luxuries that he does enjoy
his large, well-appointed flat, the better texture of his clothes, the
better quality of his food and drink and tobacco, his two or three
servants, his private motor-car or helicopter--set him in a different world
from a member of the Outer Party, and the members of the Outer Party have
a similar advantage in comparison with the submerged masses whom we call
'the proles'. The social atmosphere is that of a besieged city, where the
possession of a lump of horseflesh makes the difference between wealth and
poverty. And at the same time the consciousness of being at war, and
therefore in danger, makes the handing-over of all power to a small caste
seem the natural, unavoidable condition of survival.

War, it will be seen, accomplishes the necessary destruction, but
accomplishes it in a psychologically acceptable way. In principle it would
be quite simple to waste the surplus labour of the world by building
temples and pyramids, by digging holes and filling them up again, or even
by producing vast quantities of goods and then setting fire to them. But
this would provide only the economic and not the emotional basis for a
hierarchical society. What is concerned here is not the morale of masses,
whose attitude is unimportant so long as they are kept steadily at work,
but the morale of the Party itself. Even the humblest Party member is
expected to be competent, industrious, and even intelligent within narrow
limits, but it is also necessary that he should be a credulous and ignorant
fanatic whose prevailing moods are fear, hatred, adulation, and orgiastic
triumph. In other words it is necessary that he should have the mentality
appropriate to a state of war. It does not matter whether the war is
actually happening, and, since no decisive victory is possible, it does
not matter whether the war is going well or badly. All that is needed is
that a state of war should exist. The splitting of the intelligence which
the Party requires of its members, and which is more easily achieved in an
atmosphere of war, is now almost universal, but the higher up the ranks
one goes, the more marked it becomes. It is precisely in the Inner Party
that war hysteria and hatred of the enemy are strongest. In his capacity
as an administrator, it is often necessary for a member of the Inner Party
to know that this or that item of war news is untruthful, and he may often
be aware that the entire war is spurious and is either not happening or
is being waged for purposes quite other than the declared ones: but such
knowledge is easily neutralized by the technique of DOUBLETHINK. Meanwhile
no Inner Party member wavers for an instant in his mystical belief that
the war is real, and that it is bound to end victoriously, with Oceania
the undisputed master of the entire world.

All members of the Inner Party believe in this coming conquest as an
article of faith. It is to be achieved either by gradually acquiring more
and more territory and so building up an overwhelming preponderance of
power, or by the discovery of some new and unanswerable weapon. The search
for new weapons continues unceasingly, and is one of the very few remaining
activities in which the inventive or speculative type of mind can find any
outlet. In Oceania at the present day, Science, in the old sense, has
almost ceased to exist. In Newspeak there is no word for 'Science'. The
empirical method of thought, on which all the scientific achievements of
the past were founded, is opposed to the most fundamental principles of
Ingsoc. And even technological progress only happens when its products can
in some way be used for the diminution of human liberty. In all the useful
arts the world is either standing still or going backwards. The fields are
cultivated with horse-ploughs while books are written by machinery. But
in matters of vital importance--meaning, in effect, war and police
espionage--the empirical approach is still encouraged, or at least
tolerated. The two aims of the Party are to conquer the whole surface of
the earth and to extinguish once and for all the possibility of independent
thought. There are therefore two great problems which the Party is
concerned to solve. One is how to discover, against his will, what another
human being is thinking, and the other is how to kill several hundred
million people in a few seconds without giving warning beforehand. In
so far as scientific research still continues, this is its subject matter.
The scientist of today is either a mixture of psychologist and inquisitor,
studying with real ordinary minuteness the meaning of facial expressions,
gestures, and tones of voice, and testing the truth-producing effects of
drugs, shock therapy, hypnosis, and physical torture; or he is chemist,
physicist, or biologist concerned only with such branches of his special
subject as are relevant to the taking of life. In the vast laboratories
of the Ministry of Peace, and in the experimental stations hidden in the
Brazilian forests, or in the Australian desert, or on lost islands of
the Antarctic, the teams of experts are indefatigably at work. Some are
concerned simply with planning the logistics of future wars; others devise
larger and larger rocket bombs, more and more powerful explosives, and more
and more impenetrable armour-plating; others search for new and deadlier
gases, or for soluble poisons capable of being produced in such quantities
as to destroy the vegetation of whole continents, or for breeds of disease
germs immunized against all possible antibodies; others strive to produce
a vehicle that shall bore its way under the soil like a submarine under
the water, or an aeroplane as independent of its base as a sailing-ship;
others explore even remoter possibilities such as focusing the sun's rays
through lenses suspended thousands of kilometres away in space, or
producing artificial earthquakes and tidal waves by tapping the heat at
the earth's centre.

But none of these projects ever comes anywhere near realization, and none
of the three super-states ever gains a significant lead on the others.
What is more remarkable is that all three powers already possess, in the
atomic bomb, a weapon far more powerful than any that their present
researches are likely to discover. Although the Party, according to its
habit, claims the invention for itself, atomic bombs first appeared as
early as the nineteen-forties, and were first used on a large scale about
ten years later. At that time some hundreds of bombs were dropped on
industrial centres, chiefly in European Russia, Western Europe, and
North America. The effect was to convince the ruling groups of all
countries that a few more atomic bombs would mean the end of organized
society, and hence of their own power. Thereafter, although no formal
agreement was ever made or hinted at, no more bombs were dropped. All three
powers merely continue to produce atomic bombs and store them up against
the decisive opportunity which they all believe will come sooner or later.
And meanwhile the art of war has remained almost stationary for thirty or
forty years. Helicopters are more used than they were formerly, bombing
planes have been largely superseded by self-propelled projectiles, and the
fragile movable battleship has given way to the almost unsinkable Floating
Fortress; but otherwise there has been little development. The tank, the
submarine, the torpedo, the machine gun, even the rifle and the hand
grenade are still in use. And in spite of the endless slaughters reported
in the Press and on the telescreens, the desperate battles of earlier wars,
in which hundreds of thousands or even millions of men were often killed
in a few weeks, have never been repeated.

None of the three super-states ever attempts any manoeuvre which involves
the risk of serious defeat. When any large operation is undertaken, it is
usually a surprise attack against an ally. The strategy that all three
powers are following, or pretend to themselves that they are following,
is the same. The plan is, by a combination of fighting, bargaining, and
well-timed strokes of treachery, to acquire a ring of bases completely
encircling one or other of the rival states, and then to sign a pact of
friendship with that rival and remain on peaceful terms for so many years
as to lull suspicion to sleep. During this time rockets loaded with atomic
bombs can be assembled at all the strategic spots; finally they will all
be fired simultaneously, with effects so devastating as to make retaliation
impossible. It will then be time to sign a pact of friendship with the
remaining world-power, in preparation for another attack. This scheme, it
is hardly necessary to say, is a mere daydream, impossible of realization.
Moreover, no fighting ever occurs except in the disputed areas round the
Equator and the Pole: no invasion of enemy territory is ever undertaken.
This explains the fact that in some places the frontiers between the
super-states are arbitrary. Eurasia, for example, could easily conquer the
British Isles, which are geographically part of Europe, or on the other
hand it would be possible for Oceania to push its frontiers to the Rhine
or even to the Vistula. But this would violate the principle, followed on
all sides though never formulated, of cultural integrity. If Oceania were
to conquer the areas that used once to be known as France and Germany, it
would be necessary either to exterminate the inhabitants, a task of great
physical difficulty, or to assimilate a population of about a hundred
million people, who, so far as technical development goes, are roughly on
the Oceanic level. The problem is the same for all three super-states.
It is absolutely necessary to their structure that there should be no
contact with foreigners, except, to a limited extent, with war prisoners
and coloured slaves. Even the official ally of the moment is always
regarded with the darkest suspicion. War prisoners apart, the average
citizen of Oceania never sets eyes on a citizen of either Eurasia or
Eastasia, and he is forbidden the knowledge of foreign languages. If he
were allowed contact with foreigners he would discover that they are
creatures similar to himself and that most of what he has been told about
them is lies. The sealed world in which he lives would be broken, and the
fear, hatred, and self-righteousness on which his morale depends might
evaporate. It is therefore realized on all sides that however often Persia,
or Egypt, or Java, or Ceylon may change hands, the main frontiers must
never be crossed by anything except bombs.

Under this lies a fact never mentioned aloud, but tacitly understood and
acted upon: namely, that the conditions of life in all three super-states
are very much the same. In Oceania the prevailing philosophy is called
Ingsoc, in Eurasia it is called Neo-Bolshevism, and in Eastasia it is
called by a Chinese name usually translated as Death-Worship, but perhaps
better rendered as Obliteration of the Self. The citizen of Oceania is not
allowed to know anything of the tenets of the other two philosophies, but
he is taught to execrate them as barbarous outrages upon morality and
common sense. Actually the three philosophies are barely distinguishable,
and the social systems which they support are not distinguishable at all.
Everywhere there is the same pyramidal structure, the same worship of
semi-divine leader, the same economy existing by and for continuous
warfare. It follows that the three super-states not only cannot conquer
one another, but would gain no advantage by doing so. On the contrary,
so long as they remain in conflict they prop one another up, like three
sheaves of corn. And, as usual, the ruling groups of all three powers are
simultaneously aware and unaware of what they are doing. Their lives are
dedicated to world conquest, but they also know that it is necessary that
the war should continue everlastingly and without victory. Meanwhile the
fact that there IS no danger of conquest makes possible the denial of
reality which is the special feature of Ingsoc and its rival systems of
thought. Here it is necessary to repeat what has been said earlier, that
by becoming continuous war has fundamentally changed its character.

In past ages, a war, almost by definition, was something that sooner or
later came to an end, usually in unmistakable victory or defeat. In the
past, also, war was one of the main instruments by which human societies
were kept in touch with physical reality. All rulers in all ages have tried
to impose a false view of the world upon their followers, but they could
not afford to encourage any illusion that tended to impair military
efficiency. So long as defeat meant the loss of independence, or some other
result generally held to be undesirable, the precautions against defeat
had to be serious. Physical facts could not be ignored. In philosophy, or
religion, or ethics, or politics, two and two might make five, but when
one was designing a gun or an aeroplane they had to make four. Inefficient
nations were always conquered sooner or later, and the struggle for
efficiency was inimical to illusions. Moreover, to be efficient it was
necessary to be able to learn from the past, which meant having a fairly
accurate idea of what had happened in the past. Newspapers and history
books were, of course, always coloured and biased, but falsification of
the kind that is practised today would have been impossible. War was a
sure safeguard of sanity, and so far as the ruling classes were concerned
it was probably the most important of all safeguards. While wars could be
won or lost, no ruling class could be completely irresponsible.

But when war becomes literally continuous, it also ceases to be dangerous.
When war is continuous there is no such thing as military necessity.
Technical progress can cease and the most palpable facts can be denied or
disregarded. As we have seen, researches that could be called scientific
are still carried out for the purposes of war, but they are essentially a
kind of daydreaming, and their failure to show results is not important.
Efficiency, even military efficiency, is no longer needed. Nothing is
efficient in Oceania except the Thought Police. Since each of the three
super-states is unconquerable, each is in effect a separate universe within
which almost any perversion of thought can be safely practised. Reality
only exerts its pressure through the needs of everyday life--the need to
eat and drink, to get shelter and clothing, to avoid swallowing poison or
stepping out of top-storey windows, and the like. Between life and death,
and between physical pleasure and physical pain, there is still a
distinction, but that is all. Cut off from contact with the outer world,
and with the past, the citizen of Oceania is like a man in interstellar
space, who has no way of knowing which direction is up and which is down.
The rulers of such a state are absolute, as the Pharaohs or the Caesars
could not be. They are obliged to prevent their followers from starving
to death in numbers large enough to be inconvenient, and they are obliged
to remain at the same low level of military technique as their rivals; but
once that minimum is achieved, they can twist reality into whatever shape
they choose.

The war, therefore, if we judge it by the standards of previous wars, is
merely an imposture. It is like the battles between certain ruminant
animals whose horns are set at such an angle that they are incapable of
hurting one another. But though it is unreal it is not meaningless. It
eats up the surplus of consumable goods, and it helps to preserve the
special mental atmosphere that a hierarchical society needs. War, it will
be seen, is now a purely internal affair. In the past, the ruling groups
of all countries, although they might recognize their common interest and
therefore limit the destructiveness of war, did fight against one another,
and the victor always plundered the vanquished. In our own day they are
not fighting against one another at all. The war is waged by each ruling
group against its own subjects, and the object of the war is not to make
or prevent conquests of territory, but to keep the structure of society
intact. The very word 'war', therefore, has become misleading. It would
probably be accurate to say that by becoming continuous war has ceased to
exist. The peculiar pressure that it exerted on human beings between the
Neolithic Age and the early twentieth century has disappeared and been
replaced by something quite different. The effect would be much the same
if the three super-states, instead of fighting one another, should agree
to live in perpetual peace, each inviolate within its own boundaries. For
in that case each would still be a self-contained universe, freed for ever
from the sobering influence of external danger. A peace that was truly
permanent would be the same as a permanent war. This--although the vast
majority of Party members understand it only in a shallower sense--is the
inner meaning of the Party slogan: WAR IS PEACE.


Winston stopped reading for a moment. Somewhere in remote distance a
rocket bomb thundered. The blissful feeling of being alone with the
forbidden book, in a room with no telescreen, had not worn off. Solitude
and safety were physical sensations, mixed up somehow with the tiredness
of his body, the softness of the chair, the touch of the faint breeze from
the window that played upon his cheek. The book fascinated him, or more
exactly it reassured him. In a sense it told him nothing that was new, but
that was part of the attraction. It said what he would have said, if it
had been possible for him to set his scattered thoughts in order. It was
the product of a mind similar to his own, but enormously more powerful,
more systematic, less fear-ridden. The best books, he perceived, are those
that tell you what you know already. He had just turned back to Chapter I
when he heard Julia's footstep on the stair and started out of his chair
to meet her. She dumped her brown tool-bag on the floor and flung herself
into his arms. It was more than a week since they had seen one another.

'I've got THE BOOK,' he said as they disentangled themselves.

'Oh, you've got it? Good,' she said without much interest, and almost
immediately knelt down beside the oil stove to make the coffee.

They did not return to the subject until they had been in bed for half an
hour. The evening was just cool enough to make it worth while to pull up
the counterpane. From below came the familiar sound of singing and the
scrape of boots on the flagstones. The brawny red-armed woman whom Winston
had seen there on his first visit was almost a fixture in the yard. There
seemed to be no hour of daylight when she was not marching to and fro
between the washtub and the line, alternately gagging herself with clothes
pegs and breaking forth into lusty song. Julia had settled down on her
side and seemed to be already on the point of falling asleep. He reached
out for the book, which was lying on the floor, and sat up against the
bedhead.

'We must read it,' he said. 'You too. All members of the Brotherhood have
to read it.'

'You read it,' she said with her eyes shut. 'Read it aloud. That's the
best way. Then you can explain it to me as you go.'

The clock's hands said six, meaning eighteen. They had three or four hours
ahead of them. He propped the book against his knees and began reading:


Chapter I
Ignorance is Strength

Throughout recorded time, and probably since the end of the Neolithic Age,
there have been three kinds of people in the world, the High, the Middle,
and the Low. They have been subdivided in many ways, they have borne
countless different names, and their relative numbers, as well as their
attitude towards one another, have varied from age to age: but the
essential structure of society has never altered. Even after enormous
upheavals and seemingly irrevocable changes, the same pattern has always
reasserted itself, just as a gyroscope will always return to equilibrium,
however far it is pushed one way or the other


'Julia, are you awake?' said Winston.

'Yes, my love, I'm listening. Go on. It's marvellous.'

He continued reading:


The aims of these three groups are entirely irreconcilable. The aim of
the High is to remain where they are. The aim of the Middle is to change
places with the High. The aim of the Low, when they have an aim--for it
is an abiding characteristic of the Low that they are too much crushed
by drudgery to be more than intermittently conscious of anything outside
their daily lives--is to abolish all distinctions and create a society in
which all men shall be equal. Thus throughout history a struggle which is
the same in its main outlines recurs over and over again. For long periods
the High seem to be securely in power, but sooner or later there always
comes a moment when they lose either their belief in themselves or their
capacity to govern efficiently, or both. They are then overthrown by the
Middle, who enlist the Low on their side by pretending to them that they
are fighting for liberty and justice. As soon as they have reached their
objective, the Middle thrust the Low back into their old position of
servitude, and themselves become the High. Presently a new Middle group
splits off from one of the other groups, or from both of them, and the
struggle begins over again. Of the three groups, only the Low are never
even temporarily successful in achieving their aims. It would be an
exaggeration to say that throughout history there has been no progress of
a material kind. Even today, in a period of decline, the average human
being is physically better off than he was a few centuries ago. But no
advance in wealth, no softening of manners, no reform or revolution has
ever brought human equality a millimetre nearer. From the point of view of
the Low, no historic change has ever meant much more than a change in the
name of their masters.

By the late nineteenth century the recurrence of this pattern had become
obvious to many observers. There then rose schools of thinkers who
interpreted history as a cyclical process and claimed to show that
inequality was the unalterable law of human life. This doctrine, of course,
had always had its adherents, but in the manner in which it was now put
forward there was a significant change. In the past the need for a
hierarchical form of society had been the doctrine specifically of the
High. It had been preached by kings and aristocrats and by the priests,
lawyers, and the like who were parasitical upon them, and it had generally
been softened by promises of compensation in an imaginary world beyond the
grave. The Middle, so long as it was struggling for power, had always made
use of such terms as freedom, justice, and fraternity. Now, however, the
concept of human brotherhood began to be assailed by people who were not
yet in positions of command, but merely hoped to be so before long. In the
past the Middle had made revolutions under the banner of equality, and
then had established a fresh tyranny as soon as the old one was overthrown.
The new Middle groups in effect proclaimed their tyranny beforehand.
Socialism, a theory which appeared in the early nineteenth century and was
the last link in a chain of thought stretching back to the slave rebellions
of antiquity, was still deeply infected by the Utopianism of past ages.
But in each variant of Socialism that appeared from about 1900 onwards the
aim of establishing liberty and equality was more and more openly
abandoned. The new movements which appeared in the middle years of the
century, Ingsoc in Oceania, Neo-Bolshevism in Eurasia, Death-Worship, as
it is commonly called, in Eastasia, had the conscious aim of perpetuating
UNfreedom and INequality. These new movements, of course, grew out of the
old ones and tended to keep their names and pay lip-service to their
ideology. But the purpose of all of them was to arrest progress and freeze
history at a chosen moment. The familiar pendulum swing was to happen once
more, and then stop. As usual, the High were to be turned out by the
Middle, who would then become the High; but this time, by conscious
strategy, the High would be able to maintain their position permanently.

The new doctrines arose partly because of the accumulation of historical
knowledge, and the growth of the historical sense, which had hardly existed
before the nineteenth century. The cyclical movement of history was now
intelligible, or appeared to be so; and if it was intelligible, then it
was alterable. But the principal, underlying cause was that, as early
as the beginning of the twentieth century, human equality had become
technically possible. It was still true that men were not equal in their
native talents and that functions had to be specialized in ways that
favoured some individuals against others; but there was no longer any real
need for class distinctions or for large differences of wealth. In earlier
ages, class distinctions had been not only inevitable but desirable.
Inequality was the price of civilization. With the development of machine
production, however, the case was altered. Even if it was still necessary
for human beings to do different kinds of work, it was no longer necessary
for them to live at different social or economic levels. Therefore, from
the point of view of the new groups who were on the point of seizing power,
human equality was no longer an ideal to be striven after, but a danger to
be averted. In more primitive ages, when a just and peaceful society was
in fact not possible, it had been fairly easy to believe it. The idea of
an earthly paradise in which men should live together in a state of
brotherhood, without laws and without brute labour, had haunted the human
imagination for thousands of years. And this vision had had a certain hold
even on the groups who actually profited by each historical change. The
heirs of the French, English, and American revolutions had partly believed
in their own phrases about the rights of man, freedom of speech, equality
before the law, and the like, and have even allowed their conduct to be
influenced by them to some extent. But by the fourth decade of the
twentieth century all the main currents of political thought were
authoritarian. The earthly paradise had been discredited at exactly the
moment when it became realizable. Every new political theory, by whatever
name it called itself, led back to hierarchy and regimentation. And in the
general hardening of outlook that set in round about 1930, practices which
had been long abandoned, in some cases for hundreds of years--imprisonment
without trial, the use of war prisoners as slaves, public executions,
torture to extract confessions, the use of hostages, and the deportation
of whole populations--not only became common again, but were tolerated
and even defended by people who considered themselves enlightened and
progressive.

It was only after a decade of national wars, civil wars, revolutions, and
counter-revolutions in all parts of the world that Ingsoc and its rivals
emerged as fully worked-out political theories. But they had been
foreshadowed by the various systems, generally called totalitarian, which
had appeared earlier in the century, and the main outlines of the world
which would emerge from the prevailing chaos had long been obvious. What
kind of people would control this world had been equally obvious. The new
aristocracy was made up for the most part of bureaucrats, scientists,
technicians, trade-union organizers, publicity experts, sociologists,
teachers, journalists, and professional politicians. These people, whose
origins lay in the salaried middle class and the upper grades of the
working class, had been shaped and brought together by the barren world of
monopoly industry and centralized government. As compared with their
opposite numbers in past ages, they were less avaricious, less tempted by
luxury, hungrier for pure power, and, above all, more conscious of what
they were doing and more intent on crushing opposition. This last
difference was cardinal. By comparison with that existing today, all the
tyrannies of the past were half-hearted and inefficient. The ruling groups
were always infected to some extent by liberal ideas, and were content to
leave loose ends everywhere, to regard only the overt act and to be
uninterested in what their subjects were thinking. Even the Catholic Church
of the Middle Ages was tolerant by modern standards. Part of the reason
for this was that in the past no government had the power to keep its
citizens under constant surveillance. The invention of print, however,
made it easier to manipulate public opinion, and the film and the radio
carried the process further. With the development of television, and
the technical advance which made it possible to receive and transmit
simultaneously on the same instrument, private life came to an end. Every
citizen, or at least every citizen important enough to be worth watching,
could be kept for twenty-four hours a day under the eyes of the police
and in the sound of official propaganda, with all other channels of
communication closed. The possibility of enforcing not only complete
obedience to the will of the State, but complete uniformity of opinion
on all subjects, now existed for the first time.

After the revolutionary period of the fifties and sixties, society
regrouped itself, as always, into High, Middle, and Low. But the new High
group, unlike all its forerunners, did not act upon instinct but knew what
was needed to safeguard its position. It had long been realized that the
only secure basis for oligarchy is collectivism. Wealth and privilege
are most easily defended when they are possessed jointly. The so-called
'abolition of private property' which took place in the middle years of
the century meant, in effect, the concentration of property in far fewer
hands than before: but with this difference, that the new owners were a
group instead of a mass of individuals. Individually, no member of the
Party owns anything, except petty personal belongings. Collectively, the
Party owns everything in Oceania, because it controls everything, and
disposes of the products as it thinks fit. In the years following the
Revolution it was able to step into this commanding position almost
unopposed, because the whole process was represented as an act of
collectivization. It had always been assumed that if the capitalist class
were expropriated, Socialism must follow: and unquestionably the
capitalists had been expropriated. Factories, mines, land, houses,
transport--everything had been taken away from them: and since these
things were no longer private property, it followed that they must be
public property. Ingsoc, which grew out of the earlier Socialist movement
and inherited its phraseology, has in fact carried out the main item in
the Socialist programme; with the result, foreseen and intended beforehand,
that economic inequality has been made permanent.

But the problems of perpetuating a hierarchical society go deeper than
this. There are only four ways in which a ruling group can fall from power.
Either it is conquered from without, or it governs so inefficiently that
the masses are stirred to revolt, or it allows a strong and discontented
Middle group to come into being, or it loses its own self-confidence and
willingness to govern. These causes do not operate singly, and as a rule
all four of them are present in some degree. A ruling class which could
guard against all of them would remain in power permanently. Ultimately
the determining factor is the mental attitude of the ruling class itself.

After the middle of the present century, the first danger had in reality
disappeared. Each of the three powers which now divide the world is in
fact unconquerable, and could only become conquerable through slow
demographic changes which a government with wide powers can easily avert.
The second danger, also, is only a theoretical one. The masses never
revolt of their own accord, and they never revolt merely because they are
oppressed. Indeed, so long as they are not permitted to have standards of
comparison, they never even become aware that they are oppressed. The
recurrent economic crises of past times were totally unnecessary and are
not now permitted to happen, but other and equally large dislocations
can and do happen without having political results, because there is no
way in which discontent can become articulate. As for the problem of
over-production, which has been latent in our society since the development
of machine technique, it is solved by the device of continuous warfare
(see Chapter III), which is also useful in keying up public morale to the
necessary pitch. From the point of view of our present rulers, therefore,
the only genuine dangers are the splitting-off of a new group of able,
under-employed, power-hungry people, and the growth of liberalism and
scepticism in their own ranks. The problem, that is to say, is educational.
It is a problem of continuously moulding the consciousness both of the
directing group and of the larger executive group that lies immediately
below it. The consciousness of the masses needs only to be influenced in
a negative way.

Given this background, one could infer, if one did not know it already,
the general structure of Oceanic society. At the apex of the pyramid comes
Big Brother. Big Brother is infallible and all-powerful. Every success,
every achievement, every victory, every scientific discovery, all
knowledge, all wisdom, all happiness, all virtue, are held to issue
directly from his leadership and inspiration. Nobody has ever seen Big
Brother. He is a face on the hoardings, a voice on the telescreen. We
may be reasonably sure that he will never die, and there is already
considerable uncertainty as to when he was born. Big Brother is the guise
in which the Party chooses to exhibit itself to the world. His function is
to act as a focusing point for love, fear, and reverence, emotions which
are more easily felt towards an individual than towards an organization.
Below Big Brother comes the Inner Party. Its numbers limited to six
millions, or something less than 2 per cent of the population of Oceania.
Below the Inner Party comes the Outer Party, which, if the Inner Party is
described as the brain of the State, may be justly likened to the hands.
Below that come the dumb masses whom we habitually refer to as 'the
proles', numbering perhaps 85 per cent of the population. In the terms
of our earlier classification, the proles are the Low: for the slave
population of the equatorial lands who pass constantly from conqueror
to conqueror, are not a permanent or necessary part of the structure.

In principle, membership of these three groups is not hereditary. The
child of Inner Party parents is in theory not born into the Inner Party.
Admission to either branch of the Party is by examination, taken at the
age of sixteen. Nor is there any racial discrimination, or any marked
domination of one province by another. Jews, Negroes, South Americans of
pure Indian blood are to be found in the highest ranks of the Party, and
the administrators of any area are always drawn from the inhabitants of
that area. In no part of Oceania do the inhabitants have the feeling that
they are a colonial population ruled from a distant capital. Oceania has
no capital, and its titular head is a person whose whereabouts nobody
knows. Except that English is its chief LINGUA FRANCA and Newspeak its
official language, it is not centralized in any way. Its rulers are not
held together by blood-ties but by adherence to a common doctrine. It is
true that our society is stratified, and very rigidly stratified, on what
at first sight appear to be hereditary lines. There is far less to-and-fro
movement between the different groups than happened under capitalism or
even in the pre-industrial age. Between the two branches of the Party
there is a certain amount of interchange, but only so much as will ensure
that weaklings are excluded from the Inner Party and that ambitious
members of the Outer Party are made harmless by allowing them to rise.
Proletarians, in practice, are not allowed to graduate into the Party. The
most gifted among them, who might possibly become nuclei of discontent,
are simply marked down by the Thought Police and eliminated. But this
state of affairs is not necessarily permanent, nor is it a matter of
principle. The Party is not a class in the old sense of the word. It does
not aim at transmitting power to its own children, as such; and if there
were no other way of keeping the ablest people at the top, it would be
perfectly prepared to recruit an entire new generation from the ranks of
the proletariat. In the crucial years, the fact that the Party was not a
hereditary body did a great deal to neutralize opposition. The older kind
of Socialist, who had been trained to fight against something called
'class privilege' assumed that what is not hereditary cannot be permanent.
He did not see that the continuity of an oligarchy need not be physical,
nor did he pause to reflect that hereditary aristocracies have always been
shortlived, whereas adoptive organizations such as the Catholic Church
have sometimes lasted for hundreds or thousands of years. The essence of
oligarchical rule is not father-to-son inheritance, but the persistence of
a certain world-view and a certain way of life, imposed by the dead upon
the living. A ruling group is a ruling group so long as it can nominate
its successors. The Party is not concerned with perpetuating its blood but
with perpetuating itself. WHO wields power is not important, provided that
the hierarchical structure remains always the same.

All the beliefs, habits, tastes, emotions, mental attitudes that
characterize our time are really designed to sustain the mystique of
the Party and prevent the true nature of present-day society from being
perceived. Physical rebellion, or any preliminary move towards rebellion,
is at present not possible. From the proletarians nothing is to be feared.
Left to themselves, they will continue from generation to generation and
from century to century, working, breeding, and dying, not only without
any impulse to rebel, but without the power of grasping that the world
could be other than it is. They could only become dangerous if the advance
of industrial technique made it necessary to educate them more highly;
but, since military and commercial rivalry are no longer important, the
level of popular education is actually declining. What opinions the masses
hold, or do not hold, is looked on as a matter of indifference. They can
be granted intellectual liberty because they have no intellect. In a Party
member, on the other hand, not even the smallest deviation of opinion on
the most unimportant subject can be tolerated.

A Party member lives from birth to death under the eye of the Thought
Police. Even when he is alone he can never be sure that he is alone.
Wherever he may be, asleep or awake, working or resting, in his bath or in
bed, he can be inspected without warning and without knowing that he is
being inspected. Nothing that he does is indifferent. His friendships, his
relaxations, his behaviour towards his wife and children, the expression
of his face when he is alone, the words he mutters in sleep, even the
characteristic movements of his body, are all jealously scrutinized. Not
only any actual misdemeanour, but any eccentricity, however small, any
change of habits, any nervous mannerism that could possibly be the symptom
of an inner struggle, is certain to be detected. He has no freedom of
choice in any direction whatever. On the other hand his actions are not
regulated by law or by any clearly formulated code of behaviour. In Oceania
there is no law. Thoughts and actions which, when detected, mean certain
death are not formally forbidden, and the endless purges, arrests,
tortures, imprisonments, and vaporizations are not inflicted as punishment
for crimes which have actually been committed, but are merely the
wiping-out of persons who might perhaps commit a crime at some time in the
future. A Party member is required to have not only the right opinions,
but the right instincts. Many of the beliefs and attitudes demanded of him
are never plainly stated, and could not be stated without laying bare the
contradictions inherent in Ingsoc. If he is a person naturally orthodox
(in Newspeak a GOODTHINKER), he will in all circumstances know, without
taking thought, what is the true belief or the desirable emotion. But in
any case an elaborate mental training, undergone in childhood and grouping
itself round the Newspeak words CRIMESTOP, BLACKWHITE, and DOUBLETHINK,
makes him unwilling and unable to think too deeply on any subject whatever.

A Party member is expected to have no private emotions and no respites
from enthusiasm. He is supposed to live in a continuous frenzy of hatred
of foreign enemies and internal traitors, triumph over victories, and
self-abasement before the power and wisdom of the Party. The discontents
produced by his bare, unsatisfying life are deliberately turned outwards
and dissipated by such devices as the Two Minutes Hate, and the
speculations which might possibly induce a sceptical or rebellious attitude
are killed in advance by his early acquired inner discipline. The first
and simplest stage in the discipline, which can be taught even to young
children, is called, in Newspeak, CRIMESTOP. CRIMESTOP means the faculty
of stopping short, as though by instinct, at the threshold of any dangerous
thought. It includes the power of not grasping analogies, of failing to
perceive logical errors, of misunderstanding the simplest arguments if
they are inimical to Ingsoc, and of being bored or repelled by any train
of thought which is capable of leading in a heretical direction. CRIMESTOP,
in short, means protective stupidity. But stupidity is not enough. On the
contrary, orthodoxy in the full sense demands a control over one's own
mental processes as complete as that of a contortionist over his body.
Oceanic society rests ultimately on the belief that Big Brother is
omnipotent and that the Party is infallible. But since in reality Big
Brother is not omnipotent and the party is not infallible, there is need
for an unwearying, moment-to-moment flexibility in the treatment of facts.
The keyword here is BLACKWHITE. Like so many Newspeak words, this word has
two mutually contradictory meanings. Applied to an opponent, it means the
habit of impudently claiming that black is white, in contradiction of the
plain facts. Applied to a Party member, it means a loyal willingness to
say that black is white when Party discipline demands this. But it means
also the ability to BELIEVE that black is white, and more, to KNOW that
black is white, and to forget that one has ever believed the contrary.
This demands a continuous alteration of the past, made possible by the
system of thought which really embraces all the rest, and which is known
in Newspeak as DOUBLETHINK.

The alteration of the past is necessary for two reasons, one of which is
subsidiary and, so to speak, precautionary. The subsidiary reason is that
the Party member, like the proletarian, tolerates present-day conditions
partly because he has no standards of comparison. He must be cut off from
the past, just as he must be cut off from foreign countries, because it is
necessary for him to believe that he is better off than his ancestors and
that the average level of material comfort is constantly rising. But by
far the more important reason for the readjustment of the past is the
need to safeguard the infallibility of the Party. It is not merely that
speeches, statistics, and records of every kind must be constantly brought
up to date in order to show that the predictions of the Party were in
all cases right. It is also that no change in doctrine or in political
alignment can ever be admitted. For to change one's mind, or even one's
policy, is a confession of weakness. If, for example, Eurasia or Eastasia
(whichever it may be) is the enemy today, then that country must always
have been the enemy. And if the facts say otherwise then the facts must
be altered. Thus history is continuously rewritten. This day-to-day
falsification of the past, carried out by the Ministry of Truth, is as
necessary to the stability of the regime as the work of repression and
espionage carried out by the Ministry of Love.

The mutability of the past is the central tenet of Ingsoc. Past events,
it is argued, have no objective existence, but survive only in written
records and in human memories. The past is whatever the records and the
memories agree upon. And since the Party is in full control of all records
and in equally full control of the minds of its members, it follows that
the past is whatever the Party chooses to make it. It also follows that
though the past is alterable, it never has been altered in any specific
instance. For when it has been recreated in whatever shape is needed at
the moment, then this new version IS the past, and no different past can
ever have existed. This holds good even when, as often happens, the same
event has to be altered out of recognition several times in the course of
a year. At all times the Party is in possession of absolute truth, and
clearly the absolute can never have been different from what it is now.
It will be seen that the control of the past depends above all on the
training of memory. To make sure that all written records agree with
the orthodoxy of the moment is merely a mechanical act. But it is also
necessary to REMEMBER that events happened in the desired manner. And if
it is necessary to rearrange one's memories or to tamper with written
records, then it is necessary to FORGET that one has done so. The trick of
doing this can be learned like any other mental technique. It is learned
by the majority of Party members, and certainly by all who are intelligent
as well as orthodox. In Oldspeak it is called, quite frankly, 'reality
control'. In Newspeak it is called DOUBLETHINK, though DOUBLETHINK
comprises much else as well.

DOUBLETHINK means the power of holding two contradictory beliefs in one's
mind simultaneously, and accepting both of them. The Party intellectual
knows in which direction his memories must be altered; he therefore knows
that he is playing tricks with reality; but by the exercise of DOUBLETHINK
he also satisfies himself that reality is not violated. The process has to
be conscious, or it would not be carried out with sufficient precision,
but it also has to be unconscious, or it would bring with it a feeling of
falsity and hence of guilt. DOUBLETHINK lies at the very heart of Ingsoc,
since the essential act of the Party is to use conscious deception while
retaining the firmness of purpose that goes with complete honesty. To tell
deliberate lies while genuinely believing in them, to forget any fact that
has become inconvenient, and then, when it becomes necessary again, to
draw it back from oblivion for just so long as it is needed, to deny the
existence of objective reality and all the while to take account of the
reality which one denies--all this is indispensably necessary. Even in
using the word DOUBLETHINK it is necessary to exercise DOUBLETHINK. For
by using the word one admits that one is tampering with reality; by a
fresh act of DOUBLETHINK one erases this knowledge; and so on indefinitely,
with the lie always one leap ahead of the truth. Ultimately it is by means
of DOUBLETHINK that the Party has been able--and may, for all we know,
continue to be able for thousands of years--to arrest the course of
history.

All past oligarchies have fallen from power either because they ossified
or because they grew soft. Either they became stupid and arrogant, failed
to adjust themselves to changing circumstances, and were overthrown; or
they became liberal and cowardly, made concessions when they should have
used force, and once again were overthrown. They fell, that is to say,
either through consciousness or through unconsciousness. It is the
achievement of the Party to have produced a system of thought in which
both conditions can exist simultaneously. And upon no other intellectual
basis could the dominion of the Party be made permanent. If one is to rule,
and to continue ruling, one must be able to dislocate the sense of reality.
For the secret of rulership is to combine a belief in one's own
infallibility with the Power to learn from past mistakes.

It need hardly be said that the subtlest practitioners of DOUBLETHINK are
those who invented DOUBLETHINK and know that it is a vast system of mental
cheating. In our society, those who have the best knowledge of what is
happening are also those who are furthest from seeing the world as it is.
In general, the greater the understanding, the greater the delusion; the
more intelligent, the less sane. One clear illustration of this is the
fact that war hysteria increases in intensity as one rises in the social
scale. Those whose attitude towards the war is most nearly rational are
the subject peoples of the disputed territories. To these people the war
is simply a continuous calamity which sweeps to and fro over their bodies
like a tidal wave. Which side is winning is a matter of complete
indifference to them. They are aware that a change of overlordship means
simply that they will be doing the same work as before for new masters who
treat them in the same manner as the old ones. The slightly more favoured
workers whom we call 'the proles' are only intermittently conscious of the
war. When it is necessary they can be prodded into frenzies of fear and
hatred, but when left to themselves they are capable of forgetting for
long periods that the war is happening. It is in the ranks of the Party,
and above all of the Inner Party, that the true war enthusiasm is found.
World-conquest is believed in most firmly by those who know it to be
impossible. This peculiar linking-together of opposites--knowledge with
ignorance, cynicism with fanaticism--is one of the chief distinguishing
marks of Oceanic society. The official ideology abounds with contradictions
even when there is no practical reason for them. Thus, the Party rejects
and vilifies every principle for which the Socialist movement originally
stood, and it chooses to do this in the name of Socialism. It preaches
a contempt for the working class unexampled for centuries past, and it
dresses its members in a uniform which was at one time peculiar to manual
workers and was adopted for that reason. It systematically undermines the
solidarity of the family, and it calls its leader by a name which is a
direct appeal to the sentiment of family loyalty. Even the names of the
four Ministries by which we are governed exhibit a sort of impudence in
their deliberate reversal of the facts. The Ministry of Peace concerns
itself with war, the Ministry of Truth with lies, the Ministry of Love
with torture and the Ministry of Plenty with starvation. These
contradictions are not accidental, nor do they result from ordinary
hypocrisy; they are deliberate exercises in DOUBLETHINK. For it is only
by reconciling contradictions that power can be retained indefinitely.
In no other way could the ancient cycle be broken. If human equality is
to be for ever averted--if the High, as we have called them, are to keep
their places permanently--then the prevailing mental condition must be
controlled insanity.

But there is one question which until this moment we have almost ignored.
It is; WHY should human equality be averted? Supposing that the mechanics
of the process have been rightly described, what is the motive for this
huge, accurately planned effort to freeze history at a particular moment
of time?

Here we reach the central secret. As we have seen. the mystique of the
Party, and above all of the Inner Party, depends upon DOUBLETHINK But
deeper than this lies the original motive, the never-questioned instinct
that first led to the seizure of power and brought DOUBLETHINK, the
Thought Police, continuous warfare, and all the other necessary
paraphernalia into existence afterwards. This motive really consists...


Winston became aware of silence, as one becomes aware of a new sound. It
seemed to him that Julia had been very still for some time past. She was
lying on her side, naked from the waist upwards, with her cheek pillowed
on her hand and one dark lock tumbling across her eyes. Her breast rose
and fell slowly and regularly.

'Julia.'

No answer.

'Julia, are you awake?'

No answer. She was asleep. He shut the book, put it carefully on the floor,
lay down, and pulled the coverlet over both of them.

He had still, he reflected, not learned the ultimate secret. He understood
HOW; he did not understand WHY. Chapter I, like Chapter III, had not
actually told him anything that he did not know, it had merely systematized
the knowledge that he possessed already. But after reading it he knew
better than before that he was not mad. Being in a minority, even a
minority of one, did not make you mad. There was truth and there was
untruth, and if you clung to the truth even against the whole world, you
were not mad. A yellow beam from the sinking sun slanted in through the
window and fell across the pillow. He shut his eyes. The sun on his face
and the girl's smooth body touching his own gave him a strong, sleepy,
confident feeling. He was safe, everything was all right. He fell asleep
murmuring 'Sanity is not statistical,' with the feeling that this remark
contained in it a profound wisdom.

*****

When he woke it was with the sensation of having slept for a long time,
but a glance at the old-fashioned clock told him that it was only
twenty-thirty. He lay dozing for a while; then the usual deep-lunged
singing struck up from the yard below:


  'It was only an 'opeless fancy,
  It passed like an Ipril dye,
  But a look an' a word an' the dreams they stirred
  They 'ave stolen my 'eart awye!'


The drivelling song seemed to have kept its popularity. You still heard it
all over the place. It had outlived the Hate Song. Julia woke at the
sound, stretched herself luxuriously, and got out of bed.

'I'm hungry,' she said. 'Let's make some more coffee. Damn! The stove's
gone out and the water's cold.' She picked the stove up and shook it.
'There's no oil in it.'

'We can get some from old Charrington, I expect.'

'The funny thing is I made sure it was full. I'm going to put my clothes
on,' she added. 'It seems to have got colder.'

Winston also got up and dressed himself. The indefatigable voice sang on:


  'They sye that time 'eals all things,
  They sye you can always forget;
  But the smiles an' the tears acrorss the years
  They twist my 'eart-strings yet!'


As he fastened the belt of his overalls he strolled across to the window.
The sun must have gone down behind the houses; it was not shining into the
yard any longer. The flagstones were wet as though they had just been
washed, and he had the feeling that the sky had been washed too, so fresh
and pale was the blue between the chimney-pots. Tirelessly the woman
marched to and fro, corking and uncorking herself, singing and falling
silent, and pegging out more diapers, and more and yet more. He wondered
whether she took in washing for a living or was merely the slave of twenty
or thirty grandchildren. Julia had come across to his side; together they
gazed down with a sort of fascination at the sturdy figure below. As he
looked at the woman in her characteristic attitude, her thick arms reaching
up for the line, her powerful mare-like buttocks protruded, it struck him
for the first time that she was beautiful. It had never before occurred to
him that the body of a woman of fifty, blown up to monstrous dimensions by
childbearing, then hardened, roughened by work till it was coarse in the
grain like an over-ripe turnip, could be beautiful. But it was so, and
after all, he thought, why not? The solid, contourless body, like a block
of granite, and the rasping red skin, bore the same relation to the body
of a girl as the rose-hip to the rose. Why should the fruit be held
inferior to the flower?

'She's beautiful,' he murmured.

'She's a metre across the hips, easily,' said Julia.

'That is her style of beauty,' said Winston.

He held Julia's supple waist easily encircled by his arm. From the hip to
the knee her flank was against his. Out of their bodies no child would
ever come. That was the one thing they could never do. Only by word of
mouth, from mind to mind, could they pass on the secret. The woman down
there had no mind, she had only strong arms, a warm heart, and a fertile
belly. He wondered how many children she had given birth to. It might
easily be fifteen. She had had her momentary flowering, a year, perhaps,
of wild-rose beauty and then she had suddenly swollen like a fertilized
fruit and grown hard and red and coarse, and then her life had been
laundering, scrubbing, darning, cooking, sweeping, polishing, mending,
scrubbing, laundering, first for children, then for grandchildren, over
thirty unbroken years. At the end of it she was still singing. The mystical
reverence that he felt for her was somehow mixed up with the aspect of
the pale, cloudless sky, stretching away behind the chimney-pots into
interminable distance. It was curious to think that the sky was the same
for everybody, in Eurasia or Eastasia as well as here. And the people
under the sky were also very much the same--everywhere, all over the world,
hundreds of thousands of millions of people just like this, people ignorant
of one another's existence, held apart by walls of hatred and lies, and
yet almost exactly the same--people who had never learned to think but who
were storing up in their hearts and bellies and muscles the power that
would one day overturn the world. If there was hope, it lay in the proles!
Without having read to the end of THE BOOK, he knew that that must be
Goldstein's final message. The future belonged to the proles. And could he
be sure that when their time came the world they constructed would not be
just as alien to him, Winston Smith, as the world of the Party? Yes,
because at the least it would be a world of sanity. Where there is
equality there can be sanity. Sooner or later it would happen, strength
would change into consciousness. The proles were immortal, you could not
doubt it when you looked at that valiant figure in the yard. In the end
their awakening would come. And until that happened, though it might be a
thousand years, they would stay alive against all the odds, like birds,
passing on from body to body the vitality which the Party did not share
and could not kill.

'Do you remember,' he said, 'the thrush that sang to us, that first day,
at the edge of the wood?'

'He wasn't singing to us,' said Julia. 'He was singing to please himself.
Not even that. He was just singing.'

The birds sang, the proles sang. the Party did not sing. All round the
world, in London and New York, in Africa and Brazil, and in the mysterious,
forbidden lands beyond the frontiers, in the streets of Paris and Berlin,
in the villages of the endless Russian plain, in the bazaars of China and
Japan--everywhere stood the same solid unconquerable figure, made monstrous
by work and childbearing, toiling from birth to death and still singing.
Out of those mighty loins a race of conscious beings must one day come.
You were the dead, theirs was the future. But you could share in that
future if you kept alive the mind as they kept alive the body, and passed
on the secret doctrine that two plus two make four.

'We are the dead,' he said.

'We are the dead,' echoed Julia dutifully.

'You are the dead,' said an iron voice behind them.

They sprang apart. Winston's entrails seemed to have turned into ice. He
could see the white all round the irises of Julia's eyes. Her face had
turned a milky yellow. The smear of rouge that was still on each cheekbone
stood out sharply, almost as though unconnected with the skin beneath.

'You are the dead,' repeated the iron voice.

'It was behind the picture,' breathed Julia.

'It was behind the picture,' said the voice. 'Remain exactly where you
are. Make no movement until you are ordered.'

It was starting, it was starting at last! They could do nothing except
stand gazing into one another's eyes. To run for life, to get out of the
house before it was too late--no such thought occurred to them. Unthinkable
to disobey the iron voice from the wall. There was a snap as though a catch
had been turned back, and a crash of breaking glass. The picture had fallen
to the floor uncovering the telescreen behind it.

'Now they can see us,' said Julia.

'Now we can see you,' said the voice. 'Stand out in the middle of the
room. Stand back to back. Clasp your hands behind your heads. Do not touch
one another.'

They were not touching, but it seemed to him that he could feel Julia's
body shaking. Or perhaps it was merely the shaking of his own. He could
just stop his teeth from chattering, but his knees were beyond his control.
There was a sound of trampling boots below, inside the house and outside.
The yard seemed to be full of men. Something was being dragged across the
stones. The woman's singing had stopped abruptly. There was a long, rolling
clang, as though the washtub had been flung across the yard, and then a
confusion of angry shouts which ended in a yell of pain.

'The house is surrounded,' said Winston.

'The house is surrounded,' said the voice.

He heard Julia snap her teeth together. 'I suppose we may as well say
good-bye,' she said.

'You may as well say good-bye,' said the voice. And then another quite
different voice, a thin, cultivated voice which Winston had the impression
of having heard before, struck in; 'And by the way, while we are on the
subject, "Here comes a candle to light you to bed, here comes a chopper to
chop off your head"!'

Something crashed on to the bed behind Winston's back. The head of a ladder
had been thrust through the window and had burst in the frame. Someone was
climbing through the window. There was a stampede of boots up the stairs.
The room was full of solid men in black uniforms, with iron-shod boots on
their feet and truncheons in their hands.

Winston was not trembling any longer. Even his eyes he barely moved. One
thing alone mattered; to keep still, to keep still and not give them an
excuse to hit you! A man with a smooth prize-fighter's jowl in which the
mouth was only a slit paused opposite him balancing his truncheon
meditatively between thumb and forefinger. Winston met his eyes. The
feeling of nakedness, with one's hands behind one's head and one's face
and body all exposed, was almost unbearable. The man protruded the tip
of a white tongue, licked the place where his lips should have been, and
then passed on. There was another crash. Someone had picked up the glass
paperweight from the table and smashed it to pieces on the hearth-stone.

The fragment of coral, a tiny crinkle of pink like a sugar rosebud from
a cake, rolled across the mat. How small, thought Winston, how small it
always was! There was a gasp and a thump behind him, and he received a
violent kick on the ankle which nearly flung him off his balance. One of
the men had smashed his fist into Julia's solar plexus, doubling her up
like a pocket ruler. She was thrashing about on the floor, fighting for
breath. Winston dared not turn his head even by a millimetre, but sometimes
her livid, gasping face came within the angle of his vision. Even in his
terror it was as though he could feel the pain in his own body, the deadly
pain which nevertheless was less urgent than the struggle to get back her
breath. He knew what it was like; the terrible, agonizing pain which was
there all the while but could not be suffered yet, because before all else
it was necessary to be able to breathe. Then two of the men hoisted her
up by knees and shoulders, and carried her out of the room like a sack.
Winston had a glimpse of her face, upside down, yellow and contorted, with
the eyes shut, and still with a smear of rouge on either cheek; and that
was the last he saw of her.

He stood dead still. No one had hit him yet. Thoughts which came of their
own accord but seemed totally uninteresting began to flit through his
mind. He wondered whether they had got Mr Charrington. He wondered what
they had done to the woman in the yard. He noticed that he badly wanted
to urinate, and felt a faint surprise, because he had done so only two or
three hours ago. He noticed that the clock on the mantelpiece said nine,
meaning twenty-one. But the light seemed too strong. Would not the light
be fading at twenty-one hours on an August evening? He wondered whether
after all he and Julia had mistaken the time--had slept the clock round
and thought it was twenty-thirty when really it was nought eight-thirty
on the following morning. But he did not pursue the thought further.
It was not interesting.

There was another, lighter step in the passage. Mr Charrington came into
the room. The demeanour of the black-uniformed men suddenly became more
subdued. Something had also changed in Mr Charrington's appearance. His
eye fell on the fragments of the glass paperweight.

'Pick up those pieces,' he said sharply.

A man stooped to obey. The cockney accent had disappeared; Winston suddenly
realized whose voice it was that he had heard a few moments ago on the
telescreen. Mr Charrington was still wearing his old velvet jacket, but
his hair, which had been almost white, had turned black. Also he was not
wearing his spectacles. He gave Winston a single sharp glance, as though
verifying his identity, and then paid no more attention to him. He was
still recognizable, but he was not the same person any longer. His body
had straightened, and seemed to have grown bigger. His face had undergone
only tiny changes that had nevertheless worked a complete transformation.
The black eyebrows were less bushy, the wrinkles were gone, the whole
lines of the face seemed to have altered; even the nose seemed shorter. It
was the alert, cold face of a man of about five-and-thirty. It occurred to
Winston that for the first time in his life he was looking, with knowledge,
at a member of the Thought Police.





PART THREE




Chapter 1



He did not know where he was. Presumably he was in the Ministry of Love,
but there was no way of making certain. He was in a high-ceilinged
windowless cell with walls of glittering white porcelain. Concealed lamps
flooded it with cold light, and there was a low, steady humming sound
which he supposed had something to do with the air supply. A bench, or
shelf, just wide enough to sit on ran round the wall, broken only by the
door and, at the end opposite the door, a lavatory pan with no wooden
seat. There were four telescreens, one in each wall.

There was a dull aching in his belly. It had been there ever since they
had bundled him into the closed van and driven him away. But he was also
hungry, with a gnawing, unwholesome kind of hunger. It might be twenty-four
hours since he had eaten, it might be thirty-six. He still did not know,
probably never would know, whether it had been morning or evening when
they arrested him. Since he was arrested he had not been fed.

He sat as still as he could on the narrow bench, with his hands crossed
on his knee. He had already learned to sit still. If you made unexpected
movements they yelled at you from the telescreen. But the craving for food
was growing upon him. What he longed for above all was a piece of bread.
He had an idea that there were a few breadcrumbs in the pocket of his
overalls. It was even possible--he thought this because from time to time
something seemed to tickle his leg--that there might be a sizeable bit of
crust there. In the end the temptation to find out overcame his fear; he
slipped a hand into his pocket.

'Smith!' yelled a voice from the telescreen. '6079 Smith W.! Hands out of
pockets in the cells!'

He sat still again, his hands crossed on his knee. Before being brought
here he had been taken to another place which must have been an ordinary
prison or a temporary lock-up used by the patrols. He did not know how
long he had been there; some hours at any rate; with no clocks and no
daylight it was hard to gauge the time. It was a noisy, evil-smelling
place. They had put him into a cell similar to the one he was now in,
but filthily dirty and at all times crowded by ten or fifteen people. The
majority of them were common criminals, but there were a few political
prisoners among them. He had sat silent against the wall, jostled by dirty
bodies, too preoccupied by fear and the pain in his belly to take much
interest in his surroundings, but still noticing the astonishing difference
in demeanour between the Party prisoners and the others. The Party
prisoners were always silent and terrified, but the ordinary criminals
seemed to care nothing for anybody. They yelled insults at the guards,
fought back fiercely when their belongings were impounded, wrote obscene
words on the floor, ate smuggled food which they produced from mysterious
hiding-places in their clothes, and even shouted down the telescreen when
it tried to restore order. On the other hand some of them seemed to be on
good terms with the guards, called them by nicknames, and tried to wheedle
cigarettes through the spyhole in the door. The guards, too, treated the
common criminals with a certain forbearance, even when they had to handle
them roughly. There was much talk about the forced-labour camps to which
most of the prisoners expected to be sent. It was 'all right' in the
camps, he gathered, so long as you had good contacts and knew the ropes.
There was bribery, favouritism, and racketeering of every kind, there was
homosexuality and prostitution, there was even illicit alcohol distilled
from potatoes. The positions of trust were given only to the common
criminals, especially the gangsters and the murderers, who formed a sort
of aristocracy. All the dirty jobs were done by the politicals.

There was a constant come-and-go of prisoners of every description:
drug-peddlers, thieves, bandits, black-marketeers, drunks, prostitutes.
Some of the drunks were so violent that the other prisoners had to combine
to suppress them. An enormous wreck of a woman, aged about sixty, with
great tumbling breasts and thick coils of white hair which had come down
in her struggles, was carried in, kicking and shouting, by four guards,
who had hold of her one at each corner. They wrenched off the boots with
which she had been trying to kick them, and dumped her down across
Winston's lap, almost breaking his thigh-bones. The woman hoisted herself
upright and followed them out with a yell of 'F---- bastards!' Then,
noticing that she was sitting on something uneven, she slid off Winston's
knees on to the bench.

'Beg pardon, dearie,' she said. 'I wouldn't 'a sat on you, only the buggers
put me there. They dono 'ow to treat a lady, do they?' She paused, patted
her breast, and belched. 'Pardon,' she said, 'I ain't meself, quite.'

She leant forward and vomited copiously on the floor.

'Thass better,' she said, leaning back with closed eyes. 'Never keep it
down, thass what I say. Get it up while it's fresh on your stomach, like.'

She revived, turned to have another look at Winston and seemed immediately
to take a fancy to him. She put a vast arm round his shoulder and drew him
towards her, breathing beer and vomit into his face.

'Wass your name, dearie?' she said.

'Smith,' said Winston.

'Smith?' said the woman. 'Thass funny. My name's Smith too. Why,' she
added sentimentally, 'I might be your mother!'

She might, thought Winston, be his mother. She was about the right age and
physique, and it was probable that people changed somewhat after twenty
years in a forced-labour camp.

No one else had spoken to him. To a surprising extent the ordinary
criminals ignored the Party prisoners. 'The polITS,' they called them,
with a sort of uninterested contempt. The Party prisoners seemed terrified
of speaking to anybody, and above all of speaking to one another. Only
once, when two Party members, both women, were pressed close together on
the bench, he overheard amid the din of voices a few hurriedly-whispered
words; and in particular a reference to something called 'room one-oh-one',
which he did not understand.

It might be two or three hours ago that they had brought him here. The
dull pain in his belly never went away, but sometimes it grew better and
sometimes worse, and his thoughts expanded or contracted accordingly. When
it grew worse he thought only of the pain itself, and of his desire for
food. When it grew better, panic took hold of him. There were moments
when he foresaw the things that would happen to him with such actuality
that his heart galloped and his breath stopped. He felt the smash of
truncheons on his elbows and iron-shod boots on his shins; he saw himself
grovelling on the floor, screaming for mercy through broken teeth. He
hardly thought of Julia. He could not fix his mind on her. He loved her
and would not betray her; but that was only a fact, known as he knew the
rules of arithmetic. He felt no love for her, and he hardly even wondered
what was happening to her. He thought oftener of O'Brien, with a flickering
hope. O'Brien might know that he had been arrested. The Brotherhood, he
had said, never tried to save its members. But there was the razor blade;
they would send the razor blade if they could. There would be perhaps five
seconds before the guard could rush into the cell. The blade would bite
into him with a sort of burning coldness, and even the fingers that held
it would be cut to the bone. Everything came back to his sick body, which
shrank trembling from the smallest pain. He was not certain that he would
use the razor blade even if he got the chance. It was more natural to exist
from moment to moment, accepting another ten minutes' life even with the
certainty that there was torture at the end of it.

Sometimes he tried to calculate the number of porcelain bricks in the
walls of the cell. It should have been easy, but he always lost count at
some point or another. More often he wondered where he was, and what time
of day it was. At one moment he felt certain that it was broad daylight
outside, and at the next equally certain that it was pitch darkness. In
this place, he knew instinctively, the lights would never be turned out.
It was the place with no darkness: he saw now why O'Brien had seemed to
recognize the allusion. In the Ministry of Love there were no windows. His
cell might be at the heart of the building or against its outer wall; it
might be ten floors below ground, or thirty above it. He moved himself
mentally from place to place, and tried to determine by the feeling of his
body whether he was perched high in the air or buried deep underground.

There was a sound of marching boots outside. The steel door opened with
a clang. A young officer, a trim black-uniformed figure who seemed to
glitter all over with polished leather, and whose pale, straight-featured
face was like a wax mask, stepped smartly through the doorway. He motioned
to the guards outside to bring in the prisoner they were leading. The
poet Ampleforth shambled into the cell. The door clanged shut again.

Ampleforth made one or two uncertain movements from side to side, as
though having some idea that there was another door to go out of, and then
began to wander up and down the cell. He had not yet noticed Winston's
presence. His troubled eyes were gazing at the wall about a metre above
the level of Winston's head. He was shoeless; large, dirty toes were
sticking out of the holes in his socks. He was also several days away
from a shave. A scrubby beard covered his face to the cheekbones, giving
him an air of ruffianism that went oddly with his large weak frame and
nervous movements.

Winston roused himself a little from his lethargy. He must speak
to Ampleforth, and risk the yell from the telescreen. It was even
conceivable that Ampleforth was the bearer of the razor blade.

'Ampleforth,' he said.

There was no yell from the telescreen. Ampleforth paused, mildly startled.
His eyes focused themselves slowly on Winston.

'Ah, Smith!' he said. 'You too!'

'What are you in for?'

'To tell you the truth--' He sat down awkwardly on the bench opposite
Winston. 'There is only one offence, is there not?' he said.

'And have you committed it?'

'Apparently I have.'

He put a hand to his forehead and pressed his temples for a moment, as
though trying to remember something.

'These things happen,' he began vaguely. 'I have been able to recall one
instance--a possible instance. It was an indiscretion, undoubtedly. We
were producing a definitive edition of the poems of Kipling. I allowed the
word "God" to remain at the end of a line. I could not help it!' he added
almost indignantly, raising his face to look at Winston. 'It was impossible
to change the line. The rhyme was "rod". Do you realize that there are only
twelve rhymes to "rod" in the entire language? For days I had racked my
brains. There WAS no other rhyme.'

The expression on his face changed. The annoyance passed out of it and for
a moment he looked almost pleased. A sort of intellectual warmth, the joy
of the pedant who has found out some useless fact, shone through the dirt
and scrubby hair.

'Has it ever occurred to you,' he said, 'that the whole history of English
poetry has been determined by the fact that the English language lacks
rhymes?'

No, that particular thought had never occurred to Winston. Nor, in the
circumstances, did it strike him as very important or interesting.

'Do you know what time of day it is?' he said.

Ampleforth looked startled again. 'I had hardly thought about it. They
arrested me--it could be two days ago--perhaps three.' His eyes flitted
round the walls, as though he half expected to find a window somewhere.
'There is no difference between night and day in this place. I do not see
how one can calculate the time.'

They talked desultorily for some minutes, then, without apparent reason,
a yell from the telescreen bade them be silent. Winston sat quietly, his
hands crossed. Ampleforth, too large to sit in comfort on the narrow
bench, fidgeted from side to side, clasping his lank hands first round one
knee, then round the other. The telescreen barked at him to keep still.
Time passed. Twenty minutes, an hour--it was difficult to judge. Once more
there was a sound of boots outside. Winston's entrails contracted. Soon,
very soon, perhaps in five minutes, perhaps now, the tramp of boots would
mean that his own turn had come.

The door opened. The cold-faced young officer stepped into the cell. With
a brief movement of the hand he indicated Ampleforth.

'Room 101,' he said.

Ampleforth marched clumsily out between the guards, his face vaguely
perturbed, but uncomprehending.

What seemed like a long time passed. The pain in Winston's belly had
revived. His mind sagged round and round on the same trick, like a ball
falling again and again into the same series of slots. He had only six
thoughts. The pain in his belly; a piece of bread; the blood and the
screaming; O'Brien; Julia; the razor blade. There was another spasm in his
entrails, the heavy boots were approaching. As the door opened, the wave
of air that it created brought in a powerful smell of cold sweat. Parsons
walked into the cell. He was wearing khaki shorts and a sports-shirt.

This time Winston was startled into self-forgetfulness.

'YOU here!' he said.

Parsons gave Winston a glance in which there was neither interest nor
surprise, but only misery. He began walking jerkily up and down, evidently
unable to keep still. Each time he straightened his pudgy knees it was
apparent that they were trembling. His eyes had a wide-open, staring look,
as though he could not prevent himself from gazing at something in the
middle distance.

'What are you in for?' said Winston.

'Thoughtcrime!' said Parsons, almost blubbering. The tone of his voice
implied at once a complete admission of his guilt and a sort of incredulous
horror that such a word could be applied to himself. He paused opposite
Winston and began eagerly appealing to him: 'You don't think they'll shoot
me, do you, old chap? They don't shoot you if you haven't actually done
anything--only thoughts, which you can't help? I know they give you a fair
hearing. Oh, I trust them for that! They'll know my record, won't they?
YOU know what kind of chap I was. Not a bad chap in my way. Not brainy, of
course, but keen. I tried to do my best for the Party, didn't I? I'll get
off with five years, don't you think? Or even ten years? A chap like me
could make himself pretty useful in a labour-camp. They wouldn't shoot me
for going off the rails just once?'

'Are you guilty?' said Winston.

'Of course I'm guilty!' cried Parsons with a servile glance at the
telescreen. 'You don't think the Party would arrest an innocent man,
do you?' His frog-like face grew calmer, and even took on a slightly
sanctimonious expression. 'Thoughtcrime is a dreadful thing, old man,'
he said sententiously. 'It's insidious. It can get hold of you without
your even knowing it. Do you know how it got hold of me? In my sleep! Yes,
that's a fact. There I was, working away, trying to do my bit--never knew
I had any bad stuff in my mind at all. And then I started talking in my
sleep. Do you know what they heard me saying?'

He sank his voice, like someone who is obliged for medical reasons to
utter an obscenity.

'"Down with Big Brother!" Yes, I said that! Said it over and over again,
it seems. Between you and me, old man, I'm glad they got me before it went
any further. Do you know what I'm going to say to them when I go up before
the tribunal? "Thank you," I'm going to say, "thank you for saving me
before it was too late."'

'Who denounced you?' said Winston.

'It was my little daughter,' said Parsons with a sort of doleful pride.
'She listened at the keyhole. Heard what I was saying, and nipped off to
the patrols the very next day. Pretty smart for a nipper of seven, eh?
I don't bear her any grudge for it. In fact I'm proud of her. It shows I
brought her up in the right spirit, anyway.'

He made a few more jerky movements up and down, several times, casting a
longing glance at the lavatory pan. Then he suddenly ripped down his
shorts.

'Excuse me, old man,' he said. 'I can't help it. It's the waiting.'

He plumped his large posterior into the lavatory pan. Winston covered his
face with his hands.

'Smith!' yelled the voice from the telescreen. '6079 Smith W.! Uncover your
face. No faces covered in the cells.'

Winston uncovered his face. Parsons used the lavatory, loudly and
abundantly. It then turned out that the plug was defective and the cell
stank abominably for hours afterwards.

Parsons was removed. More prisoners came and went, mysteriously. One, a
woman, was consigned to 'Room 101', and, Winston noticed, seemed to shrivel
and turn a different colour when she heard the words. A time came when, if
it had been morning when he was brought here, it would be afternoon; or if
it had been afternoon, then it would be midnight. There were six prisoners
in the cell, men and women. All sat very still. Opposite Winston there sat
a man with a chinless, toothy face exactly like that of some large,
harmless rodent. His fat, mottled cheeks were so pouched at the bottom
that it was difficult not to believe that he had little stores of food
tucked away there. His pale-grey eyes flitted timorously from face to face
and turned quickly away again when he caught anyone's eye.

The door opened, and another prisoner was brought in whose appearance sent
a momentary chill through Winston. He was a commonplace, mean-looking man
who might have been an engineer or technician of some kind. But what was
startling was the emaciation of his face. It was like a skull. Because of
its thinness the mouth and eyes looked disproportionately large, and the
eyes seemed filled with a murderous, unappeasable hatred of somebody or
something.

The man sat down on the bench at a little distance from Winston. Winston
did not look at him again, but the tormented, skull-like face was as
vivid in his mind as though it had been straight in front of his eyes.
Suddenly he realized what was the matter. The man was dying of starvation.
The same thought seemed to occur almost simultaneously to everyone in the
cell. There was a very faint stirring all the way round the bench. The
eyes of the chinless man kept flitting towards the skull-faced man, then
turning guiltily away, then being dragged back by an irresistible
attraction. Presently he began to fidget on his seat. At last he stood up,
waddled clumsily across the cell, dug down into the pocket of his overalls,
and, with an abashed air, held out a grimy piece of bread to the
skull-faced man.

There was a furious, deafening roar from the telescreen. The chinless man
jumped in his tracks. The skull-faced man had quickly thrust his hands
behind his back, as though demonstrating to all the world that he refused
the gift.

'Bumstead!' roared the voice. '2713 Bumstead J.! Let fall that piece of
bread!'

The chinless man dropped the piece of bread on the floor.

'Remain standing where you are,' said the voice. 'Face the door. Make no
movement.'

The chinless man obeyed. His large pouchy cheeks were quivering
uncontrollably. The door clanged open. As the young officer entered and
stepped aside, there emerged from behind him a short stumpy guard with
enormous arms and shoulders. He took his stand opposite the chinless man,
and then, at a signal from the officer, let free a frightful blow, with
all the weight of his body behind it, full in the chinless man's mouth.
The force of it seemed almost to knock him clear of the floor. His body
was flung across the cell and fetched up against the base of the lavatory
seat. For a moment he lay as though stunned, with dark blood oozing from
his mouth and nose. A very faint whimpering or squeaking, which seemed
unconscious, came out of him. Then he rolled over and raised himself
unsteadily on hands and knees. Amid a stream of blood and saliva, the two
halves of a dental plate fell out of his mouth.

The prisoners sat very still, their hands crossed on their knees. The
chinless man climbed back into his place. Down one side of his face the
flesh was darkening. His mouth had swollen into a shapeless cherry-coloured
mass with a black hole in the middle of it.

From time to time a little blood dripped on to the breast of his overalls.
His grey eyes still flitted from face to face, more guiltily than ever,
as though he were trying to discover how much the others despised him for
his humiliation.

The door opened. With a small gesture the officer indicated the
skull-faced man.

'Room 101,' he said.

There was a gasp and a flurry at Winston's side. The man had actually
flung himself on his knees on the floor, with his hand clasped together.

'Comrade! Officer!' he cried. 'You don't have to take me to that place!
Haven't I told you everything already? What else is it you want to know?
There's nothing I wouldn't confess, nothing! Just tell me what it is and
I'll confess straight off. Write it down and I'll sign it--anything!
Not room 101!'

'Room 101,' said the officer.

The man's face, already very pale, turned a colour Winston would not have
believed possible. It was definitely, unmistakably, a shade of green.

'Do anything to me!' he yelled. 'You've been starving me for weeks. Finish
it off and let me die. Shoot me. Hang me. Sentence me to twenty-five
years. Is there somebody else you want me to give away? Just say who it is
and I'll tell you anything you want. I don't care who it is or what you do
to them. I've got a wife and three children. The biggest of them isn't six
years old. You can take the whole lot of them and cut their throats in
front of my eyes, and I'll stand by and watch it. But not Room 101!'

'Room 101,' said the officer.

The man looked frantically round at the other prisoners, as though with
some idea that he could put another victim in his own place. His eyes
settled on the smashed face of the chinless man. He flung out a lean arm.

'That's the one you ought to be taking, not me!' he shouted. 'You didn't
hear what he was saying after they bashed his face. Give me a chance and
I'll tell you every word of it. HE'S the one that's against the Party, not
me.' The guards stepped forward. The man's voice rose to a shriek. 'You
didn't hear him!' he repeated. 'Something went wrong with the telescreen.
HE'S the one you want. Take him, not me!'

The two sturdy guards had stooped to take him by the arms. But just at
this moment he flung himself across the floor of the cell and grabbed one
of the iron legs that supported the bench. He had set up a wordless
howling, like an animal. The guards took hold of him to wrench him loose,
but he clung on with astonishing strength. For perhaps twenty seconds
they were hauling at him. The prisoners sat quiet, their hands crossed on
their knees, looking straight in front of them. The howling stopped; the
man had no breath left for anything except hanging on. Then there was a
different kind of cry. A kick from a guard's boot had broken the fingers
of one of his hands. They dragged him to his feet.

'Room 101,' said the officer.

The man was led out, walking unsteadily, with head sunken, nursing his
crushed hand, all the fight had gone out of him.

A long time passed. If it had been midnight when the skull-faced man was
taken away, it was morning: if morning, it was afternoon. Winston was
alone, and had been alone for hours. The pain of sitting on the narrow
bench was such that often he got up and walked about, unreproved by the
telescreen. The piece of bread still lay where the chinless man had
dropped it. At the beginning it needed a hard effort not to look at it,
but presently hunger gave way to thirst. His mouth was sticky and
evil-tasting. The humming sound and the unvarying white light induced a
sort of faintness, an empty feeling inside his head. He would get up
because the ache in his bones was no longer bearable, and then would sit
down again almost at once because he was too dizzy to make sure of
staying on his feet. Whenever his physical sensations were a little under
control the terror returned. Sometimes with a fading hope he thought of
O'Brien and the razor blade. It was thinkable that the razor blade might
arrive concealed in his food, if he were ever fed. More dimly he thought
of Julia. Somewhere or other she was suffering perhaps far worse than he.
She might be screaming with pain at this moment. He thought: 'If I could
save Julia by doubling my own pain, would I do it? Yes, I would.' But that
was merely an intellectual decision, taken because he knew that he ought
to take it. He did not feel it. In this place you could not feel anything,
except pain and foreknowledge of pain. Besides, was it possible, when you
were actually suffering it, to wish for any reason that your own pain
should increase? But that question was not answerable yet.

The boots were approaching again. The door opened. O'Brien came in.

Winston started to his feet. The shock of the sight had driven all
caution out of him. For the first time in many years he forgot the
presence of the telescreen.

'They've got you too!' he cried.

'They got me a long time ago,' said O'Brien with a mild, almost regretful
irony. He stepped aside. From behind him there emerged a broad-chested
guard with a long black truncheon in his hand.

'You know this, Winston,' said O'Brien. 'Don't deceive yourself. You did
know it--you have always known it.'

Yes, he saw now, he had always known it. But there was no time to think of
that. All he had eyes for was the truncheon in the guard's hand. It might
fall anywhere; on the crown, on the tip of the ear, on the upper arm, on
the elbow----

The elbow! He had slumped to his knees, almost paralysed, clasping the
stricken elbow with his other hand. Everything had exploded into yellow
light. Inconceivable, inconceivable that one blow could cause such pain!
The light cleared and he could see the other two looking down at him. The
guard was laughing at his contortions. One question at any rate was
answered. Never, for any reason on earth, could you wish for an increase
of pain. Of pain you could wish only one thing: that it should stop.
Nothing in the world was so bad as physical pain. In the face of pain
there are no heroes, no heroes, he thought over and over as he writhed
on the floor, clutching uselessly at his disabled left arm.




Chapter 2



He was lying on something that felt like a camp bed, except that it was
higher off the ground and that he was fixed down in some way so that he
could not move. Light that seemed stronger than usual was falling on his
face. O'Brien was standing at his side, looking down at him intently. At
the other side of him stood a man in a white coat, holding a hypodermic
syringe.

Even after his eyes were open he took in his surroundings only gradually.
He had the impression of swimming up into this room from some quite
different world, a sort of underwater world far beneath it. How long he
had been down there he did not know. Since the moment when they arrested
him he had not seen darkness or daylight. Besides, his memories were not
continuous. There had been times when consciousness, even the sort of
consciousness that one has in sleep, had stopped dead and started again
after a blank interval. But whether the intervals were of days or weeks
or only seconds, there was no way of knowing.

With that first blow on the elbow the nightmare had started. Later he was
to realize that all that then happened was merely a preliminary, a routine
interrogation to which nearly all prisoners were subjected. There was a
long range of crimes--espionage, sabotage, and the like--to which everyone
had to confess as a matter of course. The confession was a formality,
though the torture was real. How many times he had been beaten, how long
the beatings had continued, he could not remember. Always there were five
or six men in black uniforms at him simultaneously. Sometimes it was
fists, sometimes it was truncheons, sometimes it was steel rods, sometimes
it was boots. There were times when he rolled about the floor, as shameless
as an animal, writhing his body this way and that in an endless, hopeless
effort to dodge the kicks, and simply inviting more and yet more kicks,
in his ribs, in his belly, on his elbows, on his shins, in his groin,
in his testicles, on the bone at the base of his spine. There were times
when it went on and on until the cruel, wicked, unforgivable thing seemed
to him not that the guards continued to beat him but that he could not
force himself into losing consciousness. There were times when his nerve
so forsook him that he began shouting for mercy even before the beating
began, when the mere sight of a fist drawn back for a blow was enough
to make him pour forth a confession of real and imaginary crimes. There
were other times when he started out with the resolve of confessing
nothing, when every word had to be forced out of him between gasps of
pain, and there were times when he feebly tried to compromise, when he
said to himself: 'I will confess, but not yet. I must hold out till the
pain becomes unbearable. Three more kicks, two more kicks, and then I will
tell them what they want.' Sometimes he was beaten till he could hardly
stand, then flung like a sack of potatoes on to the stone floor of a cell,
left to recuperate for a few hours, and then taken out and beaten again.
There were also longer periods of recovery. He remembered them dimly,
because they were spent chiefly in sleep or stupor. He remembered a cell
with a plank bed, a sort of shelf sticking out from the wall, and a tin
wash-basin, and meals of hot soup and bread and sometimes coffee. He
remembered a surly barber arriving to scrape his chin and crop his hair,
and businesslike, unsympathetic men in white coats feeling his pulse,
tapping his reflexes, turning up his eyelids, running harsh fingers over
him in search for broken bones, and shooting needles into his arm to make
him sleep.

The beatings grew less frequent, and became mainly a threat, a horror
to which he could be sent back at any moment when his answers were
unsatisfactory. His questioners now were not ruffians in black uniforms
but Party intellectuals, little rotund men with quick movements and
flashing spectacles, who worked on him in relays over periods which
lasted--he thought, he could not be sure--ten or twelve hours at a stretch.
These other questioners saw to it that he was in constant slight pain, but
it was not chiefly pain that they relied on. They slapped his face, wrung
his ears, pulled his hair, made him stand on one leg, refused him leave to
urinate, shone glaring lights in his face until his eyes ran with water;
but the aim of this was simply to humiliate him and destroy his power of
arguing and reasoning. Their real weapon was the merciless questioning
that went on and on, hour after hour, tripping him up, laying traps for
him, twisting everything that he said, convicting him at every step of
lies and self-contradiction until he began weeping as much from shame as
from nervous fatigue. Sometimes he would weep half a dozen times in a
single session. Most of the time they screamed abuse at him and threatened
at every hesitation to deliver him over to the guards again; but sometimes
they would suddenly change their tune, call him comrade, appeal to him in
the name of Ingsoc and Big Brother, and ask him sorrowfully whether even
now he had not enough loyalty to the Party left to make him wish to
undo the evil he had done. When his nerves were in rags after hours of
questioning, even this appeal could reduce him to snivelling tears. In the
end the nagging voices broke him down more completely than the boots and
fists of the guards. He became simply a mouth that uttered, a hand that
signed, whatever was demanded of him. His sole concern was to find out
what they wanted him to confess, and then confess it quickly, before the
bullying started anew. He confessed to the assassination of eminent Party
members, the distribution of seditious pamphlets, embezzlement of public
funds, sale of military secrets, sabotage of every kind. He confessed that
he had been a spy in the pay of the Eastasian government as far back as
1968. He confessed that he was a religious believer, an admirer of
capitalism, and a sexual pervert. He confessed that he had murdered his
wife, although he knew, and his questioners must have known, that his wife
was still alive. He confessed that for years he had been in personal touch
with Goldstein and had been a member of an underground organization which
had included almost every human being he had ever known. It was easier to
confess everything and implicate everybody. Besides, in a sense it was all
true. It was true that he had been the enemy of the Party, and in the eyes
of the Party there was no distinction between the thought and the deed.

There were also memories of another kind. They stood out in his mind
disconnectedly, like pictures with blackness all round them.

He was in a cell which might have been either dark or light, because he
could see nothing except a pair of eyes. Near at hand some kind of
instrument was ticking slowly and regularly. The eyes grew larger and more
luminous. Suddenly he floated out of his seat, dived into the eyes, and
was swallowed up.

He was strapped into a chair surrounded by dials, under dazzling lights.
A man in a white coat was reading the dials. There was a tramp of heavy
boots outside. The door clanged open. The waxed-faced officer marched in,
followed by two guards.

'Room 101,' said the officer.

The man in the white coat did not turn round. He did not look at Winston
either; he was looking only at the dials.

He was rolling down a mighty corridor, a kilometre wide, full of glorious,
golden light, roaring with laughter and shouting out confessions at the
top of his voice. He was confessing everything, even the things he had
succeeded in holding back under the torture. He was relating the entire
history of his life to an audience who knew it already. With him were the
guards, the other questioners, the men in white coats, O'Brien, Julia,
Mr Charrington, all rolling down the corridor together and shouting with
laughter. Some dreadful thing which had lain embedded in the future had
somehow been skipped over and had not happened. Everything was all right,
there was no more pain, the last detail of his life was laid bare,
understood, forgiven.

He was starting up from the plank bed in the half-certainty that he had
heard O'Brien's voice. All through his interrogation, although he had
never seen him, he had had the feeling that O'Brien was at his elbow, just
out of sight. It was O'Brien who was directing everything. It was he who
set the guards on to Winston and who prevented them from killing him. It
was he who decided when Winston should scream with pain, when he should
have a respite, when he should be fed, when he should sleep, when the
drugs should be pumped into his arm. It was he who asked the questions and
suggested the answers. He was the tormentor, he was the protector, he was
the inquisitor, he was the friend. And once--Winston could not remember
whether it was in drugged sleep, or in normal sleep, or even in a moment
of wakefulness--a voice murmured in his ear: 'Don't worry, Winston; you
are in my keeping. For seven years I have watched over you. Now the
turning-point has come. I shall save you, I shall make you perfect.' He
was not sure whether it was O'Brien's voice; but it was the same voice
that had said to him, 'We shall meet in the place where there is no
darkness,' in that other dream, seven years ago.

He did not remember any ending to his interrogation. There was a period of
blackness and then the cell, or room, in which he now was had gradually
materialized round him. He was almost flat on his back, and unable to move.
His body was held down at every essential point. Even the back of his head
was gripped in some manner. O'Brien was looking down at him gravely and
rather sadly. His face, seen from below, looked coarse and worn, with
pouches under the eyes and tired lines from nose to chin. He was older
than Winston had thought him; he was perhaps forty-eight or fifty. Under
his hand there was a dial with a lever on top and figures running round
the face.

'I told you,' said O'Brien, 'that if we met again it would be here.'

'Yes,' said Winston.

Without any warning except a slight movement of O'Brien's hand, a wave of
pain flooded his body. It was a frightening pain, because he could not see
what was happening, and he had the feeling that some mortal injury was
being done to him. He did not know whether the thing was really happening,
or whether the effect was electrically produced; but his body was being
wrenched out of shape, the joints were being slowly torn apart. Although
the pain had brought the sweat out on his forehead, the worst of all was
the fear that his backbone was about to snap. He set his teeth and
breathed hard through his nose, trying to keep silent as long as possible.

'You are afraid,' said O'Brien, watching his face, 'that in another moment
something is going to break. Your especial fear is that it will be your
backbone. You have a vivid mental picture of the vertebrae snapping apart
and the spinal fluid dripping out of them. That is what you are thinking,
is it not, Winston?'

Winston did not answer. O'Brien drew back the lever on the dial. The wave
of pain receded almost as quickly as it had come.

'That was forty,' said O'Brien. 'You can see that the numbers on this dial
run up to a hundred. Will you please remember, throughout our conversation,
that I have it in my power to inflict pain on you at any moment and to
whatever degree I choose? If you tell me any lies, or attempt to
prevaricate in any way, or even fall below your usual level of
intelligence, you will cry out with pain, instantly. Do you understand
that?'

'Yes,' said Winston.

O'Brien's manner became less severe. He resettled his spectacles
thoughtfully, and took a pace or two up and down. When he spoke his voice
was gentle and patient. He had the air of a doctor, a teacher, even a
priest, anxious to explain and persuade rather than to punish.

'I am taking trouble with you, Winston,' he said, 'because you are worth
trouble. You know perfectly well what is the matter with you. You have
known it for years, though you have fought against the knowledge. You are
mentally deranged. You suffer from a defective memory. You are unable to
remember real events and you persuade yourself that you remember other
events which never happened. Fortunately it is curable. You have never
cured yourself of it, because you did not choose to. There was a small
effort of the will that you were not ready to make. Even now, I am well
aware, you are clinging to your disease under the impression that it is
a virtue. Now we will take an example. At this moment, which power is
Oceania at war with?'

'When I was arrested, Oceania was at war with Eastasia.'

'With Eastasia. Good. And Oceania has always been at war with Eastasia,
has it not?'

Winston drew in his breath. He opened his mouth to speak and then did not
speak. He could not take his eyes away from the dial.

'The truth, please, Winston. YOUR truth. Tell me what you think you
remember.'

'I remember that until only a week before I was arrested, we were not at
war with Eastasia at all. We were in alliance with them. The war was
against Eurasia. That had lasted for four years. Before that----'

O'Brien stopped him with a movement of the hand.

'Another example,' he said. 'Some years ago you had a very serious delusion
indeed. You believed that three men, three one-time Party members named
Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford--men who were executed for treachery and
sabotage after making the fullest possible confession--were not guilty of
the crimes they were charged with. You believed that you had seen
unmistakable documentary evidence proving that their confessions were
false. There was a certain photograph about which you had a hallucination.
You believed that you had actually held it in your hands. It was a
photograph something like this.'

An oblong slip of newspaper had appeared between O'Brien's fingers. For
perhaps five seconds it was within the angle of Winston's vision. It was
a photograph, and there was no question of its identity. It was THE
photograph. It was another copy of the photograph of Jones, Aaronson, and
Rutherford at the party function in New York, which he had chanced upon
eleven years ago and promptly destroyed. For only an instant it was before
his eyes, then it was out of sight again. But he had seen it,
unquestionably he had seen it! He made a desperate, agonizing effort to
wrench the top half of his body free. It was impossible to move so much as
a centimetre in any direction. For the moment he had even forgotten the
dial. All he wanted was to hold the photograph in his fingers again, or at
least to see it.

'It exists!' he cried.

'No,' said O'Brien.

He stepped across the room. There was a memory hole in the opposite wall.
O'Brien lifted the grating. Unseen, the frail slip of paper was whirling
away on the current of warm air; it was vanishing in a flash of flame.
O'Brien turned away from the wall.

'Ashes,' he said. 'Not even identifiable ashes. Dust. It does not exist.
It never existed.'

'But it did exist! It does exist! It exists in memory. I remember it.
You remember it.'

'I do not remember it,' said O'Brien.

Winston's heart sank. That was doublethink. He had a feeling of deadly
helplessness. If he could have been certain that O'Brien was lying, it
would not have seemed to matter. But it was perfectly possible that O'Brien
had really forgotten the photograph. And if so, then already he would have
forgotten his denial of remembering it, and forgotten the act of
forgetting. How could one be sure that it was simple trickery? Perhaps
that lunatic dislocation in the mind could really happen: that was the
thought that defeated him.

O'Brien was looking down at him speculatively. More than ever he had the
air of a teacher taking pains with a wayward but promising child.

'There is a Party slogan dealing with the control of the past,' he said.
'Repeat it, if you please.'

'"Who controls the past controls the future: who controls the present
controls the past,"' repeated Winston obediently.

'"Who controls the present controls the past,"' said O'Brien, nodding his
head with slow approval. 'Is it your opinion, Winston, that the past has
real existence?'

Again the feeling of helplessness descended upon Winston. His eyes flitted
towards the dial. He not only did not know whether 'yes' or 'no' was the
answer that would save him from pain; he did not even know which answer he
believed to be the true one.

O'Brien smiled faintly. 'You are no metaphysician, Winston,' he said.
'Until this moment you had never considered what is meant by existence. I
will put it more precisely. Does the past exist concretely, in space? Is
there somewhere or other a place, a world of solid objects, where the past
is still happening?'

'No.'

'Then where does the past exist, if at all?'

'In records. It is written down.'

'In records. And----?'

'In the mind. In human memories.'

'In memory. Very well, then. We, the Party, control all records, and we
control all memories. Then we control the past, do we not?'

'But how can you stop people remembering things?' cried Winston again
momentarily forgetting the dial. 'It is involuntary. It is outside oneself.
How can you control memory? You have not controlled mine!'

O'Brien's manner grew stern again. He laid his hand on the dial.

'On the contrary,' he said, 'YOU have not controlled it. That is what has
brought you here. You are here because you have failed in humility, in
self-discipline. You would not make the act of submission which is the
price of sanity. You preferred to be a lunatic, a minority of one. Only the
disciplined mind can see reality, Winston. You believe that reality is
something objective, external, existing in its own right. You also believe
that the nature of reality is self-evident. When you delude yourself into
thinking that you see something, you assume that everyone else sees the
same thing as you. But I tell you, Winston, that reality is not external.
Reality exists in the human mind, and nowhere else. Not in the individual
mind, which can make mistakes, and in any case soon perishes: only in the
mind of the Party, which is collective and immortal. Whatever the Party
holds to be the truth, is truth. It is impossible to see reality except by
looking through the eyes of the Party. That is the fact that you have got
to relearn, Winston. It needs an act of self-destruction, an effort of the
will. You must humble yourself before you can become sane.'

He paused for a few moments, as though to allow what he had been saying to
sink in.

'Do you remember,' he went on, 'writing in your diary, "Freedom is the
freedom to say that two plus two make four"?'

'Yes,' said Winston.

O'Brien held up his left hand, its back towards Winston, with the thumb
hidden and the four fingers extended.

'How many fingers am I holding up, Winston?'

'Four.'

'And if the party says that it is not four but five--then how many?'

'Four.'

The word ended in a gasp of pain. The needle of the dial had shot up to
fifty-five. The sweat had sprung out all over Winston's body. The air tore
into his lungs and issued again in deep groans which even by clenching his
teeth he could not stop. O'Brien watched him, the four fingers still
extended. He drew back the lever. This time the pain was only slightly
eased.

'How many fingers, Winston?'

'Four.'

The needle went up to sixty.

'How many fingers, Winston?'

'Four! Four! What else can I say? Four!'

The needle must have risen again, but he did not look at it. The heavy,
stern face and the four fingers filled his vision. The fingers stood up
before his eyes like pillars, enormous, blurry, and seeming to vibrate,
but unmistakably four.

'How many fingers, Winston?'

'Four! Stop it, stop it! How can you go on? Four! Four!'

'How many fingers, Winston?'

'Five! Five! Five!'

'No, Winston, that is no use. You are lying. You still think there are
four. How many fingers, please?'

'Four! five! Four! Anything you like. Only stop it, stop the pain!'

Abruptly he was sitting up with O'Brien's arm round his shoulders. He had
perhaps lost consciousness for a few seconds. The bonds that had held his
body down were loosened. He felt very cold, he was shaking uncontrollably,
his teeth were chattering, the tears were rolling down his cheeks. For a
moment he clung to O'Brien like a baby, curiously comforted by the heavy
arm round his shoulders. He had the feeling that O'Brien was his protector,
that the pain was something that came from outside, from some other source,
and that it was O'Brien who would save him from it.

'You are a slow learner, Winston,' said O'Brien gently.

'How can I help it?' he blubbered. 'How can I help seeing what is in front
of my eyes? Two and two are four.'

'Sometimes, Winston. Sometimes they are five. Sometimes they are three.
Sometimes they are all of them at once. You must try harder. It is not
easy to become sane.'

He laid Winston down on the bed. The grip of his limbs tightened again,
but the pain had ebbed away and the trembling had stopped, leaving him
merely weak and cold. O'Brien motioned with his head to the man in the
white coat, who had stood immobile throughout the proceedings. The man in
the white coat bent down and looked closely into Winston's eyes, felt his
pulse, laid an ear against his chest, tapped here and there, then he
nodded to O'Brien.

'Again,' said O'Brien.

The pain flowed into Winston's body. The needle must be at seventy,
seventy-five. He had shut his eyes this time. He knew that the fingers
were still there, and still four. All that mattered was somehow to stay
alive until the spasm was over. He had ceased to notice whether he was
crying out or not. The pain lessened again. He opened his eyes. O'Brien
had drawn back the lever.

'How many fingers, Winston?'

'Four. I suppose there are four. I would see five if I could. I am trying
to see five.'

'Which do you wish: to persuade me that you see five, or really to see
them?'

'Really to see them.'

'Again,' said O'Brien.

Perhaps the needle was eighty--ninety. Winston could not intermittently
remember why the pain was happening. Behind his screwed-up eyelids a
forest of fingers seemed to be moving in a sort of dance, weaving in and
out, disappearing behind one another and reappearing again. He was trying
to count them, he could not remember why. He knew only that it was
impossible to count them, and that this was somehow due to the mysterious
identity between five and four. The pain died down again. When he opened
his eyes it was to find that he was still seeing the same thing.
Innumerable fingers, like moving trees, were still streaming past in
either direction, crossing and recrossing. He shut his eyes again.

'How many fingers am I holding up, Winston?'

'I don't know. I don't know. You will kill me if you do that again. Four,
five, six--in all honesty I don't know.'

'Better,' said O'Brien.

A needle slid into Winston's arm. Almost in the same instant a blissful,
healing warmth spread all through his body. The pain was already
half-forgotten. He opened his eyes and looked up gratefully at O'Brien.
At sight of the heavy, lined face, so ugly and so intelligent, his heart
seemed to turn over. If he could have moved he would have stretched out
a hand and laid it on O'Brien's arm. He had never loved him so deeply as
at this moment, and not merely because he had stopped the pain. The old
feeling, that at bottom it did not matter whether O'Brien was a friend
or an enemy, had come back. O'Brien was a person who could be talked to.
Perhaps one did not want to be loved so much as to be understood. O'Brien
had tortured him to the edge of lunacy, and in a little while, it was
certain, he would send him to his death. It made no difference. In some
sense that went deeper than friendship, they were intimates: somewhere or
other, although the actual words might never be spoken, there was a place
where they could meet and talk. O'Brien was looking down at him with an
expression which suggested that the same thought might be in his own mind.
When he spoke it was in an easy, conversational tone.

'Do you know where you are, Winston?' he said.

'I don't know. I can guess. In the Ministry of Love.'

'Do you know how long you have been here?'

'I don't know. Days, weeks, months--I think it is months.'

'And why do you imagine that we bring people to this place?'

'To make them confess.'

'No, that is not the reason. Try again.'

'To punish them.'

'No!' exclaimed O'Brien. His voice had changed extraordinarily, and his
face had suddenly become both stern and animated. 'No! Not merely to
extract your confession, not to punish you. Shall I tell you why we have
brought you here? To cure you! To make you sane! Will you understand,
Winston, that no one whom we bring to this place ever leaves our hands
uncured? We are not interested in those stupid crimes that you have
committed. The Party is not interested in the overt act: the thought is
all we care about. We do not merely destroy our enemies, we change them.
Do you understand what I mean by that?'

He was bending over Winston. His face looked enormous because of its
nearness, and hideously ugly because it was seen from below. Moreover it
was filled with a sort of exaltation, a lunatic intensity. Again Winston's
heart shrank. If it had been possible he would have cowered deeper into
the bed. He felt certain that O'Brien was about to twist the dial out of
sheer wantonness. At this moment, however, O'Brien turned away. He took a
pace or two up and down. Then he continued less vehemently:

'The first thing for you to understand is that in this place there are no
martyrdoms. You have read of the religious persecutions of the past. In
the Middle Ages there was the Inquisition. It was a failure. It set out
to eradicate heresy, and ended by perpetuating it. For every heretic it
burned at the stake, thousands of others rose up. Why was that? Because
the Inquisition killed its enemies in the open, and killed them while
they were still unrepentant: in fact, it killed them because they were
unrepentant. Men were dying because they would not abandon their true
beliefs. Naturally all the glory belonged to the victim and all the shame
to the Inquisitor who burned him. Later, in the twentieth century, there
were the totalitarians, as they were called. There were the German Nazis
and the Russian Communists. The Russians persecuted heresy more cruelly
than the Inquisition had done. And they imagined that they had learned
from the mistakes of the past; they knew, at any rate, that one must not
make martyrs. Before they exposed their victims to public trial, they
deliberately set themselves to destroy their dignity. They wore them down
by torture and solitude until they were despicable, cringing wretches,
confessing whatever was put into their mouths, covering themselves with
abuse, accusing and sheltering behind one another, whimpering for mercy.
And yet after only a few years the same thing had happened over again.
The dead men had become martyrs and their degradation was forgotten. Once
again, why was it? In the first place, because the confessions that they
had made were obviously extorted and untrue. We do not make mistakes of
that kind. All the confessions that are uttered here are true. We make
them true. And above all we do not allow the dead to rise up against us.
You must stop imagining that posterity will vindicate you, Winston.
Posterity will never hear of you. You will be lifted clean out from the
stream of history. We shall turn you into gas and pour you into the
stratosphere. Nothing will remain of you, not a name in a register, not
a memory in a living brain. You will be annihilated in the past as well
as in the future. You will never have existed.'

Then why bother to torture me? thought Winston, with a momentary
bitterness. O'Brien checked his step as though Winston had uttered the
thought aloud. His large ugly face came nearer, with the eyes a little
narrowed.

'You are thinking,' he said, 'that since we intend to destroy you utterly,
so that nothing that you say or do can make the smallest difference--in
that case, why do we go to the trouble of interrogating you first? That is
what you were thinking, was it not?'

'Yes,' said Winston.

O'Brien smiled slightly. 'You are a flaw in the pattern, Winston. You are
a stain that must be wiped out. Did I not tell you just now that we are
different from the persecutors of the past? We are not content with
negative obedience, nor even with the most abject submission. When finally
you surrender to us, it must be of your own free will. We do not destroy
the heretic because he resists us: so long as he resists us we never
destroy him. We convert him, we capture his inner mind, we reshape him.
We burn all evil and all illusion out of him; we bring him over to our
side, not in appearance, but genuinely, heart and soul. We make him one of
ourselves before we kill him. It is intolerable to us that an erroneous
thought should exist anywhere in the world, however secret and powerless
it may be. Even in the instant of death we cannot permit any deviation. In
the old days the heretic walked to the stake still a heretic, proclaiming
his heresy, exulting in it. Even the victim of the Russian purges could
carry rebellion locked up in his skull as he walked down the passage
waiting for the bullet. But we make the brain perfect before we blow it
out. The command of the old despotisms was "Thou shalt not". The command
of the totalitarians was "Thou shalt". Our command is "THOU ART". No one
whom we bring to this place ever stands out against us. Everyone is washed
clean. Even those three miserable traitors in whose innocence you once
believed--Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford--in the end we broke them down.
I took part in their interrogation myself. I saw them gradually worn down,
whimpering, grovelling, weeping--and in the end it was not with pain or
fear, only with penitence. By the time we had finished with them they were
only the shells of men. There was nothing left in them except sorrow for
what they had done, and love of Big Brother. It was touching to see
how they loved him. They begged to be shot quickly, so that they could die
while their minds were still clean.'

His voice had grown almost dreamy. The exaltation, the lunatic enthusiasm,
was still in his face. He is not pretending, thought Winston, he is not a
hypocrite, he believes every word he says. What most oppressed him was the
consciousness of his own intellectual inferiority. He watched the heavy
yet graceful form strolling to and fro, in and out of the range of his
vision. O'Brien was a being in all ways larger than himself. There was no
idea that he had ever had, or could have, that O'Brien had not long ago
known, examined, and rejected. His mind CONTAINED Winston's mind. But
in that case how could it be true that O'Brien was mad? It must be he,
Winston, who was mad. O'Brien halted and looked down at him. His voice had
grown stern again.

'Do not imagine that you will save yourself, Winston, however completely
you surrender to us. No one who has once gone astray is ever spared. And
even if we chose to let you live out the natural term of your life, still
you would never escape from us. What happens to you here is for ever.
Understand that in advance. We shall crush you down to the point from
which there is no coming back. Things will happen to you from which you
could not recover, if you lived a thousand years. Never again will you be
capable of ordinary human feeling. Everything will be dead inside you.
Never again will you be capable of love, or friendship, or joy of living,
or laughter, or curiosity, or courage, or integrity. You will be hollow.
We shall squeeze you empty, and then we shall fill you with ourselves.'

He paused and signed to the man in the white coat. Winston was aware of
some heavy piece of apparatus being pushed into place behind his head.
O'Brien had sat down beside the bed, so that his face was almost on a
level with Winston's.

'Three thousand,' he said, speaking over Winston's head to the man in the
white coat.

Two soft pads, which felt slightly moist, clamped themselves against
Winston's temples. He quailed. There was pain coming, a new kind of pain.
O'Brien laid a hand reassuringly, almost kindly, on his.

'This time it will not hurt,' he said. 'Keep your eyes fixed on mine.'

At this moment there was a devastating explosion, or what seemed like an
explosion, though it was not certain whether there was any noise. There
was undoubtedly a blinding flash of light. Winston was not hurt, only
prostrated. Although he had already been lying on his back when the thing
happened, he had a curious feeling that he had been knocked into that
position. A terrific painless blow had flattened him out. Also something
had happened inside his head. As his eyes regained their focus he
remembered who he was, and where he was, and recognized the face that was
gazing into his own; but somewhere or other there was a large patch of
emptiness, as though a piece had been taken out of his brain.

'It will not last,' said O'Brien. 'Look me in the eyes. What country is
Oceania at war with?'

Winston thought. He knew what was meant by Oceania and that he himself was
a citizen of Oceania. He also remembered Eurasia and Eastasia; but who was
at war with whom he did not know. In fact he had not been aware that there
was any war.

'I don't remember.'

'Oceania is at war with Eastasia. Do you remember that now?'

'Yes.'

'Oceania has always been at war with Eastasia. Since the beginning of your
life, since the beginning of the Party, since the beginning of history,
the war has continued without a break, always the same war. Do you
remember that?'

'Yes.'

'Eleven years ago you created a legend about three men who had been
condemned to death for treachery. You pretended that you had seen a piece
of paper which proved them innocent. No such piece of paper ever existed.
You invented it, and later you grew to believe in it. You remember now the
very moment at which you first invented it. Do you remember that?'

'Yes.'

'Just now I held up the fingers of my hand to you. You saw five fingers.
Do you remember that?'

'Yes.'

O'Brien held up the fingers of his left hand, with the thumb concealed.

'There are five fingers there. Do you see five fingers?'

'Yes.'

And he did see them, for a fleeting instant, before the scenery of his
mind changed. He saw five fingers, and there was no deformity. Then
everything was normal again, and the old fear, the hatred, and the
bewilderment came crowding back again. But there had been a moment--he did
not know how long, thirty seconds, perhaps--of luminous certainty, when
each new suggestion of O'Brien's had filled up a patch of emptiness and
become absolute truth, and when two and two could have been three as
easily as five, if that were what was needed. It had faded but before
O'Brien had dropped his hand; but though he could not recapture it, he
could remember it, as one remembers a vivid experience at some period of
one's life when one was in effect a different person.

'You see now,' said O'Brien, 'that it is at any rate possible.'

'Yes,' said Winston.

O'Brien stood up with a satisfied air. Over to his left Winston saw the
man in the white coat break an ampoule and draw back the plunger of a
syringe. O'Brien turned to Winston with a smile. In almost the old manner
he resettled his spectacles on his nose.

'Do you remember writing in your diary,' he said, 'that it did not matter
whether I was a friend or an enemy, since I was at least a person who
understood you and could be talked to? You were right. I enjoy talking to
you. Your mind appeals to me. It resembles my own mind except that you
happen to be insane. Before we bring the session to an end you can ask me
a few questions, if you choose.'

'Any question I like?'

'Anything.' He saw that Winston's eyes were upon the dial. 'It is switched
off. What is your first question?'

'What have you done with Julia?' said Winston.

O'Brien smiled again. 'She betrayed you, Winston. Immediately--unreservedly.
I have seldom seen anyone come over to us so promptly. You would hardly
recognize her if you saw her. All her rebelliousness, her deceit, her
folly, her dirty-mindedness--everything has been burned out of her. It was
a perfect conversion, a textbook case.'

'You tortured her?'

O'Brien left this unanswered. 'Next question,' he said.

'Does Big Brother exist?'

'Of course he exists. The Party exists. Big Brother is the embodiment of
the Party.'

'Does he exist in the same way as I exist?'

'You do not exist,' said O'Brien.

Once again the sense of helplessness assailed him. He knew, or he could
imagine, the arguments which proved his own nonexistence; but they were
nonsense, they were only a play on words. Did not the statement, 'You do
not exist', contain a logical absurdity? But what use was it to say so?
His mind shrivelled as he thought of the unanswerable, mad arguments with
which O'Brien would demolish him.

'I think I exist,' he said wearily. 'I am conscious of my own identity.
I was born and I shall die. I have arms and legs. I occupy a particular
point in space. No other solid object can occupy the same point
simultaneously. In that sense, does Big Brother exist?'

'It is of no importance. He exists.'

'Will Big Brother ever die?'

'Of course not. How could he die? Next question.'

'Does the Brotherhood exist?'

'That, Winston, you will never know. If we choose to set you free when we
have finished with you, and if you live to be ninety years old, still you
will never learn whether the answer to that question is Yes or No. As long
as you live it will be an unsolved riddle in your mind.'

Winston lay silent. His breast rose and fell a little faster. He still had
not asked the question that had come into his mind the first. He had got
to ask it, and yet it was as though his tongue would not utter it. There
was a trace of amusement in O'Brien's face. Even his spectacles seemed to
wear an ironical gleam. He knows, thought Winston suddenly, he knows what
I am going to ask! At the thought the words burst out of him:

'What is in Room 101?'

The expression on O'Brien's face did not change. He answered drily:

'You know what is in Room 101, Winston. Everyone knows what is in
Room 101.'

He raised a finger to the man in the white coat. Evidently the session was
at an end. A needle jerked into Winston's arm. He sank almost instantly
into deep sleep.




Chapter 3



'There are three stages in your reintegration,' said O'Brien. 'There is
learning, there is understanding, and there is acceptance. It is time for
you to enter upon the second stage.'

As always, Winston was lying flat on his back. But of late his bonds were
looser. They still held him to the bed, but he could move his knees a
little and could turn his head from side to side and raise his arms from
the elbow. The dial, also, had grown to be less of a terror. He could
evade its pangs if he was quick-witted enough: it was chiefly when he
showed stupidity that O'Brien pulled the lever. Sometimes they got through
a whole session without use of the dial. He could not remember how many
sessions there had been. The whole process seemed to stretch out over a
long, indefinite time--weeks, possibly--and the intervals between the
sessions might sometimes have been days, sometimes only an hour or two.

'As you lie there,' said O'Brien, 'you have often wondered--you have even
asked me--why the Ministry of Love should expend so much time and trouble
on you. And when you were free you were puzzled by what was essentially
the same question. You could grasp the mechanics of the Society you lived
in, but not its underlying motives. Do you remember writing in your diary,
"I understand HOW: I do not understand WHY"? It was when you thought about
"why" that you doubted your own sanity. You have read THE BOOK,
Goldstein's book, or parts of it, at least. Did it tell you anything that
you did not know already?'

'You have read it?' said Winston.

'I wrote it. That is to say, I collaborated in writing it. No book is
produced individually, as you know.'

'Is it true, what it says?'

'As description, yes. The programme it sets forth is nonsense. The secret
accumulation of knowledge--a gradual spread of enlightenment--ultimately
a proletarian rebellion--the overthrow of the Party. You foresaw yourself
that that was what it would say. It is all nonsense. The proletarians will
never revolt, not in a thousand years or a million. They cannot. I do
not have to tell you the reason: you know it already. If you have ever
cherished any dreams of violent insurrection, you must abandon them. There
is no way in which the Party can be overthrown. The rule of the Party is
for ever. Make that the starting-point of your thoughts.'

He came closer to the bed. 'For ever!' he repeated. 'And now let us get
back to the question of "how" and "why". You understand well enough HOW
the Party maintains itself in power. Now tell me WHY we cling to power.
What is our motive? Why should we want power? Go on, speak,' he added as
Winston remained silent.

Nevertheless Winston did not speak for another moment or two. A feeling of
weariness had overwhelmed him. The faint, mad gleam of enthusiasm had come
back into O'Brien's face. He knew in advance what O'Brien would say. That
the Party did not seek power for its own ends, but only for the good of
the majority. That it sought power because men in the mass were frail,
cowardly creatures who could not endure liberty or face the truth, and
must be ruled over and systematically deceived by others who were stronger
than themselves. That the choice for mankind lay between freedom and
happiness, and that, for the great bulk of mankind, happiness was better.
That the party was the eternal guardian of the weak, a dedicated sect
doing evil that good might come, sacrificing its own happiness to that of
others. The terrible thing, thought Winston, the terrible thing was that
when O'Brien said this he would believe it. You could see it in his face.
O'Brien knew everything. A thousand times better than Winston he knew what
the world was really like, in what degradation the mass of human beings
lived and by what lies and barbarities the Party kept them there. He had
understood it all, weighed it all, and it made no difference: all was
justified by the ultimate purpose. What can you do, thought Winston,
against the lunatic who is more intelligent than yourself, who gives your
arguments a fair hearing and then simply persists in his lunacy?

'You are ruling over us for our own good,' he said feebly. 'You believe
that human beings are not fit to govern themselves, and therefore----'

He started and almost cried out. A pang of pain had shot through his body.
O'Brien had pushed the lever of the dial up to thirty-five.

'That was stupid, Winston, stupid!' he said. 'You should know better than
to say a thing like that.'

He pulled the lever back and continued:

'Now I will tell you the answer to my question. It is this. The Party
seeks power entirely for its own sake. We are not interested in the good
of others; we are interested solely in power. Not wealth or luxury or long
life or happiness: only power, pure power. What pure power means you will
understand presently. We are different from all the oligarchies of the
past, in that we know what we are doing. All the others, even those who
resembled ourselves, were cowards and hypocrites. The German Nazis and the
Russian Communists came very close to us in their methods, but they never
had the courage to recognize their own motives. They pretended, perhaps
they even believed, that they had seized power unwillingly and for a
limited time, and that just round the corner there lay a paradise where
human beings would be free and equal. We are not like that. We know that
no one ever seizes power with the intention of relinquishing it. Power is
not a means, it is an end. One does not establish a dictatorship in order
to safeguard a revolution; one makes the revolution in order to establish
the dictatorship. The object of persecution is persecution. The object of
torture is torture. The object of power is power. Now do you begin to
understand me?'

Winston was struck, as he had been struck before, by the tiredness of
O'Brien's face. It was strong and fleshy and brutal, it was full of
intelligence and a sort of controlled passion before which he felt himself
helpless; but it was tired. There were pouches under the eyes, the skin
sagged from the cheekbones. O'Brien leaned over him, deliberately bringing
the worn face nearer.

'You are thinking,' he said, 'that my face is old and tired. You are
thinking that I talk of power, and yet I am not even able to prevent the
decay of my own body. Can you not understand, Winston, that the individual
is only a cell? The weariness of the cell is the vigour of the organism.
Do you die when you cut your fingernails?'

He turned away from the bed and began strolling up and down again, one hand
in his pocket.

'We are the priests of power,' he said. 'God is power. But at present
power is only a word so far as you are concerned. It is time for you to
gather some idea of what power means. The first thing you must realize
is that power is collective. The individual only has power in so far as
he ceases to be an individual. You know the Party slogan: "Freedom is
Slavery". Has it ever occurred to you that it is reversible? Slavery is
freedom. Alone--free--the human being is always defeated. It must be so,
because every human being is doomed to die, which is the greatest of all
failures. But if he can make complete, utter submission, if he can escape
from his identity, if he can merge himself in the Party so that he IS the
Party, then he is all-powerful and immortal. The second thing for you to
realize is that power is power over human beings. Over the body--but, above
all, over the mind. Power over matter--external reality, as you would call
it--is not important. Already our control over matter is absolute.'

For a moment Winston ignored the dial. He made a violent effort to raise
himself into a sitting position, and merely succeeded in wrenching his
body painfully.

'But how can you control matter?' he burst out. 'You don't even control
the climate or the law of gravity. And there are disease, pain, death----'

O'Brien silenced him by a movement of his hand. 'We control matter because
we control the mind. Reality is inside the skull. You will learn by
degrees, Winston. There is nothing that we could not do. Invisibility,
levitation--anything. I could float off this floor like a soap bubble if
I wish to. I do not wish to, because the Party does not wish it. You must
get rid of those nineteenth-century ideas about the laws of Nature. We
make the laws of Nature.'

'But you do not! You are not even masters of this planet. What about
Eurasia and Eastasia? You have not conquered them yet.'

'Unimportant. We shall conquer them when it suits us. And if we did not,
what difference would it make? We can shut them out of existence. Oceania
is the world.'

'But the world itself is only a speck of dust. And man is tiny--helpless!
How long has he been in existence? For millions of years the earth was
uninhabited.'

'Nonsense. The earth is as old as we are, no older. How could it be older?
Nothing exists except through human consciousness.'

'But the rocks are full of the bones of extinct animals--mammoths and
mastodons and enormous reptiles which lived here long before man was ever
heard of.'

'Have you ever seen those bones, Winston? Of course not. Nineteenth-century
biologists invented them. Before man there was nothing. After man, if he
could come to an end, there would be nothing. Outside man there is
nothing.'

'But the whole universe is outside us. Look at the stars! Some of them are
a million light-years away. They are out of our reach for ever.'

'What are the stars?' said O'Brien indifferently. 'They are bits of fire
a few kilometres away. We could reach them if we wanted to. Or we could
blot them out. The earth is the centre of the universe. The sun and the
stars go round it.'

Winston made another convulsive movement. This time he did not say
anything. O'Brien continued as though answering a spoken objection:

'For certain purposes, of course, that is not true. When we navigate the
ocean, or when we predict an eclipse, we often find it convenient to
assume that the earth goes round the sun and that the stars are millions
upon millions of kilometres away. But what of it? Do you suppose it is
beyond us to produce a dual system of astronomy? The stars can be near
or distant, according as we need them. Do you suppose our mathematicians
are unequal to that? Have you forgotten doublethink?'

Winston shrank back upon the bed. Whatever he said, the swift answer
crushed him like a bludgeon. And yet he knew, he KNEW, that he was in the
right. The belief that nothing exists outside your own mind--surely there
must be some way of demonstrating that it was false? Had it not been
exposed long ago as a fallacy? There was even a name for it, which he
had forgotten. A faint smile twitched the corners of O'Brien's mouth as
he looked down at him.

'I told you, Winston,' he said, 'that metaphysics is not your strong
point. The word you are trying to think of is solipsism. But you are
mistaken. This is not solipsism. Collective solipsism, if you like. But
that is a different thing: in fact, the opposite thing. All this is a
digression,' he added in a different tone. 'The real power, the power we
have to fight for night and day, is not power over things, but over men.'
He paused, and for a moment assumed again his air of a schoolmaster
questioning a promising pupil: 'How does one man assert his power over
another, Winston?'

Winston thought. 'By making him suffer,' he said.

'Exactly. By making him suffer. Obedience is not enough. Unless he is
suffering, how can you be sure that he is obeying your will and not his
own? Power is in inflicting pain and humiliation. Power is in tearing
human minds to pieces and putting them together again in new shapes of
your own choosing. Do you begin to see, then, what kind of world we are
creating? It is the exact opposite of the stupid hedonistic Utopias that
the old reformers imagined. A world of fear and treachery and torment, a
world of trampling and being trampled upon, a world which will grow not
less but MORE merciless as it refines itself. Progress in our world will
be progress towards more pain. The old civilizations claimed that they
were founded on love or justice. Ours is founded upon hatred. In our world
there will be no emotions except fear, rage, triumph, and self-abasement.
Everything else we shall destroy--everything. Already we are breaking down
the habits of thought which have survived from before the Revolution. We
have cut the links between child and parent, and between man and man, and
between man and woman. No one dares trust a wife or a child or a friend
any longer. But in the future there will be no wives and no friends.
Children will be taken from their mothers at birth, as one takes eggs from
a hen. The sex instinct will be eradicated. Procreation will be an annual
formality like the renewal of a ration card. We shall abolish the orgasm.
Our neurologists are at work upon it now. There will be no loyalty, except
loyalty towards the Party. There will be no love, except the love of
Big Brother. There will be no laughter, except the laugh of triumph over
a defeated enemy. There will be no art, no literature, no science. When
we are omnipotent we shall have no more need of science. There will be
no distinction between beauty and ugliness. There will be no curiosity,
no enjoyment of the process of life. All competing pleasures will be
destroyed. But always--do not forget this, Winston--always there will be
the intoxication of power, constantly increasing and constantly growing
subtler. Always, at every moment, there will be the thrill of victory,
the sensation of trampling on an enemy who is helpless. If you want a
picture of the future, imagine a boot stamping on a human face--for ever.'

He paused as though he expected Winston to speak. Winston had tried to
shrink back into the surface of the bed again. He could not say anything.
His heart seemed to be frozen. O'Brien went on:

'And remember that it is for ever. The face will always be there to be
stamped upon. The heretic, the enemy of society, will always be there, so
that he can be defeated and humiliated over again. Everything that you
have undergone since you have been in our hands--all that will continue,
and worse. The espionage, the betrayals, the arrests, the tortures, the
executions, the disappearances will never cease. It will be a world of
terror as much as a world of triumph. The more the Party is powerful, the
less it will be tolerant: the weaker the opposition, the tighter the
despotism. Goldstein and his heresies will live for ever. Every day, at
every moment, they will be defeated, discredited, ridiculed, spat upon and
yet they will always survive. This drama that I have played out with you
during seven years will be played out over and over again generation after
generation, always in subtler forms. Always we shall have the heretic here
at our mercy, screaming with pain, broken up, contemptible--and in the end
utterly penitent, saved from himself, crawling to our feet of his own
accord. That is the world that we are preparing, Winston. A world of
victory after victory, triumph after triumph after triumph: an endless
pressing, pressing, pressing upon the nerve of power. You are beginning,
I can see, to realize what that world will be like. But in the end you
will do more than understand it. You will accept it, welcome it, become
part of it.'

Winston had recovered himself sufficiently to speak. 'You can't!' he said
weakly.

'What do you mean by that remark, Winston?'

'You could not create such a world as you have just described. It is a
dream. It is impossible.'

'Why?'

'It is impossible to found a civilization on fear and hatred and cruelty.
It would never endure.'

'Why not?'

'It would have no vitality. It would disintegrate. It would commit
suicide.'

'Nonsense. You are under the impression that hatred is more exhausting
than love. Why should it be? And if it were, what difference would that
make? Suppose that we choose to wear ourselves out faster. Suppose that we
quicken the tempo of human life till men are senile at thirty. Still what
difference would it make? Can you not understand that the death of the
individual is not death? The party is immortal.'

As usual, the voice had battered Winston into helplessness. Moreover he
was in dread that if he persisted in his disagreement O'Brien would twist
the dial again. And yet he could not keep silent. Feebly, without
arguments, with nothing to support him except his inarticulate horror of
what O'Brien had said, he returned to the attack.

'I don't know--I don't care. Somehow you will fail. Something will defeat
you. Life will defeat you.'

'We control life, Winston, at all its levels. You are imagining that there
is something called human nature which will be outraged by what we do and
will turn against us. But we create human nature. Men are infinitely
malleable. Or perhaps you have returned to your old idea that the
proletarians or the slaves will arise and overthrow us. Put it out of your
mind. They are helpless, like the animals. Humanity is the Party. The
others are outside--irrelevant.'

'I don't care. In the end they will beat you. Sooner or later they will
see you for what you are, and then they will tear you to pieces.'

'Do you see any evidence that that is happening? Or any reason why it
should?'

'No. I believe it. I KNOW that you will fail. There is something in the
universe--I don't know, some spirit, some principle--that you will never
overcome.'

'Do you believe in God, Winston?'

'No.'

'Then what is it, this principle that will defeat us?'

'I don't know. The spirit of Man.'

'And do you consider yourself a man?'

'Yes.'

'If you are a man, Winston, you are the last man. Your kind is extinct; we
are the inheritors. Do you understand that you are ALONE? You are outside
history, you are non-existent.' His manner changed and he said more
harshly: 'And you consider yourself morally superior to us, with our lies
and our cruelty?'

'Yes, I consider myself superior.'

O'Brien did not speak. Two other voices were speaking. After a moment
Winston recognized one of them as his own. It was a sound-track of the
conversation he had had with O'Brien, on the night when he had enrolled
himself in the Brotherhood. He heard himself promising to lie, to steal,
to forge, to murder, to encourage drug-taking and prostitution, to
disseminate venereal diseases, to throw vitriol in a child's face. O'Brien
made a small impatient gesture, as though to say that the demonstration
was hardly worth making. Then he turned a switch and the voices stopped.

'Get up from that bed,' he said.

The bonds had loosened themselves. Winston lowered himself to the floor
and stood up unsteadily.

'You are the last man,' said O'Brien. 'You are the guardian of the human
spirit. You shall see yourself as you are. Take off your clothes.'

Winston undid the bit of string that held his overalls together. The zip
fastener had long since been wrenched out of them. He could not remember
whether at any time since his arrest he had taken off all his clothes at
one time. Beneath the overalls his body was looped with filthy yellowish
rags, just recognizable as the remnants of underclothes. As he slid
them to the ground he saw that there was a three-sided mirror at the far
end of the room. He approached it, then stopped short. An involuntary cry
had broken out of him.

'Go on,' said O'Brien. 'Stand between the wings of the mirror. You shall
see the side view as well.'

He had stopped because he was frightened. A bowed, grey-coloured,
skeleton-like thing was coming towards him. Its actual appearance was
frightening, and not merely the fact that he knew it to be himself. He
moved closer to the glass. The creature's face seemed to be protruded,
because of its bent carriage. A forlorn, jailbird's face with a nobby
forehead running back into a bald scalp, a crooked nose, and
battered-looking cheekbones above which his eyes were fierce and watchful.
The cheeks were seamed, the mouth had a drawn-in look. Certainly it was
his own face, but it seemed to him that it had changed more than he had
changed inside. The emotions it registered would be different from the
ones he felt. He had gone partially bald. For the first moment he had
thought that he had gone grey as well, but it was only the scalp that was
grey. Except for his hands and a circle of his face, his body was grey all
over with ancient, ingrained dirt. Here and there under the dirt there
were the red scars of wounds, and near the ankle the varicose ulcer was an
inflamed mass with flakes of skin peeling off it. But the truly frightening
thing was the emaciation of his body. The barrel of the ribs was as narrow
as that of a skeleton: the legs had shrunk so that the knees were thicker
than the thighs. He saw now what O'Brien had meant about seeing the side
view. The curvature of the spine was astonishing. The thin shoulders were
hunched forward so as to make a cavity of the chest, the scraggy neck
seemed to be bending double under the weight of the skull. At a guess he
would have said that it was the body of a man of sixty, suffering from
some malignant disease.

'You have thought sometimes,' said O'Brien, 'that my face--the face of a
member of the Inner Party--looks old and worn. What do you think of your
own face?'

He seized Winston's shoulder and spun him round so that he was facing him.

'Look at the condition you are in!' he said. 'Look at this filthy grime
all over your body. Look at the dirt between your toes. Look at that
disgusting running sore on your leg. Do you know that you stink like a
goat? Probably you have ceased to notice it. Look at your emaciation. Do
you see? I can make my thumb and forefinger meet round your bicep. I could
snap your neck like a carrot. Do you know that you have lost twenty-five
kilograms since you have been in our hands? Even your hair is coming out
in handfuls. Look!' He plucked at Winston's head and brought away a tuft
of hair. 'Open your mouth. Nine, ten, eleven teeth left. How many had you
when you came to us? And the few you have left are dropping out of your
head. Look here!'

He seized one of Winston's remaining front teeth between his powerful
thumb and forefinger. A twinge of pain shot through Winston's jaw. O'Brien
had wrenched the loose tooth out by the roots. He tossed it across the
cell.

'You are rotting away,' he said; 'you are falling to pieces. What are you?
A bag of filth. Now turn around and look into that mirror again. Do you
see that thing facing you? That is the last man. If you are human, that is
humanity. Now put your clothes on again.'

Winston began to dress himself with slow stiff movements. Until now he had
not seemed to notice how thin and weak he was. Only one thought stirred in
his mind: that he must have been in this place longer than he had imagined.
Then suddenly as he fixed the miserable rags round himself a feeling of
pity for his ruined body overcame him. Before he knew what he was doing
he had collapsed on to a small stool that stood beside the bed and burst
into tears. He was aware of his ugliness, his gracelessness, a bundle of
bones in filthy underclothes sitting weeping in the harsh white light: but
he could not stop himself. O'Brien laid a hand on his shoulder, almost
kindly.

'It will not last for ever,' he said. 'You can escape from it whenever you
choose. Everything depends on yourself.'

'You did it!' sobbed Winston. 'You reduced me to this state.'

'No, Winston, you reduced yourself to it. This is what you accepted when
you set yourself up against the Party. It was all contained in that first
act. Nothing has happened that you did not foresee.'

He paused, and then went on:

'We have beaten you, Winston. We have broken you up. You have seen what
your body is like. Your mind is in the same state. I do not think there
can be much pride left in you. You have been kicked and flogged and
insulted, you have screamed with pain, you have rolled on the floor in
your own blood and vomit. You have whimpered for mercy, you have betrayed
everybody and everything. Can you think of a single degradation that has
not happened to you?'

Winston had stopped weeping, though the tears were still oozing out of his
eyes. He looked up at O'Brien.

'I have not betrayed Julia,' he said.

O'Brien looked down at him thoughtfully. 'No,' he said; 'no; that is
perfectly true. You have not betrayed Julia.'

The peculiar reverence for O'Brien, which nothing seemed able to destroy,
flooded Winston's heart again. How intelligent, he thought, how
intelligent! Never did O'Brien fail to understand what was said to him.
Anyone else on earth would have answered promptly that he HAD betrayed
Julia. For what was there that they had not screwed out of him under the
torture? He had told them everything he knew about her, her habits, her
character, her past life; he had confessed in the most trivial detail
everything that had happened at their meetings, all that he had said to
her and she to him, their black-market meals, their adulteries, their
vague plottings against the Party--everything. And yet, in the sense in
which he intended the word, he had not betrayed her. He had not stopped
loving her; his feelings towards her had remained the same. O'Brien had
seen what he meant without the need for explanation.

'Tell me,' he said, 'how soon will they shoot me?'

'It might be a long time,' said O'Brien. 'You are a difficult case. But
don't give up hope. Everyone is cured sooner or later. In the end we shall
shoot you.'




Chapter 4



He was much better. He was growing fatter and stronger every day, if it
was proper to speak of days.

The white light and the humming sound were the same as ever, but the cell
was a little more comfortable than the others he had been in. There was a
pillow and a mattress on the plank bed, and a stool to sit on. They had
given him a bath, and they allowed him to wash himself fairly frequently
in a tin basin. They even gave him warm water to wash with. They had given
him new underclothes and a clean suit of overalls. They had dressed his
varicose ulcer with soothing ointment. They had pulled out the remnants
of his teeth and given him a new set of dentures.

Weeks or months must have passed. It would have been possible now to keep
count of the passage of time, if he had felt any interest in doing so,
since he was being fed at what appeared to be regular intervals. He was
getting, he judged, three meals in the twenty-four hours; sometimes he
wondered dimly whether he was getting them by night or by day. The food
was surprisingly good, with meat at every third meal. Once there was even
a packet of cigarettes. He had no matches, but the never-speaking guard
who brought his food would give him a light. The first time he tried to
smoke it made him sick, but he persevered, and spun the packet out for
a long time, smoking half a cigarette after each meal.

They had given him a white slate with a stump of pencil tied to the
corner. At first he made no use of it. Even when he was awake he was
completely torpid. Often he would lie from one meal to the next almost
without stirring, sometimes asleep, sometimes waking into vague reveries
in which it was too much trouble to open his eyes. He had long grown
used to sleeping with a strong light on his face. It seemed to make no
difference, except that one's dreams were more coherent. He dreamed a
great deal all through this time, and they were always happy dreams. He
was in the Golden Country, or he was sitting among enormous glorious,
sunlit ruins, with his mother, with Julia, with O'Brien--not doing
anything, merely sitting in the sun, talking of peaceful things. Such
thoughts as he had when he was awake were mostly about his dreams. He
seemed to have lost the power of intellectual effort, now that the
stimulus of pain had been removed. He was not bored, he had no desire
for conversation or distraction. Merely to be alone, not to be beaten
or questioned, to have enough to eat, and to be clean all over, was
completely satisfying.

By degrees he came to spend less time in sleep, but he still felt no
impulse to get off the bed. All he cared for was to lie quiet and feel the
strength gathering in his body. He would finger himself here and there,
trying to make sure that it was not an illusion that his muscles were
growing rounder and his skin tauter. Finally it was established beyond a
doubt that he was growing fatter; his thighs were now definitely thicker
than his knees. After that, reluctantly at first, he began exercising
himself regularly. In a little while he could walk three kilometres,
measured by pacing the cell, and his bowed shoulders were growing
straighter. He attempted more elaborate exercises, and was astonished and
humiliated to find what things he could not do. He could not move out of a
walk, he could not hold his stool out at arm's length, he could not stand
on one leg without falling over. He squatted down on his heels, and found
that with agonizing pains in thigh and calf he could just lift himself to
a standing position. He lay flat on his belly and tried to lift his weight
by his hands. It was hopeless, he could not raise himself a centimetre.
But after a few more days--a few more mealtimes--even that feat was
accomplished. A time came when he could do it six times running. He began
to grow actually proud of his body, and to cherish an intermittent belief
that his face also was growing back to normal. Only when he chanced to put
his hand on his bald scalp did he remember the seamed, ruined face that
had looked back at him out of the mirror.

His mind grew more active. He sat down on the plank bed, his back against
the wall and the slate on his knees, and set to work deliberately at the
task of re-educating himself.

He had capitulated, that was agreed. In reality, as he saw now, he had
been ready to capitulate long before he had taken the decision. From the
moment when he was inside the Ministry of Love--and yes, even during those
minutes when he and Julia had stood helpless while the iron voice from the
telescreen told them what to do--he had grasped the frivolity, the
shallowness of his attempt to set himself up against the power of the
Party. He knew now that for seven years the Thought Police had watched him
like a beetle under a magnifying glass. There was no physical act, no word
spoken aloud, that they had not noticed, no train of thought that they had
not been able to infer. Even the speck of whitish dust on the cover of his
diary they had carefully replaced. They had played sound-tracks to him,
shown him photographs. Some of them were photographs of Julia and himself.
Yes, even... He could not fight against the Party any longer. Besides,
the Party was in the right. It must be so; how could the immortal,
collective brain be mistaken? By what external standard could you check
its judgements? Sanity was statistical. It was merely a question of
learning to think as they thought. Only----!

The pencil felt thick and awkward in his fingers. He began to write down
the thoughts that came into his head. He wrote first in large clumsy
capitals:


FREEDOM IS SLAVERY


Then almost without a pause he wrote beneath it:


TWO AND TWO MAKE FIVE


But then there came a sort of check. His mind, as though shying away from
something, seemed unable to concentrate. He knew that he knew what came
next, but for the moment he could not recall it. When he did recall it,
it was only by consciously reasoning out what it must be: it did not come
of its own accord. He wrote:


GOD IS POWER


He accepted everything. The past was alterable. The past never had been
altered. Oceania was at war with Eastasia. Oceania had always been at war
with Eastasia. Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford were guilty of the crimes
they were charged with. He had never seen the photograph that disproved
their guilt. It had never existed, he had invented it. He remembered
remembering contrary things, but those were false memories, products of
self-deception. How easy it all was! Only surrender, and everything else
followed. It was like swimming against a current that swept you backwards
however hard you struggled, and then suddenly deciding to turn round and
go with the current instead of opposing it. Nothing had changed except
your own attitude: the predestined thing happened in any case. He hardly
knew why he had ever rebelled. Everything was easy, except----!

Anything could be true. The so-called laws of Nature were nonsense. The
law of gravity was nonsense. 'If I wished,' O'Brien had said, 'I could
float off this floor like a soap bubble.' Winston worked it out. 'If he
THINKS he floats off the floor, and if I simultaneously THINK I see him
do it, then the thing happens.' Suddenly, like a lump of submerged wreckage
breaking the surface of water, the thought burst into his mind: 'It doesn't
really happen. We imagine it. It is hallucination.' He pushed the thought
under instantly. The fallacy was obvious. It presupposed that somewhere
or other, outside oneself, there was a 'real' world where 'real' things
happened. But how could there be such a world? What knowledge have we of
anything, save through our own minds? All happenings are in the mind.
Whatever happens in all minds, truly happens.

He had no difficulty in disposing of the fallacy, and he was in no danger
of succumbing to it. He realized, nevertheless, that it ought never to
have occurred to him. The mind should develop a blind spot whenever a
dangerous thought presented itself. The process should be automatic,
instinctive. CRIMESTOP, they called it in Newspeak.

He set to work to exercise himself in crimestop. He presented himself with
propositions--'the Party says the earth is flat', 'the party says that
ice is heavier than water'--and trained himself in not seeing or not
understanding the arguments that contradicted them. It was not easy.
It needed great powers of reasoning and improvisation. The arithmetical
problems raised, for instance, by such a statement as 'two and two make
five' were beyond his intellectual grasp. It needed also a sort of
athleticism of mind, an ability at one moment to make the most delicate
use of logic and at the next to be unconscious of the crudest logical
errors. Stupidity was as necessary as intelligence, and as difficult to
attain.

All the while, with one part of his mind, he wondered how soon they would
shoot him. 'Everything depends on yourself,' O'Brien had said; but he knew
that there was no conscious act by which he could bring it nearer. It
might be ten minutes hence, or ten years. They might keep him for years in
solitary confinement, they might send him to a labour-camp, they might
release him for a while, as they sometimes did. It was perfectly possible
that before he was shot the whole drama of his arrest and interrogation
would be enacted all over again. The one certain thing was that death
never came at an expected moment. The tradition--the unspoken tradition:
somehow you knew it, though you never heard it said--was that they shot
you from behind; always in the back of the head, without warning, as you
walked down a corridor from cell to cell.

One day--but 'one day' was not the right expression; just as probably it
was in the middle of the night: once--he fell into a strange, blissful
reverie. He was walking down the corridor, waiting for the bullet. He knew
that it was coming in another moment. Everything was settled, smoothed
out, reconciled. There were no more doubts, no more arguments, no more
pain, no more fear. His body was healthy and strong. He walked easily,
with a joy of movement and with a feeling of walking in sunlight. He was
not any longer in the narrow white corridors in the Ministry of Love, he
was in the enormous sunlit passage, a kilometre wide, down which he had
seemed to walk in the delirium induced by drugs. He was in the Golden
Country, following the foot-track across the old rabbit-cropped pasture.
He could feel the short springy turf under his feet and the gentle sunshine
on his face. At the edge of the field were the elm trees, faintly stirring,
and somewhere beyond that was the stream where the dace lay in the green
pools under the willows.

Suddenly he started up with a shock of horror. The sweat broke out on his
backbone. He had heard himself cry aloud:

'Julia! Julia! Julia, my love! Julia!'

For a moment he had had an overwhelming hallucination of her presence. She
had seemed to be not merely with him, but inside him. It was as though she
had got into the texture of his skin. In that moment he had loved her far
more than he had ever done when they were together and free. Also he knew
that somewhere or other she was still alive and needed his help.

He lay back on the bed and tried to compose himself. What had he done? How
many years had he added to his servitude by that moment of weakness?

In another moment he would hear the tramp of boots outside. They could not
let such an outburst go unpunished. They would know now, if they had not
known before, that he was breaking the agreement he had made with them.
He obeyed the Party, but he still hated the Party. In the old days he had
hidden a heretical mind beneath an appearance of conformity. Now he had
retreated a step further: in the mind he had surrendered, but he had hoped
to keep the inner heart inviolate. He knew that he was in the wrong, but
he preferred to be in the wrong. They would understand that--O'Brien would
understand it. It was all confessed in that single foolish cry.

He would have to start all over again. It might take years. He ran a hand
over his face, trying to familiarize himself with the new shape. There
were deep furrows in the cheeks, the cheekbones felt sharp, the nose
flattened. Besides, since last seeing himself in the glass he had been
given a complete new set of teeth. It was not easy to preserve
inscrutability when you did not know what your face looked like. In any
case, mere control of the features was not enough. For the first time he
perceived that if you want to keep a secret you must also hide it from
yourself. You must know all the while that it is there, but until it is
needed you must never let it emerge into your consciousness in any shape
that could be given a name. From now onwards he must not only think right;
he must feel right, dream right. And all the while he must keep his hatred
locked up inside him like a ball of matter which was part of himself and
yet unconnected with the rest of him, a kind of cyst.

One day they would decide to shoot him. You could not tell when it would
happen, but a few seconds beforehand it should be possible to guess. It
was always from behind, walking down a corridor. Ten seconds would be
enough. In that time the world inside him could turn over. And then
suddenly, without a word uttered, without a check in his step, without the
changing of a line in his face--suddenly the camouflage would be down and
bang! would go the batteries of his hatred. Hatred would fill him like an
enormous roaring flame. And almost in the same instant bang! would go the
bullet, too late, or too early. They would have blown his brain to pieces
before they could reclaim it. The heretical thought would be unpunished,
unrepented, out of their reach for ever. They would have blown a hole in
their own perfection. To die hating them, that was freedom.

He shut his eyes. It was more difficult than accepting an intellectual
discipline. It was a question of degrading himself, mutilating himself. He
had got to plunge into the filthiest of filth. What was the most horrible,
sickening thing of all? He thought of Big Brother. The enormous face
(because of constantly seeing it on posters he always thought of it as
being a metre wide), with its heavy black moustache and the eyes that
followed you to and fro, seemed to float into his mind of its own accord.
What were his true feelings towards Big Brother?

There was a heavy tramp of boots in the passage. The steel door swung open
with a clang. O'Brien walked into the cell. Behind him were the waxen-faced
officer and the black-uniformed guards.

'Get up,' said O'Brien. 'Come here.'

Winston stood opposite him. O'Brien took Winston's shoulders between his
strong hands and looked at him closely.

'You have had thoughts of deceiving me,' he said. 'That was stupid.
Stand up straighter. Look me in the face.'

He paused, and went on in a gentler tone:

'You are improving. Intellectually there is very little wrong with you.
It is only emotionally that you have failed to make progress. Tell me,
Winston--and remember, no lies: you know that I am always able to detect
a lie--tell me, what are your true feelings towards Big Brother?'

'I hate him.'

'You hate him. Good. Then the time has come for you to take the last step.
You must love Big Brother. It is not enough to obey him: you must love
him.'

He released Winston with a little push towards the guards.

'Room 101,' he said.




Chapter 5



At each stage of his imprisonment he had known, or seemed to know,
whereabouts he was in the windowless building. Possibly there were slight
differences in the air pressure. The cells where the guards had beaten him
were below ground level. The room where he had been interrogated by
O'Brien was high up near the roof. This place was many metres underground,
as deep down as it was possible to go.

It was bigger than most of the cells he had been in. But he hardly noticed
his surroundings. All he noticed was that there were two small tables
straight in front of him, each covered with green baize. One was only a
metre or two from him, the other was further away, near the door. He was
strapped upright in a chair, so tightly that he could move nothing, not
even his head. A sort of pad gripped his head from behind, forcing him to
look straight in front of him.

For a moment he was alone, then the door opened and O'Brien came in.

'You asked me once,' said O'Brien, 'what was in Room 101. I told you that
you knew the answer already. Everyone knows it. The thing that is in
Room 101 is the worst thing in the world.'

The door opened again. A guard came in, carrying something made of wire,
a box or basket of some kind. He set it down on the further table. Because
of the position in which O'Brien was standing. Winston could not see what
the thing was.

'The worst thing in the world,' said O'Brien, 'varies from individual to
individual. It may be burial alive, or death by fire, or by drowning, or
by impalement, or fifty other deaths. There are cases where it is some
quite trivial thing, not even fatal.'

He had moved a little to one side, so that Winston had a better view of
the thing on the table. It was an oblong wire cage with a handle on top
for carrying it by. Fixed to the front of it was something that looked
like a fencing mask, with the concave side outwards. Although it was three
or four metres away from him, he could see that the cage was divided
lengthways into two compartments, and that there was some kind of creature
in each. They were rats.

'In your case,' said O'Brien, 'the worst thing in the world happens to be
rats.'

A sort of premonitory tremor, a fear of he was not certain what, had
passed through Winston as soon as he caught his first glimpse of the cage.
But at this moment the meaning of the mask-like attachment in front of it
suddenly sank into him. His bowels seemed to turn to water.

'You can't do that!' he cried out in a high cracked voice. 'You couldn't,
you couldn't! It's impossible.'

'Do you remember,' said O'Brien, 'the moment of panic that used to occur
in your dreams? There was a wall of blackness in front of you, and a
roaring sound in your ears. There was something terrible on the other side
of the wall. You knew that you knew what it was, but you dared not drag it
into the open. It was the rats that were on the other side of the wall.'

'O'Brien!' said Winston, making an effort to control his voice. 'You know
this is not necessary. What is it that you want me to do?'

O'Brien made no direct answer. When he spoke it was in the schoolmasterish
manner that he sometimes affected. He looked thoughtfully into the
distance, as though he were addressing an audience somewhere behind
Winston's back.

'By itself,' he said, 'pain is not always enough. There are occasions when
a human being will stand out against pain, even to the point of death.
But for everyone there is something unendurable--something that cannot be
contemplated. Courage and cowardice are not involved. If you are falling
from a height it is not cowardly to clutch at a rope. If you have come up
from deep water it is not cowardly to fill your lungs with air. It is
merely an instinct which cannot be destroyed. It is the same with the
rats. For you, they are unendurable. They are a form of pressure that you
cannot withstand, even if you wished to. You will do what is required of
you.'

'But what is it, what is it? How can I do it if I don't know what it is?'

O'Brien picked up the cage and brought it across to the nearer table.
He set it down carefully on the baize cloth. Winston could hear the blood
singing in his ears. He had the feeling of sitting in utter loneliness.
He was in the middle of a great empty plain, a flat desert drenched with
sunlight, across which all sounds came to him out of immense distances.
Yet the cage with the rats was not two metres away from him. They were
enormous rats. They were at the age when a rat's muzzle grows blunt and
fierce and his fur brown instead of grey.

'The rat,' said O'Brien, still addressing his invisible audience,
'although a rodent, is carnivorous. You are aware of that. You will have
heard of the things that happen in the poor quarters of this town. In some
streets a woman dare not leave her baby alone in the house, even for five
minutes. The rats are certain to attack it. Within quite a small time they
will strip it to the bones. They also attack sick or dying people. They
show astonishing intelligence in knowing when a human being is helpless.'

There was an outburst of squeals from the cage. It seemed to reach Winston
from far away. The rats were fighting; they were trying to get at each
other through the partition. He heard also a deep groan of despair.
That, too, seemed to come from outside himself.

O'Brien picked up the cage, and, as he did so, pressed something in it.
There was a sharp click. Winston made a frantic effort to tear himself
loose from the chair. It was hopeless; every part of him, even his head,
was held immovably. O'Brien moved the cage nearer. It was less than a
metre from Winston's face.

'I have pressed the first lever,' said O'Brien. 'You understand the
construction of this cage. The mask will fit over your head, leaving no
exit. When I press this other lever, the door of the cage will slide up.
These starving brutes will shoot out of it like bullets. Have you ever
seen a rat leap through the air? They will leap on to your face and bore
straight into it. Sometimes they attack the eyes first. Sometimes they
burrow through the cheeks and devour the tongue.'

The cage was nearer; it was closing in. Winston heard a succession of
shrill cries which appeared to be occurring in the air above his head. But
he fought furiously against his panic. To think, to think, even with a
split second left--to think was the only hope. Suddenly the foul musty
odour of the brutes struck his nostrils. There was a violent convulsion of
nausea inside him, and he almost lost consciousness. Everything had gone
black. For an instant he was insane, a screaming animal. Yet he came out
of the blackness clutching an idea. There was one and only one way to save
himself. He must interpose another human being, the BODY of another human
being, between himself and the rats.

The circle of the mask was large enough now to shut out the vision of
anything else. The wire door was a couple of hand-spans from his face. The
rats knew what was coming now. One of them was leaping up and down, the
other, an old scaly grandfather of the sewers, stood up, with his pink
hands against the bars, and fiercely sniffed the air. Winston could see
the whiskers and the yellow teeth. Again the black panic took hold of him.
He was blind, helpless, mindless.

'It was a common punishment in Imperial China,' said O'Brien as
didactically as ever.

The mask was closing on his face. The wire brushed his cheek. And then--no,
it was not relief, only hope, a tiny fragment of hope. Too late, perhaps
too late. But he had suddenly understood that in the whole world there was
just ONE person to whom he could transfer his punishment--ONE body that he
could thrust between himself and the rats. And he was shouting frantically,
over and over.

'Do it to Julia! Do it to Julia! Not me! Julia! I don't care what you do
to her. Tear her face off, strip her to the bones. Not me! Julia! Not me!'

He was falling backwards, into enormous depths, away from the rats. He was
still strapped in the chair, but he had fallen through the floor, through
the walls of the building, through the earth, through the oceans, through
the atmosphere, into outer space, into the gulfs between the stars--always
away, away, away from the rats. He was light years distant, but O'Brien
was still standing at his side. There was still the cold touch of wire
against his cheek. But through the darkness that enveloped him he heard
another metallic click, and knew that the cage door had clicked shut and
not open.




Chapter 6



The Chestnut Tree was almost empty. A ray of sunlight slanting through a
window fell on dusty table-tops. It was the lonely hour of fifteen. A
tinny music trickled from the telescreens.

Winston sat in his usual corner, gazing into an empty glass. Now and again
he glanced up at a vast face which eyed him from the opposite wall.
BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, the caption said. Unbidden, a waiter came and
filled his glass up with Victory Gin, shaking into it a few drops from
another bottle with a quill through the cork. It was saccharine flavoured
with cloves, the speciality of the cafe.

Winston was listening to the telescreen. At present only music was coming
out of it, but there was a possibility that at any moment there might be
a special bulletin from the Ministry of Peace. The news from the African
front was disquieting in the extreme. On and off he had been worrying
about it all day. A Eurasian army (Oceania was at war with Eurasia:
Oceania had always been at war with Eurasia) was moving southward at
terrifying speed. The mid-day bulletin had not mentioned any definite
area, but it was probable that already the mouth of the Congo was a
battlefield. Brazzaville and Leopoldville were in danger. One did not have
to look at the map to see what it meant. It was not merely a question of
losing Central Africa: for the first time in the whole war, the territory
of Oceania itself was menaced.

A violent emotion, not fear exactly but a sort of undifferentiated
excitement, flared up in him, then faded again. He stopped thinking about
the war. In these days he could never fix his mind on any one subject for
more than a few moments at a time. He picked up his glass and drained it
at a gulp. As always, the gin made him shudder and even retch slightly.
The stuff was horrible. The cloves and saccharine, themselves disgusting
enough in their sickly way, could not disguise the flat oily smell; and
what was worst of all was that the smell of gin, which dwelt with him
night and day, was inextricably mixed up in his mind with the smell of
those----

He never named them, even in his thoughts, and so far as it was possible
he never visualized them. They were something that he was half-aware of,
hovering close to his face, a smell that clung to his nostrils. As the gin
rose in him he belched through purple lips. He had grown fatter since they
released him, and had regained his old colour--indeed, more than regained
it. His features had thickened, the skin on nose and cheekbones was
coarsely red, even the bald scalp was too deep a pink. A waiter, again
unbidden, brought the chessboard and the current issue of 'The Times',
with the page turned down at the chess problem. Then, seeing that Winston's
glass was empty, he brought the gin bottle and filled it. There was no
need to give orders. They knew his habits. The chessboard was always
waiting for him, his corner table was always reserved; even when the place
was full he had it to himself, since nobody cared to be seen sitting too
close to him. He never even bothered to count his drinks. At irregular
intervals they presented him with a dirty slip of paper which they said
was the bill, but he had the impression that they always undercharged him.
It would have made no difference if it had been the other way about. He
had always plenty of money nowadays. He even had a job, a sinecure, more
highly-paid than his old job had been.

The music from the telescreen stopped and a voice took over. Winston raised
his head to listen. No bulletins from the front, however. It was merely a
brief announcement from the Ministry of Plenty. In the preceding quarter,
it appeared, the Tenth Three-Year Plan's quota for bootlaces had been
overfulfilled by 98 per cent.

He examined the chess problem and set out the pieces. It was a tricky
ending, involving a couple of knights. 'White to play and mate in two
moves.' Winston looked up at the portrait of Big Brother. White always
mates, he thought with a sort of cloudy mysticism. Always, without
exception, it is so arranged. In no chess problem since the beginning of
the world has black ever won. Did it not symbolize the eternal, unvarying
triumph of Good over Evil? The huge face gazed back at him, full of calm
power. White always mates.

The voice from the telescreen paused and added in a different and much
graver tone: 'You are warned to stand by for an important announcement at
fifteen-thirty. Fifteen-thirty! This is news of the highest importance.
Take care not to miss it. Fifteen-thirty!' The tinkling music struck up
again.

Winston's heart stirred. That was the bulletin from the front; instinct
told him that it was bad news that was coming. All day, with little spurts
of excitement, the thought of a smashing defeat in Africa had been in and
out of his mind. He seemed actually to see the Eurasian army swarming
across the never-broken frontier and pouring down into the tip of Africa
like a column of ants. Why had it not been possible to outflank them in
some way? The outline of the West African coast stood out vividly in his
mind. He picked up the white knight and moved it across the board. THERE
was the proper spot. Even while he saw the black horde racing southward he
saw another force, mysteriously assembled, suddenly planted in their rear,
cutting their communications by land and sea. He felt that by willing it he
was bringing that other force into existence. But it was necessary to act
quickly. If they could get control of the whole of Africa, if they had
airfields and submarine bases at the Cape, it would cut Oceania in two. It
might mean anything: defeat, breakdown, the redivision of the world, the
destruction of the Party! He drew a deep breath. An extraordinary medley
of feeling--but it was not a medley, exactly; rather it was successive
layers of feeling, in which one could not say which layer was
undermost--struggled inside him.

The spasm passed. He put the white knight back in its place, but for the
moment he could not settle down to serious study of the chess problem.
His thoughts wandered again. Almost unconsciously he traced with his
finger in the dust on the table:

2+2=5

'They can't get inside you,' she had said. But they could get inside you.
'What happens to you here is FOR EVER,' O'Brien had said. That was a true
word. There were things, your own acts, from which you could never recover.
Something was killed in your breast: burnt out, cauterized out.

He had seen her; he had even spoken to her. There was no danger in it. He
knew as though instinctively that they now took almost no interest in his
doings. He could have arranged to meet her a second time if either of them
had wanted to. Actually it was by chance that they had met. It was in the
Park, on a vile, biting day in March, when the earth was like iron and
all the grass seemed dead and there was not a bud anywhere except a few
crocuses which had pushed themselves up to be dismembered by the wind. He
was hurrying along with frozen hands and watering eyes when he saw her not
ten metres away from him. It struck him at once that she had changed in
some ill-defined way. They almost passed one another without a sign, then
he turned and followed her, not very eagerly. He knew that there was no
danger, nobody would take any interest in him. She did not speak. She
walked obliquely away across the grass as though trying to get rid of him,
then seemed to resign herself to having him at her side. Presently they
were in among a clump of ragged leafless shrubs, useless either for
concealment or as protection from the wind. They halted. It was vilely
cold. The wind whistled through the twigs and fretted the occasional,
dirty-looking crocuses. He put his arm round her waist.

There was no telescreen, but there must be hidden microphones: besides,
they could be seen. It did not matter, nothing mattered. They could have
lain down on the ground and done THAT if they had wanted to. His flesh
froze with horror at the thought of it. She made no response whatever to
the clasp of his arm; she did not even try to disengage herself. He knew
now what had changed in her. Her face was sallower, and there was a long
scar, partly hidden by the hair, across her forehead and temple; but that
was not the change. It was that her waist had grown thicker, and, in a
surprising way, had stiffened. He remembered how once, after the explosion
of a rocket bomb, he had helped to drag a corpse out of some ruins, and
had been astonished not only by the incredible weight of the thing, but by
its rigidity and awkwardness to handle, which made it seem more like stone
than flesh. Her body felt like that. It occurred to him that the texture
of her skin would be quite different from what it had once been.

He did not attempt to kiss her, nor did they speak. As they walked back
across the grass, she looked directly at him for the first time. It
was only a momentary glance, full of contempt and dislike. He wondered
whether it was a dislike that came purely out of the past or whether it
was inspired also by his bloated face and the water that the wind kept
squeezing from his eyes. They sat down on two iron chairs, side by side
but not too close together. He saw that she was about to speak. She moved
her clumsy shoe a few centimetres and deliberately crushed a twig. Her
feet seemed to have grown broader, he noticed.

'I betrayed you,' she said baldly.

'I betrayed you,' he said.

She gave him another quick look of dislike.

'Sometimes,' she said, 'they threaten you with something something you
can't stand up to, can't even think about. And then you say, "Don't do it
to me, do it to somebody else, do it to so-and-so." And perhaps you might
pretend, afterwards, that it was only a trick and that you just said it to
make them stop and didn't really mean it. But that isn't true. At the time
when it happens you do mean it. You think there's no other way of saving
yourself, and you're quite ready to save yourself that way. You WANT it to
happen to the other person. You don't give a damn what they suffer. All
you care about is yourself.'

'All you care about is yourself,' he echoed.

'And after that, you don't feel the same towards the other person any
longer.'

'No,' he said, 'you don't feel the same.'

There did not seem to be anything more to say. The wind plastered their
thin overalls against their bodies. Almost at once it became embarrassing
to sit there in silence: besides, it was too cold to keep still. She said
something about catching her Tube and stood up to go.

'We must meet again,' he said.

'Yes,' she said, 'we must meet again.'

He followed irresolutely for a little distance, half a pace behind her.
They did not speak again. She did not actually try to shake him off, but
walked at just such a speed as to prevent his keeping abreast of her.
He had made up his mind that he would accompany her as far as the Tube
station, but suddenly this process of trailing along in the cold seemed
pointless and unbearable. He was overwhelmed by a desire not so much to
get away from Julia as to get back to the Chestnut Tree Cafe, which had
never seemed so attractive as at this moment. He had a nostalgic vision
of his corner table, with the newspaper and the chessboard and the
ever-flowing gin. Above all, it would be warm in there. The next moment,
not altogether by accident, he allowed himself to become separated from
her by a small knot of people. He made a half-hearted attempt to catch up,
then slowed down, turned, and made off in the opposite direction. When he
had gone fifty metres he looked back. The street was not crowded, but
already he could not distinguish her. Any one of a dozen hurrying figures
might have been hers. Perhaps her thickened, stiffened body was no longer
recognizable from behind.

'At the time when it happens,' she had said, 'you do mean it.' He had
meant it. He had not merely said it, he had wished it. He had wished that
she and not he should be delivered over to the----

Something changed in the music that trickled from the telescreen. A
cracked and jeering note, a yellow note, came into it. And then--perhaps
it was not happening, perhaps it was only a memory taking on the semblance
of sound--a voice was singing:


  'Under the spreading chestnut tree
  I sold you and you sold me----'


The tears welled up in his eyes. A passing waiter noticed that his glass
was empty and came back with the gin bottle.

He took up his glass and sniffed at it. The stuff grew not less but more
horrible with every mouthful he drank. But it had become the element he
swam in. It was his life, his death, and his resurrection. It was gin that
sank him into stupor every night, and gin that revived him every morning.
When he woke, seldom before eleven hundred, with gummed-up eyelids and
fiery mouth and a back that seemed to be broken, it would have been
impossible even to rise from the horizontal if it had not been for the
bottle and teacup placed beside the bed overnight. Through the midday
hours he sat with glazed face, the bottle handy, listening to the
telescreen. From fifteen to closing-time he was a fixture in the Chestnut
Tree. No one cared what he did any longer, no whistle woke him, no
telescreen admonished him. Occasionally, perhaps twice a week, he went
to a dusty, forgotten-looking office in the Ministry of Truth and did
a little work, or what was called work. He had been appointed to a
sub-committee of a sub-committee which had sprouted from one of the
innumerable committees dealing with minor difficulties that arose in the
compilation of the Eleventh Edition of the Newspeak Dictionary. They were
engaged in producing something called an Interim Report, but what it was
that they were reporting on he had never definitely found out. It was
something to do with the question of whether commas should be placed
inside brackets, or outside. There were four others on the committee, all
of them persons similar to himself. There were days when they assembled
and then promptly dispersed again, frankly admitting to one another that
there was not really anything to be done. But there were other days when
they settled down to their work almost eagerly, making a tremendous show
of entering up their minutes and drafting long memoranda which were never
finished--when the argument as to what they were supposedly arguing about
grew extraordinarily involved and abstruse, with subtle haggling over
definitions, enormous digressions, quarrels--threats, even, to appeal to
higher authority. And then suddenly the life would go out of them and
they would sit round the table looking at one another with extinct eyes,
like ghosts fading at cock-crow.

The telescreen was silent for a moment. Winston raised his head again. The
bulletin! But no, they were merely changing the music. He had the map of
Africa behind his eyelids. The movement of the armies was a diagram: a
black arrow tearing vertically southward, and a white arrow horizontally
eastward, across the tail of the first. As though for reassurance he
looked up at the imperturbable face in the portrait. Was it conceivable
that the second arrow did not even exist?

His interest flagged again. He drank another mouthful of gin, picked up
the white knight and made a tentative move. Check. But it was evidently
not the right move, because----

Uncalled, a memory floated into his mind. He saw a candle-lit room with a
vast white-counterpaned bed, and himself, a boy of nine or ten, sitting on
the floor, shaking a dice-box, and laughing excitedly. His mother was
sitting opposite him and also laughing.

It must have been about a month before she disappeared. It was a moment of
reconciliation, when the nagging hunger in his belly was forgotten and his
earlier affection for her had temporarily revived. He remembered the day
well, a pelting, drenching day when the water streamed down the window-pane
and the light indoors was too dull to read by. The boredom of the two
children in the dark, cramped bedroom became unbearable. Winston whined
and grizzled, made futile demands for food, fretted about the room pulling
everything out of place and kicking the wainscoting until the neighbours
banged on the wall, while the younger child wailed intermittently. In the
end his mother said, 'Now be good, and I'll buy you a toy. A lovely
toy--you'll love it'; and then she had gone out in the rain, to a little
general shop which was still sporadically open nearby, and came back with
a cardboard box containing an outfit of Snakes and Ladders. He could still
remember the smell of the damp cardboard. It was a miserable outfit. The
board was cracked and the tiny wooden dice were so ill-cut that they
would hardly lie on their sides. Winston looked at the thing sulkily and
without interest. But then his mother lit a piece of candle and they sat
down on the floor to play. Soon he was wildly excited and shouting with
laughter as the tiddly-winks climbed hopefully up the ladders and then
came slithering down the snakes again, almost to the starting-point. They
played eight games, winning four each. His tiny sister, too young to
understand what the game was about, had sat propped up against a bolster,
laughing because the others were laughing. For a whole afternoon they had
all been happy together, as in his earlier childhood.

He pushed the picture out of his mind. It was a false memory. He was
troubled by false memories occasionally. They did not matter so long as
one knew them for what they were. Some things had happened, others had not
happened. He turned back to the chessboard and picked up the white knight
again. Almost in the same instant it dropped on to the board with a
clatter. He had started as though a pin had run into him.

A shrill trumpet-call had pierced the air. It was the bulletin! Victory!
It always meant victory when a trumpet-call preceded the news. A sort of
electric drill ran through the cafe. Even the waiters had started and
pricked up their ears.

The trumpet-call had let loose an enormous volume of noise. Already an
excited voice was gabbling from the telescreen, but even as it started
it was almost drowned by a roar of cheering from outside. The news had
run round the streets like magic. He could hear just enough of what was
issuing from the telescreen to realize that it had all happened, as he had
foreseen; a vast seaborne armada had secretly assembled a sudden blow in
the enemy's rear, the white arrow tearing across the tail of the black.
Fragments of triumphant phrases pushed themselves through the din: 'Vast
strategic manoeuvre--perfect co-ordination--utter rout--half a million
prisoners--complete demoralization--control of the whole of Africa--bring
the war within measurable distance of its end--victory--greatest victory
in human history--victory, victory, victory!'

Under the table Winston's feet made convulsive movements. He had not
stirred from his seat, but in his mind he was running, swiftly running,
he was with the crowds outside, cheering himself deaf. He looked up again
at the portrait of Big Brother. The colossus that bestrode the world!
The rock against which the hordes of Asia dashed themselves in vain! He
thought how ten minutes ago--yes, only ten minutes--there had still been
equivocation in his heart as he wondered whether the news from the front
would be of victory or defeat. Ah, it was more than a Eurasian army that
had perished! Much had changed in him since that first day in the Ministry
of Love, but the final, indispensable, healing change had never happened,
until this moment.

The voice from the telescreen was still pouring forth its tale of prisoners
and booty and slaughter, but the shouting outside had died down a little.
The waiters were turning back to their work. One of them approached with
the gin bottle. Winston, sitting in a blissful dream, paid no attention
as his glass was filled up. He was not running or cheering any longer. He
was back in the Ministry of Love, with everything forgiven, his soul white
as snow. He was in the public dock, confessing everything, implicating
everybody. He was walking down the white-tiled corridor, with the feeling
of walking in sunlight, and an armed guard at his back. The long-hoped-for
bullet was entering his brain.

He gazed up at the enormous face. Forty years it had taken him to learn
what kind of smile was hidden beneath the dark moustache. O cruel, needless
misunderstanding! O stubborn, self-willed exile from the loving breast!
Two gin-scented tears trickled down the sides of his nose. But it was all
right, everything was all right, the struggle was finished. He had won
the victory over himself. He loved Big Brother.



THE END



APPENDIX.

The Principles of Newspeak



Newspeak was the official language of Oceania and had been devised to meet
the ideological needs of Ingsoc, or English Socialism. In the year 1984
there was not as yet anyone who used Newspeak as his sole means of
communication, either in speech or writing. The leading articles in
'The Times' were written in it, but this was a TOUR DE FORCE which could
only be carried out by a specialist. It was expected that Newspeak would
have finally superseded Oldspeak (or Standard English, as we should
call it) by about the year 2050. Meanwhile it gained ground steadily, all
Party members tending to use Newspeak words and grammatical constructions
more and more in their everyday speech. The version in use in 1984, and
embodied in the Ninth and Tenth Editions of the Newspeak Dictionary, was
a provisional one, and contained many superfluous words and archaic
formations which were due to be suppressed later. It is with the final,
perfected version, as embodied in the Eleventh Edition of the Dictionary,
that we are concerned here.

The purpose of Newspeak was not only to provide a medium of expression
for the world-view and mental habits proper to the devotees of Ingsoc,
but to make all other modes of thought impossible. It was intended that
when Newspeak had been adopted once and for all and Oldspeak forgotten,
a heretical thought--that is, a thought diverging from the principles of
Ingsoc--should be literally unthinkable, at least so far as thought is
dependent on words. Its vocabulary was so constructed as to give exact and
often very subtle expression to every meaning that a Party member could
properly wish to express, while excluding all other meanings and also the
possibility of arriving at them by indirect methods. This was done partly
by the invention of new words, but chiefly by eliminating undesirable
words and by stripping such words as remained of unorthodox meanings, and
so far as possible of all secondary meanings whatever. To give a single
example. The word FREE still existed in Newspeak, but it could only be
used in such statements as 'This dog is free from lice' or 'This field is
free from weeds'. It could not be used in its old sense of 'politically
free' or 'intellectually free' since political and intellectual freedom no
longer existed even as concepts, and were therefore of necessity nameless.
Quite apart from the suppression of definitely heretical words, reduction
of vocabulary was regarded as an end in itself, and no word that could be
dispensed with was allowed to survive. Newspeak was designed not to extend
but to DIMINISH the range of thought, and this purpose was indirectly
assisted by cutting the choice of words down to a minimum.

Newspeak was founded on the English language as we now know it, though
many Newspeak sentences, even when not containing newly-created words,
would be barely intelligible to an English-speaker of our own day. Newspeak
words were divided into three distinct classes, known as the A vocabulary,
the B vocabulary (also called compound words), and the C vocabulary.
It will be simpler to discuss each class separately, but the grammatical
peculiarities of the language can be dealt with in the section devoted to
the A vocabulary, since the same rules held good for all three categories.


THE A VOCABULARY. The A vocabulary consisted of the words needed for the
business of everyday life--for such things as eating, drinking, working,
putting on one's clothes, going up and down stairs, riding in vehicles,
gardening, cooking, and the like. It was composed almost entirely of words
that we already possess words like HIT, RUN, DOG, TREE, SUGAR, HOUSE,
FIELD--but in comparison with the present-day English vocabulary their
number was extremely small, while their meanings were far more rigidly
defined. All ambiguities and shades of meaning had been purged out of
them. So far as it could be achieved, a Newspeak word of this class was
simply a staccato sound expressing ONE clearly understood concept. It
would have been quite impossible to use the A vocabulary for literary
purposes or for political or philosophical discussion. It was intended
only to express simple, purposive thoughts, usually involving concrete
objects or physical actions.

The grammar of Newspeak had two outstanding peculiarities. The first of
these was an almost complete interchangeability between different parts of
speech. Any word in the language (in principle this applied even to very
abstract words such as IF or WHEN) could be used either as verb, noun,
adjective, or adverb. Between the verb and the noun form, when they were
of the same root, there was never any variation, this rule of itself
involving the destruction of many archaic forms. The word THOUGHT, for
example, did not exist in Newspeak. Its place was taken by THINK, which
did duty for both noun and verb. No etymological principle was followed
here: in some cases it was the original noun that was chosen for retention,
in other cases the verb. Even where a noun and verb of kindred meaning
were not etymologically connected, one or other of them was frequently
suppressed. There was, for example, no such word as CUT, its meaning being
sufficiently covered by the noun-verb KNIFE. Adjectives were formed by
adding the suffix -FUL to the noun-verb, and adverbs by adding -WISE. Thus
for example, SPEEDFUL meant 'rapid' and SPEEDWISE meant 'quickly'. Certain
of our present-day adjectives, such as GOOD, STRONG, BIG, BLACK, SOFT,
were retained, but their total number was very small. There was little
need for them, since almost any adjectival meaning could be arrived at by
adding -FUL to a noun-verb. None of the now-existing adverbs was retained,
except for a very few already ending in -WISE: the -WISE termination was
invariable. The word WELL, for example, was replaced by GOODWISE.

In addition, any word--this again applied in principle to every word in
the language--could be negatived by adding the affix UN-, or could be
strengthened by the affix PLUS-, or, for still greater emphasis,
DOUBLEPLUS-. Thus, for example, UNCOLD meant 'warm', while PLUSCOLD and
DOUBLEPLUSCOLD meant, respectively, 'very cold' and 'superlatively cold'.
It was also possible, as in present-day English, to modify the meaning of
almost any word by prepositional affixes such as ANTE-, POST-, UP-, DOWN-,
etc. By such methods it was found possible to bring about an enormous
diminution of vocabulary. Given, for instance, the word GOOD, there was no
need for such a word as BAD, since the required meaning was equally
well--indeed, better--expressed by UNGOOD. All that was necessary, in any
case where two words formed a natural pair of opposites, was to decide
which of them to suppress. DARK, for example, could be replaced by UNLIGHT,
or LIGHT by UNDARK, according to preference.

The second distinguishing mark of Newspeak grammar was its regularity.
Subject to a few exceptions which are mentioned below all inflexions
followed the same rules. Thus, in all verbs the preterite and the past
participle were the same and ended in -ED. The preterite of STEAL was
STEALED, the preterite of THINK was THINKED, and so on throughout the
language, all such forms as SWAM, GAVE, BROUGHT, SPOKE, TAKEN, etc., being
abolished. All plurals were made by adding -S or -ES as the case might be.
The plurals OF MAN, OX, LIFE, were MANS, OXES, LIFES. Comparison of
adjectives was invariably made by adding -ER, -EST (GOOD, GOODER, GOODEST),
irregular forms and the MORE, MOST formation being suppressed.

The only classes of words that were still allowed to inflect irregularly
were the pronouns, the relatives, the demonstrative adjectives, and the
auxiliary verbs. All of these followed their ancient usage, except that
WHOM had been scrapped as unnecessary, and the SHALL, SHOULD tenses had
been dropped, all their uses being covered by WILL and WOULD. There were
also certain irregularities in word-formation arising out of the need for
rapid and easy speech. A word which was difficult to utter, or was liable
to be incorrectly heard, was held to be ipso facto a bad word; occasionally
therefore, for the sake of euphony, extra letters were inserted into a word
or an archaic formation was retained. But this need made itself felt
chiefly in connexion with the B vocabulary. WHY so great an importance was
attached to ease of pronunciation will be made clear later in this essay.


THE B VOCABULARY. The B vocabulary consisted of words which had been
deliberately constructed for political purposes: words, that is to say,
which not only had in every case a political implication, but were intended
to impose a desirable mental attitude upon the person using them. Without
a full understanding of the principles of Ingsoc it was difficult to use
these words correctly. In some cases they could be translated into
Oldspeak, or even into words taken from the A vocabulary, but this usually
demanded a long paraphrase and always involved the loss of certain
overtones. The B words were a sort of verbal shorthand, often packing
whole ranges of ideas into a few syllables, and at the same time more
accurate and forcible than ordinary language.

The B words were in all cases compound words. [Compound words such as
SPEAKWRITE, were of course to be found in the A vocabulary, but these were
merely convenient abbreviations and had no special ideological colour.]
They consisted of two or more words, or portions of words, welded together
in an easily pronounceable form. The resulting amalgam was always a
noun-verb, and inflected according to the ordinary rules. To take a single
example: the word GOODTHINK, meaning, very roughly, 'orthodoxy', or, if
one chose to regard it as a verb, 'to think in an orthodox manner'. This
inflected as follows: noun-verb, GOODTHINK; past tense and past participle,
GOODTHINKED; present participle, GOOD-THINKING; adjective, GOODTHINKFUL;
adverb, GOODTHINKWISE; verbal noun, GOODTHINKER.

The B words were not constructed on any etymological plan. The words of
which they were made up could be any parts of speech, and could be placed
in any order and mutilated in any way which made them easy to pronounce
while indicating their derivation. In the word CRIMETHINK (thoughtcrime),
for instance, the THINK came second, whereas in THINKPOL (Thought Police)
it came first, and in the latter word POLICE had lost its second syllable.
Because of the great difficulty in securing euphony, irregular formations
were commoner in the B vocabulary than in the A vocabulary. For example,
the adjective forms of MINITRUE, MINIPAX, and MINILUV were, respectively,
MINITRUTHFUL, MINIPEACEFUL, and MINILOVELY, simply because -TRUEFUL,
-PAXFUL, and -LOVEFUL were slightly awkward to pronounce. In principle,
however, all B words could inflect, and all inflected in exactly the
same way.

Some of the B words had highly subtilized meanings, barely intelligible to
anyone who had not mastered the language as a whole. Consider, for example,
such a typical sentence from a 'Times' leading article as OLDTHINKERS
UNBELLYFEEL INGSOC. The shortest rendering that one could make of this
in Oldspeak would be: 'Those whose ideas were formed before the Revolution
cannot have a full emotional understanding of the principles of English
Socialism.' But this is not an adequate translation. To begin with, in
order to grasp the full meaning of the Newspeak sentence quoted above,
one would have to have a clear idea of what is meant by INGSOC. And in
addition, only a person thoroughly grounded in Ingsoc could appreciate
the full force of the word BELLYFEEL, which implied a blind, enthusiastic
acceptance difficult to imagine today; or of the word OLDTHINK, which was
inextricably mixed up with the idea of wickedness and decadence. But the
special function of certain Newspeak words, of which OLDTHINK was one,
was not so much to express meanings as to destroy them. These words,
necessarily few in number, had had their meanings extended until they
contained within themselves whole batteries of words which, as they were
sufficiently covered by a single comprehensive term, could now be scrapped
and forgotten. The greatest difficulty facing the compilers of the Newspeak
Dictionary was not to invent new words, but, having invented them, to make
sure what they meant: to make sure, that is to say, what ranges of words
they cancelled by their existence.

As we have already seen in the case of the word FREE, words which had
once borne a heretical meaning were sometimes retained for the sake of
convenience, but only with the undesirable meanings purged out of them.
Countless other words such as HONOUR, JUSTICE, MORALITY, INTERNATIONALISM,
DEMOCRACY, SCIENCE, and RELIGION had simply ceased to exist. A few blanket
words covered them, and, in covering them, abolished them. All words
grouping themselves round the concepts of liberty and equality, for
instance, were contained in the single word CRIMETHINK, while all words
grouping themselves round the concepts of objectivity and rationalism
were contained in the single word OLDTHINK. Greater precision would have
been dangerous. What was required in a Party member was an outlook similar
to that of the ancient Hebrew who knew, without knowing much else, that
all nations other than his own worshipped 'false gods'. He did not need to
know that these gods were called Baal, Osiris, Moloch, Ashtaroth, and the
like: probably the less he knew about them the better for his orthodoxy.
He knew Jehovah and the commandments of Jehovah: he knew, therefore, that
all gods with other names or other attributes were false gods. In somewhat
the same way, the party member knew what constituted right conduct, and in
exceedingly vague, generalized terms he knew what kinds of departure from
it were possible. His sexual life, for example, was entirely regulated by
the two Newspeak words SEXCRIME (sexual immorality) and GOODSEX (chastity).
SEXCRIME covered all sexual misdeeds whatever. It covered fornication,
adultery, homosexuality, and other perversions, and, in addition, normal
intercourse practised for its own sake. There was no need to enumerate
them separately, since they were all equally culpable, and, in principle,
all punishable by death. In the C vocabulary, which consisted of scientific
and technical words, it might be necessary to give specialized names to
certain sexual aberrations, but the ordinary citizen had no need of them.
He knew what was meant by GOODSEX--that is to say, normal intercourse
between man and wife, for the sole purpose of begetting children, and
without physical pleasure on the part of the woman: all else was SEXCRIME.
In Newspeak it was seldom possible to follow a heretical thought further
than the perception that it WAS heretical: beyond that point the necessary
words were nonexistent.

No word in the B vocabulary was ideologically neutral. A great many were
euphemisms. Such words, for instance, as JOYCAMP (forced-labour camp) or
MINIPAX (Ministry of Peace, i.e. Ministry of War) meant almost the exact
opposite of what they appeared to mean. Some words, on the other hand,
displayed a frank and contemptuous understanding of the real nature of
Oceanic society. An example was PROLEFEED, meaning the rubbishy
entertainment and spurious news which the Party handed out to the masses.
Other words, again, were ambivalent, having the connotation 'good' when
applied to the Party and 'bad' when applied to its enemies. But in
addition there were great numbers of words which at first sight appeared
to be mere abbreviations and which derived their ideological colour not
from their meaning, but from their structure.

So far as it could be contrived, everything that had or might have
political significance of any kind was fitted into the B vocabulary. The
name of every organization, or body of people, or doctrine, or country, or
institution, or public building, was invariably cut down into the familiar
shape; that is, a single easily pronounced word with the smallest number
of syllables that would preserve the original derivation. In the Ministry
of Truth, for example, the Records Department, in which Winston Smith
worked, was called RECDEP, the Fiction Department was called FICDEP, the
Teleprogrammes Department was called TELEDEP, and so on. This was not
done solely with the object of saving time. Even in the early decades of
the twentieth century, telescoped words and phrases had been one of the
characteristic features of political language; and it had been noticed
that the tendency to use abbreviations of this kind was most marked in
totalitarian countries and totalitarian organizations. Examples were such
words as NAZI, GESTAPO, COMINTERN, INPRECORR, AGITPROP. In the beginning
the practice had been adopted as it were instinctively, but in Newspeak
it was used with a conscious purpose. It was perceived that in thus
abbreviating a name one narrowed and subtly altered its meaning, by
cutting out most of the associations that would otherwise cling to it.
The words COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL, for instance, call up a composite
picture of universal human brotherhood, red flags, barricades, Karl Marx,
and the Paris Commune. The word COMINTERN, on the other hand, suggests
merely a tightly-knit organization and a well-defined body of doctrine.
It refers to something almost as easily recognized, and as limited in
purpose, as a chair or a table. COMINTERN is a word that can be uttered
almost without taking thought, whereas COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL is a phrase
over which one is obliged to linger at least momentarily. In the same way,
the associations called up by a word like MINITRUE are fewer and more
controllable than those called up by MINISTRY OF TRUTH. This accounted not
only for the habit of abbreviating whenever possible, but also for the
almost exaggerated care that was taken to make every word easily
pronounceable.

In Newspeak, euphony outweighed every consideration other than exactitude
of meaning. Regularity of grammar was always sacrificed to it when it
seemed necessary. And rightly so, since what was required, above all for
political purposes, was short clipped words of unmistakable meaning which
could be uttered rapidly and which roused the minimum of echoes in the
speaker's mind. The words of the B vocabulary even gained in force from
the fact that nearly all of them were very much alike. Almost invariably
these words--GOODTHINK, MINIPAX, PROLEFEED, SEXCRIME, JOYCAMP, INGSOC,
BELLYFEEL, THINKPOL, and countless others--were words of two or three
syllables, with the stress distributed equally between the first syllable
and the last. The use of them encouraged a gabbling style of speech, at
once staccato and monotonous. And this was exactly what was aimed at. The
intention was to make speech, and especially speech on any subject not
ideologically neutral, as nearly as possible independent of consciousness.
For the purposes of everyday life it was no doubt necessary, or sometimes
necessary, to reflect before speaking, but a Party member called upon to
make a political or ethical judgement should be able to spray forth the
correct opinions as automatically as a machine gun spraying forth bullets.
His training fitted him to do this, the language gave him an almost
foolproof instrument, and the texture of the words, with their harsh sound
and a certain wilful ugliness which was in accord with the spirit of
Ingsoc, assisted the process still further.

So did the fact of having very few words to choose from. Relative to our
own, the Newspeak vocabulary was tiny, and new ways of reducing it were
constantly being devised. Newspeak, indeed, differed from most all other
languages in that its vocabulary grew smaller instead of larger every
year. Each reduction was a gain, since the smaller the area of choice,
the smaller the temptation to take thought. Ultimately it was hoped to
make articulate speech issue from the larynx without involving the higher
brain centres at all. This aim was frankly admitted in the Newspeak word
DUCKSPEAK, meaning 'to quack like a duck'. Like various other words in
the B vocabulary, DUCKSPEAK was ambivalent in meaning. Provided that the
opinions which were quacked out were orthodox ones, it implied nothing but
praise, and when 'The Times' referred to one of the orators of the Party
as a DOUBLEPLUSGOOD DUCKSPEAKER it was paying a warm and valued compliment.


THE C VOCABULARY. The C vocabulary was supplementary to the others and
consisted entirely of scientific and technical terms. These resembled the
scientific terms in use today, and were constructed from the same roots,
but the usual care was taken to define them rigidly and strip them of
undesirable meanings. They followed the same grammatical rules as the
words in the other two vocabularies. Very few of the C words had any
currency either in everyday speech or in political speech. Any scientific
worker or technician could find all the words he needed in the list devoted
to his own speciality, but he seldom had more than a smattering of the
words occurring in the other lists. Only a very few words were common to
all lists, and there was no vocabulary expressing the function of Science
as a habit of mind, or a method of thought, irrespective of its particular
branches. There was, indeed, no word for 'Science', any meaning that it
could possibly bear being already sufficiently covered by the word INGSOC.

From the foregoing account it will be seen that in Newspeak the expression
of unorthodox opinions, above a very low level, was well-nigh impossible.
It was of course possible to utter heresies of a very crude kind, a
species of blasphemy. It would have been possible, for example, to say
BIG BROTHER IS UNGOOD. But this statement, which to an orthodox ear merely
conveyed a self-evident absurdity, could not have been sustained by
reasoned argument, because the necessary words were not available. Ideas
inimical to Ingsoc could only be entertained in a vague wordless form,
and could only be named in very broad terms which lumped together and
condemned whole groups of heresies without defining them in doing so.
One could, in fact, only use Newspeak for unorthodox purposes by
illegitimately translating some of the words back into Oldspeak. For
example, ALL MANS ARE EQUAL was a possible Newspeak sentence, but only
in the same sense in which ALL MEN ARE REDHAIRED is a possible Oldspeak
sentence. It did not contain a grammatical error, but it expressed
a palpable untruth--i.e. that all men are of equal size, weight, or
strength. The concept of political equality no longer existed, and this
secondary meaning had accordingly been purged out of the word EQUAL.
In 1984, when Oldspeak was still the normal means of communication,
the danger theoretically existed that in using Newspeak words one might
remember their original meanings. In practice it was not difficult for
any person well grounded in DOUBLETHINK to avoid doing this, but within
a couple of generations even the possibility of such a lapse would have
vanished. A person growing up with Newspeak as his sole language would no
more know that EQUAL had once had the secondary meaning of 'politically
equal', or that FREE had once meant 'intellectually free', than for
instance, a person who had never heard of chess would be aware of the
secondary meanings attaching to QUEEN and ROOK. There would be many
crimes and errors which it would be beyond his power to commit, simply
because they were nameless and therefore unimaginable. And it was to be
foreseen that with the passage of time the distinguishing characteristics
of Newspeak would become more and more pronounced--its words growing
fewer and fewer, their meanings more and more rigid, and the chance of
putting them to improper uses always diminishing.

When Oldspeak had been once and for all superseded, the last link with
the past would have been severed. History had already been rewritten,
but fragments of the literature of the past survived here and there,
imperfectly censored, and so long as one retained one's knowledge of
Oldspeak it was possible to read them. In the future such fragments, even
if they chanced to survive, would be unintelligible and untranslatable.
It was impossible to translate any passage of Oldspeak into Newspeak unless
it either referred to some technical process or some very simple everyday
action, or was already orthodox (GOODTHINKFUL would be the Newspeak
expression) in tendency. In practice this meant that no book written before
approximately 1960 could be translated as a whole. Pre-revolutionary
literature could only be subjected to ideological translation--that is,
alteration in sense as well as language. Take for example the well-known
passage from the Declaration of Independence:


WE HOLD THESE TRUTHS TO BE SELF-EVIDENT, THAT ALL MEN ARE CREATED EQUAL,
THAT THEY ARE ENDOWED BY THEIR CREATOR WITH CERTAIN INALIENABLE RIGHTS,
THAT AMONG THESE ARE LIFE, LIBERTY, AND THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS.
THAT TO SECURE THESE RIGHTS, GOVERNMENTS ARE INSTITUTED AMONG MEN,
DERIVING THEIR POWERS FROM THE CONSENT OF THE GOVERNED. THAT WHENEVER
ANY FORM OF GOVERNMENT BECOMES DESTRUCTIVE OF THOSE ENDS, IT IS THE RIGHT
OF THE PEOPLE TO ALTER OR ABOLISH IT, AND TO INSTITUTE NEW GOVERNMENT...


It would have been quite impossible to render this into Newspeak while
keeping to the sense of the original. The nearest one could come to doing
so would be to swallow the whole passage up in the single word CRIMETHINK.
A full translation could only be an ideological translation, whereby
Jefferson's words would be changed into a panegyric on absolute government.

A good deal of the literature of the past was, indeed, already being
transformed in this way. Considerations of prestige made it desirable to
preserve the memory of certain historical figures, while at the same time
bringing their achievements into line with the philosophy of Ingsoc.
Various writers, such as Shakespeare, Milton, Swift, Byron, Dickens, and
some others were therefore in process of translation: when the task had
been completed, their original writings, with all else that survived of
the literature of the past, would be destroyed. These translations were
a slow and difficult business, and it was not expected that they would
be finished before the first or second decade of the twenty-first
century. There were also large quantities of merely utilitarian
literature--indispensable technical manuals, and the like--that had to
be treated in the same way. It was chiefly in order to allow time for
the preliminary work of translation that the final adoption of Newspeak
had been fixed for so late a date as 2050.

THE END

Review of Adolph Hitler's "Mein Kampf"
by

George Orwell

Published in New English Weekly, 21 March 1940
IT is a sign of the speed at which events are moving that Hurst and Blackett's unexpurgated edition of Mein Kampf, published only a year ago, is edited from a pro-Hitler angle. The obvious intention of the translator's preface and notes is to tone down the book's ferocity and present Hitler in as kindly a light as possible. For at that date Hitler was still respectable. He had crushed the German labour movement, and for that the property-owning classes were willing to forgive him almost anything. Both Left and Right concurred in the very shallow notion that National Socialism was merely a version of Conservatism.

Then suddenly it turned out that Hitler was not respectable after all. As one result of this, Hurst and Blackett's edition was reissued in a new jacket explaining that all profits would be devoted to the Red Cross. Nevertheless, simply on the internal evidence of Mein Kampf, it is difficult to believe that any real change has taken place in Hitler's aims and opinions. When one compares his utterances of a year or so ago with those made fifteen years earlier, a thing that strikes one is the rigidity of his mind, the way in which his world-view doesn't develop. It is the fixed vision of a monomaniac and not likely to be much affected by the temporary manoeuvres of power politics. Probably, in Hitler's own mind, the Russo-German Pact represents no more than an alteration of time-table. The plan laid down in Mein Kampf was to smash Russia first, with the implied intention of smashing England afterwards. Now, as it has turned out, England has got to be dealt with first, because Russia was the more easily bribed of the two. But Russia's turn will come when England is out of the picture—that, no doubt, is how Hitler sees it. Whether it will turn out that way is of course a different question.

Suppose that Hitler's programme could be put into effect. What he envisages, a hundred years hence, is a continuous state of 250 million Germans with plenty of "living room" (i.e. stretching to Afghanistan or thereabouts), a horrible brainless empire in which, essentially, nothing ever happens except the training of young men for war and the endless breeding of fresh cannon-fodder. How was it that he was able to put this monstrous vision across? It is easy to say that at one stage of his career he was financed by the heavy industrialists, who saw in him the man who would smash the Socialists and Communists. They would not have backed him, however, if he had not talked a great movement into existence already. Again, the situation in Germany, with its seven million unemployed, was obviously favourable for demagogues. But Hitler could not have succeeded against his many rivals if it had not been for the attraction of his own personality, which one can feel even in the clumsy writing of Mein Kampf, and which is no doubt overwhelming when one hears his speeches. I should like to put it on record that I have never been able to dislike Hitler. Ever since he came to power—till then, like nearly everyone, I had been deceived into thinking that he did not matter—I have reflected that I would certainly kill him if I could get within reach of him, but that I could feel no personal animosity. The fact is that there is something deeply appealing about him. One feels it again when one sees his photographs—and I recommend especially the photograph at the beginning of Hurst and Blackett's edition, which shows Hitler in his early Brownshirt days. It is a pathetic, dog-like face, the face of a man suffering under intolerable wrongs. In a rather more manly way it reproduces the expression of innumerable pictures of Christ crucified, and there is little doubt that that is how Hitler sees himself. The initial, personal cause of his grievance against the universe can only be guessed at; but at any rate the grievance is here. He is the martyr, the victim, Prometheus chained to the rock, the self-sacrificing hero who fights single-handed against impossible odds. If he were killing a mouse he would know how to make it seem like a dragon. One feels, as with Napoleon, that he is fighting against destiny, that he can't win, and yet that he somehow deserves to. The attraction of such a pose is of course enormous; half the films that one sees turn upon some such theme.

Also he has grasped the falsity of the hedonistic attitude to life. Nearly all western thought since the last war, certainly all "progressive" thought, has assumed tacitly that human beings desire nothing beyond ease, security and avoidance of pain. In such a view of life there is no room, for instance, for patriotism and the military virtues. The Socialist who finds his children playing with soldiers is usually upset, but he is never able to think of a substitute for the tin soldiers; tin pacifists somehow won't do. Hitler, because in his own joyless mind he feels it with exceptional strength, knows that human beings don't only want comfort, safety, short working-hours, hygiene, birth-control and, in general, common sense; they also, at least intermittently, want struggle and self-sacrifice, not to mention drums, flags and loyalty-parades. However they may be as economic theories, Fascism and Nazism are psychologically far sounder than any hedonistic conception of life. The same is probably true of Stalin's militarised version of Socialism. All three of the great dictators have enhanced their power by imposing intolerable burdens on their peoples. Whereas Socialism, and even capitalism in a more grudging way, have said to people "I offer you a good time," Hitler has said to them "I offer you struggle, danger and death," and as a result a whole nation flings itself at his feet. Perhaps later on they will get sick of it and change their minds, as at the end of the last war. After a few years of slaughter and starvation "Greatest happiness of the greatest number" is a good slogan, but at this moment "Better an end with horror than a horror without end" is a winner. Now that we are fighting against the man who coined it, we ought not to underrate its emotional appeal.