Title:      Keep the Aspidistra Flying
Author:     George Orwell


Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not
money, I am become as a sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.  And
though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries,
and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could
remove mountains, and have not money, I am nothing.  And though I
bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to
be burned, and have not money, it profiteth me nothing.  Money
suffereth long, and is kind; money envieth not; money vaunteth not
itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave unseemly, seeketh not her
own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil; rejoiceth not in
iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; beareth all things, believeth
all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. . . .  And now
abideth faith, hope, money, these three; but the greatest of these
is money.

I Corinthians xiii (adapted)



1


The clock struck half past two.  In the little office at the back
of Mr McKechnie's bookshop, Gordon--Gordon Comstock, last member
of the Comstock family, aged twenty-nine and rather moth-eaten
already--lounged across the table, pushing a four-penny packet of
Player's Weights open and shut with his thumb.

The ding-dong of another, remoter clock--from the Prince of Wales,
the other side of the street--rippled the stagnant air.  Gordon
made an effort, sat upright, and stowed his packet of cigarettes
away in his inside pocket.  He was perishing for a smoke.  However,
there were only four cigarettes left.  Today was Wednesday and he
had no money coming to him till Friday.  It would be too bloody to
be without tobacco tonight as well as all tomorrow.

Bored in advance by tomorrow's tobaccoless hours, he got up and
moved towards the door--a small frail figure, with delicate bones
and fretful movements.  His coat was out at elbow in the right
sleeve and its middle button was missing; his ready-made flannel
trousers were stained and shapeless.  Even from above you could see
that his shoes needed resoling.

The money clinked in his trouser pocket as he got up.  He knew
the precise sum that was there.  Fivepence halfpenny--twopence
halfpenny and a Joey.  He paused, took out the miserable little
threepenny-bit, and looked at it.  Beastly, useless thing!  And
bloody fool to have taken it!  It had happened yesterday, when he
was buying cigarettes.  'Don't mind a threepenny-bit, do you, sir?'
the little bitch of a shop-girl had chirped.  And of course he had
let her give it him.  'Oh no, not at all!' he had said--fool,
bloody fool!

His heart sickened to think that he had only fivepence halfpenny in
the world, threepence of which couldn't even be spent.  Because how
can you buy anything with a threepenny-bit?  It isn't a coin, it's
the answer to a riddle.  You look such a fool when you take it out
of your pocket, unless it's in among a whole handful of other
coins.  'How much?' you say.  'Threepence,' the shop-girl says.
And then you feel all round your pocket and fish out that absurd
little thing, all by itself, sticking on the end of your finger
like a tiddley-wink.  The shop-girl sniffs.  She spots immediately
that it's your last threepence in the world.  You see her glance
quickly at it--she's wondering whether there's a piece of Christmas
pudding still sticking to it.  And you stalk out with your nose in
the air, and can't ever go to that shop again.  No!  We won't spend
our Joey.  Twopence halfpenny left--twopence halfpenny to last till
Friday.

This was the lonely after-dinner hour, when few or no customers
were to be expected.  He was alone with seven thousand books.  The
small dark room, smelling of dust and decayed paper, that gave on
the office, was filled to the brim with books, mostly aged and
unsaleable.  On the top shelves near the ceiling the quarto volumes
of extinct encyclopedias slumbered on their sides in piles like the
tiered coffins in common graves.  Gordon pushed aside the blue,
dust-sodden curtains that served as a doorway to the next room.
This, better lighted than the other, contained the lending library.
It was one of those 'twopenny no-deposit' libraries beloved of
book-pinchers.  No books in it except novels, of course.  And WHAT
novels!  But that too was a matter of course.

Eight hundred strong, the novels lined the room on three sides
ceiling-high, row upon row of gaudy oblong backs, as though the
walls had been built of many-coloured bricks laid upright.  They
were arranged alphabetically.  Arlen, Burroughs, Deeping, Dell,
Frankau, Galsworthy, Gibbs, Priestley, Sapper, Walpole.  Gordon
eyed them with inert hatred.  At this moment he hated all books,
and novels most of all.  Horrible to think of all that soggy, half-
baked trash massed together in one place.  Pudding, suet pudding.
Eight hundred slabs of pudding, walling him in--a vault of
puddingstone.  The thought was oppressive.  He moved on through the
open doorway into the front part of the shop.  In doing so, he
smoothed his hair.  It was an habitual movement.  After all, there
might be girls outside the glass door.  Gordon was not impressive
to look at.  He was just five feet seven inches high, and because
his hair was usually too long he gave the impression that his head
was a little too big for his body.  He was never quite unconscious
of his small stature.  When he knew that anyone was looking at him
he carried himself very upright, throwing a chest, with a you-be-
damned air which occasionally deceived simple people.

However, there was nobody outside.  The front room, unlike the rest
of the shop, was smart and expensive-looking, and it contained
about two thousand books, exclusive of those in the window.  On the
right there was a glass showcase in which children's books were
kept.  Gordon averted his eyes from a beastly Rackhamesque dust-
jacket; elvish children tripping Wendily through a bluebell glade.
He gazed out through the glass door.  A foul day, and the wind
rising.  The sky was leaden, the cobbles of the street were slimy.
It was St Andrew's day, the thirtieth of November.  McKechnie's
stood on a corner, on a sort of shapeless square where four streets
converged.  To the left, just within sight from the door, stood a
great elm-tree, leafless now, its multitudinous twigs making sepia-
coloured lace against the sky.  Opposite, next to the Prince of
Wales, were tall hoardings covered with ads for patent foods and
patent medicines.  A gallery of monstrous doll-faces--pink vacuous
faces, full of goofy optimism.  Q.T. Sauce, Truweet Breakfast
Crisps ('Kiddies clamour for their Breakfast Crisps'), Kangaroo
Burgundy, Vitamalt Chocolate, Bovex.  Of them all, the Bovex one
oppressed Gordon the most.  A spectacled rat-faced clerk, with
patent-leather hair, sitting at a cafe table grinning over a white
mug of Bovex.  'Corner Table enjoys his meal with Bovex', the
legend ran.

Gordon shortened the focus of his eyes.  From the dust-dulled pane
the reflection of his own face looked back at him.  Not a good
face.  Not thirty yet, but moth-eaten already.  Very pale, with
bitter, ineradicable lines.  What people call a 'good' forehead--
high, that is--but a small pointed chin, so that the face as a
whole was pear-shaped rather than oval.  Hair mouse-coloured and
unkempt, mouth unamiable, eyes hazel inclining to green.  He
lengthened the focus of his eyes again.  He hated mirrors nowadays.
Outside, all was bleak and wintry.  A tram, like a raucous swan of
steel, glided groaning over the cobbles, and in its wake the wind
swept a debris of trampled leaves.  The twigs of the elm-tree were
swirling, straining eastward.  The poster that advertised Q.T.
Sauce was torn at the edge; a ribbon of paper fluttered fitfully
like a tiny pennant.  In the side street too, to the right, the
naked poplars that lined the pavement bowed sharply as the wind
caught them.  A nasty raw wind.  There was a threatening note in it
as it swept over; the first growl of winter's anger.  Two lines of
a poem struggled for birth in Gordon's mind:

Sharply the something wind--for instance, threatening wind?  No,
better, menacing wind.  The menacing wind blows over--no, sweeps
over, say.

The something poplars--yielding poplars?  No, better, bending
poplars.  Assonance between bending and menacing?  No matter.  The
bending poplars, newly bare.  Good.


Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over
The bending poplars, newly bare.


Good.  'Bare' is a sod to rhyme; however, there's always 'air',
which every poet since Chaucer has been struggling to find rhymes
for.  But the impulse died away in Gordon's mind.  He turned the
money over in his pocket.  Twopence halfpenny and a Joey--twopence
halfpenny.  His mind was sticky with boredom.  He couldn't cope
with rhymes and adjectives.  You can't, with only twopence
halfpenny in your pocket.

His eyes refocused themselves upon the posters opposite.  He had
his private reasons for hating them.  Mechanically he re-read their
slogans.  'Kangaroo Burgundy--the wine for Britons.'  'Asthma was
choking her!'  'Q.T. Sauce Keeps Hubby Smiling.'  'Hike all day on
a Slab of Vitamalt!'  'Curve Cut--the Smoke for Outdoor Men.'
'Kiddies clamour for their Breakfast Crisps.'  'Corner Table enjoys
his meal with Bovex.'

Ha!  A customer--potential, at any rate.  Gordon stiffened himself.
Standing by the door, you could get an oblique view out of the
front window without being seen yourself.  He looked the potential
customer over.

A decentish middle-aged man, black suit, bowler hat, umbrella, and
dispatch-case--provincial solicitor or Town Clerk--keeking at the
window with large pale-coloured eyes.  He wore a guilty look.
Gordon followed the direction of his eyes.  Ah!  So that was it!
He had nosed out those D. H. Lawrence first editions in the far
corner.  Pining for a bit of smut, of course.  He had heard of Lady
Chatterley afar off.  A bad face he had, Gordon thought.  Pale,
heavy, downy, with bad contours.  Welsh, by the look of him--
Nonconformist, anyway.  He had the regular Dissenting pouches round
the corners of his mouth.  At home, president of the local Purity
League or Seaside Vigilance Committee (rubber-soled slippers and
electric torch, spotting kissing couples along the beach parade),
and now up in town on the razzle.  Gordon wished he would come in.
Sell him a copy of Women in Love.  How it would disappoint him!

But no!  The Welsh solicitor had funked it.  He tucked his umbrella
under his arm and moved off with righteously turned backside.  But
doubtless tonight, when darkness hid his blushes, he'd slink into
one of the rubber-shops and buy High Jinks in a Parisian Convent,
by Sadie Blackeyes.

Gordon turned away from the door and back to the book-shelves.  In
the shelves to your left as you came out of the library the new and
nearly-new books were kept--a patch of bright colour that was meant
to catch the eye of anyone glancing through the glass door.  Their
sleek unspotted backs seemed to yearn at you from the shelves.
'Buy me, buy me!' they seemed to be saying.  Novels fresh from the
press--still unravished brides, pining for the paperknife to
deflower them--and review copies, like youthful widows, blooming
still though virgin no longer, and here and there, in sets of half
a dozen, those pathetic spinster-things, 'remainders', still
guarding hopefully their long preserv'd virginity.  Gordon turned
his eyes away from the 'remainders'.  They called up evil memories.
The single wretched little book that he himself had published, two
years ago, had sold exactly a hundred and fifty-three copies and
then been 'remaindered'; and even as a 'remainder' it hadn't sold.
He passed the new books by and paused in front of the shelves which
ran at right angles to them and which contained more second-hand
books.

Over to the right were shelves of poetry.  Those in front of him
were prose, a miscellaneous lot.  Upwards and downwards they were
graded, from clean and expensive at eye-level to cheap and dingy at
top and bottom.  In all book-shops there goes on a savage Darwinian
struggle in which the works of living men gravitate to eye-level
and the works of dead men go up or down--down to Gehenna or up to
the throne, but always away from any position where they will be
noticed.  Down in the bottom shelves the 'classics', the extinct
monsters of the Victorian age, were quietly rotting.  Scott,
Carlyle, Meredith, Ruskin, Pater, Stevenson--you could hardly read
the names upon their broad dowdy backs.  In the top shelves, almost
out of sight, slept the pudgy biographies of dukes.  Below those,
saleable still and therefore placed within reach, was 'religious'
literature--all sects and all creeds, lumped indiscriminately
together.  The World Beyond, by the author of Spirit Hands Have
Touched me.  Dean Farrar's Life of Christ.  Jesus the First
Rotarian.  Father Hilaire Chestnut's latest book of R. C.
propaganda.  Religion always sells provided it is soppy enough.
Below, exactly at eye-level, was the contemporary stuff.
Priestley's latest.  Dinky little books of reprinted 'middles'.
Cheer-up 'humour' from Herbert and Knox and Milne.  Some highbrow
stuff as well.  A novel or two by Hemingway and Virginia Woolf.
Smart pseudo-Strachey predigested biographies.  Snooty, refined
books on safe painters and safe poets by those moneyed young beasts
who glide so gracefully from Eton to Cambridge and from Cambridge
to the literary reviews.

Dull-eyed, he gazed at the wall of books.  He hated the whole lot
of them, old and new, highbrow and lowbrow, snooty and chirpy.  The
mere sight of them brought home to him his own sterility.  For here
was he, supposedly a 'writer', and he couldn't even 'write'!  It
wasn't merely a question of not getting published; it was that he
produced nothing, or next to nothing.  And all that tripe
cluttering the shelves--well, at any rate it existed; it was an
achievement of sorts.  Even the Dells and Deepings do at least turn
out their yearly acre of print.  But it was the snooty 'cultured'
kind of books that he hated the worst.  Books of criticism and
belles-lettres.  The kind of thing that those moneyed young beasts
from Cambridge write almost in their sleep--and that Gordon himself
might have written if he had had a little more money.  Money and
culture!  In a country like England you can no more be cultured
without money than you can join the Cavalry Club.  With the same
instinct that makes a child waggle a loose tooth, he took out a
snooty-looking volume--Some Aspects of the Italian Baroque--opened
it, read a paragraph, and shoved it back with mingled loathing and
envy.  That devastating omniscience!  That noxious, horn-spectacled
refinement!  And the money that such refinement means!  For after
all, what is there behind it, except money?  Money for the right
kind of education, money for influential friends, money for leisure
and peace of mind, money for trips to Italy.  Money writes books,
money sells them.  Give me not righteousness, O Lord, give me
money, only money.

He jingled the coins in his pocket.  He was nearly thirty and had
accomplished nothing; only his miserable book of poems that had
fallen flatter than any pancake.  And ever since, for two whole
years, he had been struggling in the labyrinth of a dreadful book
that never got any further, and which, as he knew in his moments of
clarity, never would get any further.  It was the lack of money,
simply the lack of money, that robbed him of the power to 'write'.
He clung to that as to an article of faith.  Money, money, all is
money!  Could you write even a penny novelette without money to put
heart in you?  Invention, energy, wit, style, charm--they've all
got to be paid for in hard cash.

Nevertheless, as he looked along the shelves he felt himself a
little comforted.  So many of the books were faded and unreadable.
After all, we're all in the same boat.  Memento mori.  For you and
for me and for the snooty young men from Cambridge, the same
oblivion waits--though doubtless it'll wait rather longer for those
snooty young men from Cambridge.  He looked at the time-dulled
'classics' near his feet.  Dead, all dead.  Carlyle and Ruskin and
Meredith and Stevenson--all are dead, God rot them.  He glanced
over their faded titles.  Collected Letters of Robert Louis
Stevenson.  Ha, ha!  That's good.  Collected Letters of Robert
Louis Stevenson!  Its top edge was black with dust.  Dust thou art,
to dust returnest.  Gordon kicked Stevenson's buckram backside.
Art there, old false-penny?  You're cold meat, if ever Scotchman
was.

Ping!  The shop bell.  Gordon turned round.  Two customers, for the
library.

A dejected, round-shouldered, lower-class woman, looking like a
draggled duck nosing among garbage, seeped in, fumbling with a rush
basket.  In her wake hopped a plump little sparrow of a woman, red-
cheeked, middle-middle class, carrying under her arm a copy of The
Forsyte Saga--title outwards, so that passers-by could spot her for
a high-brow.

Gordon had taken off his sour expression.  He greeted them with the
homey, family-doctor geniality reserved for library-subscribers.

'Good afternoon, Mrs Weaver.  Good afternoon, Mrs Penn.  What
terrible weather!'

'Shocking!' said Mrs Penn.

He stood aside to let them pass.  Mrs Weaver upset her rush basket
and spilled on to the floor a much-thumbed copy of Ethel M. Dell's
Silver Wedding.  Mrs Penn's bright bird-eye lighted upon it.
Behind Mrs Weaver's back she smiled up to Gordon, archly, as
highbrow to highbrow.  Dell!  The lowness of it!  The books these
lower classes read!  Understandingly, he smiled back.  They passed
into the library, highbrow to highbrow smiling.

Mrs Penn laid The Forsyte Saga on the table and turned her sparrow-
bosom upon Gordon.  She was always very affable to Gordon.  She
addressed him as Mister Comstock, shopwalker though he was, and
held literary conversations with him.  There was the free-masonry
of highbrows between them.

'I hope you enjoyed The Forsyte Saga, Mrs Penn?'

'What a perfectly MARVELLOUS achievement that book is, Mr Comstock!
Do you know that that makes the fourth time I've read it?  An epic,
a real epic!'

Mrs Weaver nosed among the books, too dim-witted to grasp that they
were in alphabetical order.

'I don't know what to 'ave this week, that I don't,' she mumbled
through untidy lips.  'My daughter she keeps on at me to 'ave a try
at Deeping.  She's great on Deeping, my daughter is.  But my son-
in-law, now, 'e's more for Burroughs.  I don't know, I'm sure.'

A spasm passed over Mrs Penn's face at the mention of Burroughs.
She turned her back markedly on Mrs Weaver.

'What I feel, Mr Comstock, is that there's something so BIG about
Galsworthy.  He's so broad, so universal, and yet at the same time
so thoroughly English in spirit, so HUMAN.  His books are real
HUMAN documents.'

'And Priestley, too,' said Gordon.  'I think Priestley's such an
awfully fine writer, don't you?'

'Oh, he is!  So big, so broad, so human!  And so essentially
English!'

Mrs Weaver pursed her lips.  Behind them were three isolated yellow
teeth.

'I think p'raps I can do better'n 'ave another Dell,' she said.
'You 'ave got some more Dells, 'aven't you?  I DO enjoy a good read
of Dell, I must say.  I says to my daughter, I says, "You can keep
your Deepings and your Burroughses.  Give me Dell," I says.'

Ding Dong Dell!  Dukes and dogwhips!  Mrs Penn's eye signalled
highbrow irony.  Gordon returned her signal.  Keep in with Mrs
Penn!  A good, steady customer.

'Oh, certainly, Mrs Weaver.  We've got a whole shelf by Ethel M.
Dell.  Would you like The Desire of his Life?  Or perhaps you've
read that.  Then what about The Alter of Honour?'

'I wonder whether you have Hugh Walpole's latest book?' said Mrs
Penn.  'I feel in the mood this week for something epic, something
BIG.  Now Walpole, you know, I consider a really GREAT writer, I
put him second only to Galsworthy.  There's something so BIG about
him.  And yet he's so human with it.'

'And so essentially English,' said Gordon.

'Oh, of course!  So essentially English!'

'I b'lieve I'll jest 'ave The Way of an Eagle over again,' said Mrs
Weaver finally.  'You don't never seem to get tired of The Way of
an Eagle, do you, now?'

'It's certainly astonishingly popular,' said Gordon, diplomatically,
his eye on Mrs Penn.

'Oh, asTONishingly!' echoed Mrs Penn, ironically, her eye on
Gordon.

He took their twopences and sent them happy away, Mrs Penn with
Walpole's Rogue Herries and Mrs Weaver with The Way of an Eagle.

Soon he had wandered back to the other room and towards the shelves
of poetry.  A melancholy fascination, those shelves had for him.
His own wretched book was there--skied, of course, high up among
the unsaleable.  Mice, by Gordon Comstock; a sneaky little foolscap
octavo, price three and sixpence but now reduced to a bob.  Of the
thirteen B.F.s who had reviewed it (and The Times Lit. Supp. had
declared that it showed 'exceptional promise') not one had seen the
none too subtle joke of that title.  And in the two years he had
been at McKechnie's bookshop, not a single customer, not a single
one, had ever taken Mice out of its shelf.

There were fifteen or twenty shelves of poetry.  Gordon regarded
them sourly.  Dud stuff, for the most part.  A little above eye-
level, already on their way to heaven and oblivion, were the poets
of yesteryear, the stars of his earlier youth.  Yeats, Davies,
Housman, Thomas, De la Mare, Hardy.  Dead stars.  Below them,
exactly at eye-level, were the squibs of the passing minute.
Eliot, Pound, Auden, Campbell, Day Lewis, Spender.  Very damp
squibs, that lot.  Dead stars above, damp squibs below.  Shall we
ever again get a writer worth reading?  But Lawrence was all right,
and Joyce even better before he went off his coconut.  And if we
did get a writer worth reading, should we know him when we saw him,
so choked as we are with trash?

Ping!  Shop bell.  Gordon turned.  Another customer.

A youth of twenty, cherry-lipped, with gilded hair, tripped
Nancifully in.  Moneyed, obviously.  He had the golden aura of
money.  He had been in the shop before.  Gordon assumed the
gentlemanly-servile mien reserved for new customers.  He repeated
the usual formula:

'Good afternoon.  Can I do anything for you?  Are you looking for
any particular book?'

'Oh, no, not weally.'  An R-less Nancy voice.  'May I just BWOWSE?
I simply couldn't wesist your fwont window.  I have such a tewwible
weakness for bookshops!  So I just floated in--tee-hee!'

Float out again, then, Nancy.  Gordon smiled a cultured smile, as
booklover to booklover.

'Oh, please do.  We like people to look round.  Are you interested
in poetry, by any chance?'

'Oh, of course!  I ADORE poetwy!'

Of course!  Mangy little snob.  There was a sub-artistic look about
his clothes.  Gordon slid a 'slim' red volume from the poetry
shelves.

'These are just out.  They might interest you, perhaps.  They're
translations--something rather out of the common.  Translations
from the Bulgarian.'

Very subtle, that.  Now leave him to himself.  That's the proper
way with customers.  Don't hustle them; let them browse for twenty
minutes or so; then they get ashamed and buy something.  Gordon
moved to the door, discreetly, keeping out of Nancy's way; yet
casually, one hand in his pocket, with the insouciant air proper to
a gentleman.

Outside, the slimy street looked grey and drear.  From somewhere
round the corner came the clatter of hooves, a cold hollow sound.
Caught by the wind, the dark columns of smoke from the chimneys
veered over and rolled flatly down the sloping roofs.  Ah!


Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over
The bending poplars, newly bare,
And the dark ribbons of the chimneys
Veer downward tumty tumty (something like 'murky') air.


Good.  But the impulse faded.  His eye fell again upon the ad-
posters across the street.

He almost wanted to laugh at them, they were so feeble, so dead-
alive, so unappetizing.  As though anybody could be tempted by
THOSE!  Like succubi with pimply backsides.  But they depressed him
all the same.  The money-stink, everywhere the money-stink.  He
stole a glance at the Nancy, who had drifted away from the poetry
shelves and taken out a large expensive book on the Russian ballet.
He was holding it delicately between his pink non-prehensile paws,
as a squirrel holds a nut, studying the photographs.  Gordon knew
his type.  The moneyed 'artistic' young man.  Not an artist
himself, exactly, but a hanger-on of the arts; frequenter of
studios, retailer of scandal.  A nice-looking boy, though, for all
his Nancitude.  The skin at the back of his neck was as silky-
smooth as the inside of a shell.  You can't have a skin like that
under five hundred a year.  A sort of charm he had, a glamour, like
all moneyed people.  Money and charm; who shall separate them?

Gordon thought of Ravelston, his charming, rich friend, editor of
Antichrist, of whom he was extravagantly fond, and whom he did not
see so often as once in a fortnight; and of Rosemary, his girl, who
loved him--adored him, so she said--and who, all the same, had
never slept with him.  Money, once again; all is money.  All human
relationships must be purchased with money.  If you have no money,
men won't care for you, women won't love you; won't, that is, care
for you or love you the last little bit that matters.  And how
right they are, after all!  For, moneyless, you are unlovable.
Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels.  But then,
if I haven't money, I DON'T speak with the tongues of men and of
angels.

He looked again at the ad-posters.  He really hated them this time.
That Vitamalt one, for instance!  'Hike all day on a slab of
Vitamalt!'  A youthful couple, boy and girl, in clean-minded hiking
kit, their hair picturesquely tousled by the wind, climbing a stile
against a Sussex landscape.  That girl's face!  The awful bright
tomboy cheeriness of it!  The kind of girl who goes in for Plenty
of Clean Fun.  Windswept.  Tight khaki shorts but that doesn't mean
you can pinch her backside.  And next to them--Corner Table.
'Corner Table enjoys his meal with Bovex'.  Gordon examined the
thing with the intimacy of hatred.  The idiotic grinning face, like
the face of a self-satisfied rat, the slick black hair, the silly
spectacles.  Corner Table, heir of the ages; victor of Waterloo,
Corner Table, Modern man as his master want him to be.  A docile
little porker, sitting in the money-sty, drinking Bovex.

Faces passed, wind-yellowed.  A tram boomed across the square, and
the clock over the Prince of Wales struck three.  A couple of old
creatures, a tramp or a beggar and his wife, in long greasy
overcoats that reached almost to the ground, were shuffling towards
the shop.  Book-pinchers, by the look of them.  Better keep an eye
on the boxes outside.  The old man halted on the kerb a few yards
away while his wife came to the door.  She pushed it open and
looked up at Gordon, between grey strings of hair, with a sort of
hopeful malevolence.

'Ju buy books?' she demanded hoarsely.

'Sometimes.  It depends what books they are.'

'I gossome LOVELY books 'ere.'

She came in, shutting the door with a clang.  The Nancy glanced
over his shoulder distastefully and moved a step or two away, into
the corner.  The old woman had produced a greasy little sack from
under her overcoat.  She moved confidentially nearer to Gordon.
She smelt of very, very old breadcrusts.

'Will you 'ave 'em?' she said, clasping the neck of the sack.
'Only 'alf a crown the lot.'

'What are they?  Let me see them, please.'

'LOVELY books, they are,' she breathed, bending over to open the
sack and emitting a sudden very powerful whiff of breadcrusts.

''Ere!' she said, and thrust an armful of filthy-looking books
almost into Gordon's face.

They were an 1884 edition of Charlotte M. Yonge's novels, and had
the appearance of having been slept on for many years.  Gordon
stepped back, suddenly revolted.

'We can't possibly buy those,' he said shortly.

'Can't buy 'em?  WHY can't yer buy 'em?'

'Because they're no use to us.  We can't sell that kind of thing.'

'Wotcher make me take 'em out o' me bag for, then?' demanded the
old woman ferociously.

Gordon made a detour round her, to avoid the smell, and held the
door open, silently.  No use arguing.  You had people of this type
coming into the shop all day long.  The old woman made off,
mumbling, with malevolence in the hump of her shoulders, and joined
her husband.  He paused on the kerb to cough, so fruitily that you
could hear him through the door.  A clot of phlegm, like a little
white tongue, came slowly out between his lips and was ejected into
the gutter.  Then the two old creatures shuffled away, beetle-like
in the long greasy overcoats that hid everything except their feet.

Gordon watched them go.  They were just by-products.  The throw-
outs of the money-god.  All over London, by tens of thousands,
draggled old beasts of that description; creeping like unclean
beetles to the grave.

He gazed out at the graceless street.  At this moment it seemed to
him that in a street like this, in a town like this, every life
that is lived must be meaningless and intolerable.  The sense of
disintegration, of decay, that is endemic in our time, was strong
upon him.  Somehow it was mixed up with the ad-posters opposite.
He looked now with more seeing eyes at those grinning yard-wide
faces.  After all, there was more there than mere silliness, greed,
and vulgarity.  Corner Table grins at you, seemingly optimistic,
with a flash of false teeth.  But what is behind the grin?
Desolation, emptiness, prophecies of doom.  For can you not see, if
you know how to look, that behind that slick self-satisfaction, that
tittering fat-bellied triviality, there is nothing but a frightful
emptiness, a secret despair?  The great death-wish of the modern
world.  Suicide pacts.  Heads stuck in gas-ovens in lonely
maisonettes.  French letters and Amen Pills.  And the reverberations
of future wars.  Enemy aeroplanes flying over London; the deep
threatening hum of the propellers, the shattering thunder of the
bombs.  It is all written in Corner Table's face.

More customers coming.  Gordon stood back, gentlemanly-servile.

The door-bell clanged.  Two upper-middle-class ladies sailed
noisily in.  One pink and fruity, thirty-fivish, with voluptuous
bosom burgeoning from her coat of squirrel-skin, emitting a super-
feminine scent of Parma violets: the other middle-aged, tough, and
curried--India, presumably.  Close behind them a dark, grubby, shy
young man slipped through the doorway as apologetically as a cat.
He was one of the shop's best customers--a flitting, solitary
creature who was almost too shy to speak and who by some strange
manipulation kept himself always a day away from a shave.

Gordon repeated his formula:

'Good afternoon.  Can I do anything for you?  Are you looking for
any particular book?'

Fruity-face overwhelmed him with a smile, but curry-face decided to
treat the question as an impertinence.  Ignoring Gordon, she drew
fruity-face across to the shelves next to the new books where the
dog-books and cat-books were kept.  The two of them immediately
began taking books out of the shelves and talking loudly.  Curry-
face had the voice of a drill-sergeant.  She was no doubt a
colonel's wife, or widow.  The Nancy, still deep in the big book on
the Russian ballet, edged delicately away.  His face said that he
would leave the shop if his privacy were disturbed again.  The shy
young man had already found his way to the poetry shelves.  The two
ladies were fairly frequent visitors to the shop.  They always
wanted to see books about cats and dogs, but never actually bought
anything.  There were two whole shelves of dog-books and cat-books.
'Ladies' Corner,' old McKechnie called it.

Another customer arrived, for the library.  An ugly girl of twenty,
hatless, in a white overall, with a sallow, blithering, honest face
and powerful spectacles that distorted her eyes.  She was an
assistant at a chemist's shop.  Gordon put on his homey library
manner.  She smiled at him, and with a gait as clumsy as a bear's
followed him into the library.

'What kind of book would you like this time, Miss Weeks?'

'Well'--she clutched the front of her overall.  Her distorted,
black-treacle eyes beamed trustfully into his.  'Well, what I'd
REALLY like's a good hot-stuff love story.  You know--something
MODERN.'

'Something modern?  Something by Barbara Bedworthy for instance?
Have you read Almost a Virgin?'

'Oh no, not her.  She's too Deep.  I can't bear Deep books.  But I
want something--well, YOU know--MODERN.  Sex-problems and divorce
and all that.  YOU know.'

'Modern, but not Deep,' said Gordon, as lowbrow to lowbrow.

He ranged among the hot-stuff modern love-stories.  There were not
less than three hundred of them in the library.  From the front
room came the voices of the two upper-middle-class ladies, the one
fruity, the other curried, disputing about dogs.  They had taken
out one of the dog-books and were examining the photographs.
Fruity-voice enthused over the photograph of a Peke, the ickle
angel pet, wiv his gweat big Soulful eyes and his ickle black
nosie--oh, so ducky-duck!  But curry-voice--yes, undoubtedly a
colonel's widow--said Pekes were soppy.  Give her dogs with guts--
dogs that would fight, she said; she hated these soppy lapdogs, she
said.  'You have no Soul, Bedelia, no Soul,' said fruity-voice
plaintively.  The door-bell pinged again.  Gordon handed the
chemist's girl Seven Scarlet Nights and booked it on her ticket.
She took a shabby leather purse out of her overall pocket and paid
him twopence.

He went back to the front room.  The Nancy had put his book back in
the wrong shelf and vanished.  A lean, straight-nosed, brisk woman,
with sensible clothes and gold-rimmed pince-nez--schoolmarm
possibly, feminist certainly--came in and demanded Mrs Wharton-
Beverley's history of the suffrage movement.  With secret joy
Gordon told her that they hadn't got it.  She stabbed his male
incompetence with gimlet eyes and went out again.  The thin young
man stood apologetically in the corner, his face buried in D. H.
Lawrence's Collected Poems, like some long-legged bird with its
head buried under its wing.

Gordon waited by the door.  Outside, a shabby-genteel old man with
a strawberry nose and a khaki muffler round his throat was picking
over the books in the sixpenny box.  The two upper-middle-class
ladies suddenly departed, leaving a litter of open books on the
table.  Fruity-face cast reluctant backward glances at the dog-
books, but curry-face drew her away, resolute not to buy anything.
Gordon held the door open.  The two ladies sailed noisily out,
ignoring him.

He watched their fur-coated upper-middle-class backs go down the
street.  The old strawberry-nosed man was talking to himself as he
pawed over the books.  A bit wrong in the head, presumably.  He
would pinch something if he wasn't watched.  The wind blew colder,
drying the slime of the street.  Time to light up presently.
Caught by a swirl of air, the torn strip of paper on the Q. T.
Sauce advertisement fluttered sharply, like a piece of washing on
the line.  Ah!


Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over
The bending poplars, newly bare,
And the dark ribbons of the chimneys
Veer downward; flicked by whips of air
Torn posters flutter.


Not bad, not bad at all.  But he had no wish to go on--could not go
on, indeed.  He fingered the money in his pocket, not chinking it,
lest the shy young man should hear.  Twopence-halfpenny.  No
tobacco all tomorrow.  His bones ached.

A light sprang up in the Prince of Wales.  They would be swabbing
out the bar.  The old strawberry-nosed man was reading an Edgar
Wallace out of the twopenny box.  A tram boomed in the distance.
In the room upstairs Mr McKechnie, who seldom came down to the
shop, drowsed by the gas-fire, white-haired and white-bearded, with
snuff-box handy, over his calf-bound folio of Middleton's Travels
in the Levant.

The thin young man suddenly realized that he was alone and looked
up guiltily.  He was a habitue of bookshops, yet never stayed
longer than ten minutes in any one shop.  A passionate hunger for
books, and the fear of being a nuisance, were constantly at war in
him.  After ten minutes in any shop he would grow uneasy, feel
himself de trop, and take to flight, having bought something out of
sheer nervousness.  Without speaking he held out the copy of
Lawrence's poems and awkwardly extracted three florins from his
pocket.  In handing them to Gordon he dropped one.  Both dived for
it simultaneously; their heads bumped against one another.  The
young man stood back, blushing sallowly.

'I'll wrap it up for you,' said Gordon.

But the shy young man shook his head--he stammered so badly that he
never spoke when it was avoidable.  He clutched his book to him and
slipped out with the air of having committed some disgraceful
action.

Gordon was alone.  He wandered back to the door.  The strawberry-
nosed man glanced over his shoulder, caught Gordon's eye, and moved
off, foiled.  He had been on the point of slipping Edgar Wallace
into his pocket.  The clock over the Prince of Wales struck a
quarter past three.

Ding Dong!  A quarter past three.  Light up at half past.  Four and
three-quarter hours till closing time.  Five and a quarter hours
till supper.  Twopence halfpenny in pocket.  No tobacco tomorrow.

Suddenly a ravishing, irresistible desire to smoke came over
Gordon.  He had made up his mind not to smoke this afternoon.  He
had only four cigarettes left.  They must be saved for tonight,
when he intended to 'write'; for he could no more 'write' without
tobacco than without air.  Nevertheless, he had got to have a
smoke.  He took out his packet of Player's Weights and extracted
one of the dwarfish cigarettes.  It was sheer stupid indulgence; it
meant half an hour off tonight's 'writing' time.  But there was no
resisting it.  With a sort of shameful joy he sucked the soothing
smoke into his lungs.

The reflection of his own face looked back at him from the greyish
pane.  Gordon Comstock, author of MICE; en l'an trentiesme de son
eage, and moth-eaten already.  Only twenty-six teeth left.
However, Villon at the same age was poxed on his own showing.
Let's be thankful for small mercies.

He watched the ribbon of torn paper whirling, fluttering on the
Q. T. Sauce advertisement.  Our civilization is dying.  It MUST be
dying.  But it isn't going to die in its bed.  Presently the
aeroplanes are coming.  Zoom--whizz--crash!  The whole western
world going up in a roar of high explosives.

He looked at the darkening street, at the greyish reflection of his
face in the pane, at the shabby figures shuffling past.  Almost
involuntarily he repeated:


'C'est l'Ennui--l'oeil charge d'un pleur involontaire,
Il reve d'echafauds en fumant son houka!'


Money, money!  Corner Table!  The humming of the aeroplanes and the
crash of the bombs.

Gordon squinted up at the leaden sky.  Those aeroplanes are coming.
In imagination he saw them coming now; squadron after squadron,
innumerable, darkening the sky like clouds of gnats.  With his
tongue not quite against his teeth he made a buzzing, bluebottle-
on-the-window-pane sound to represent the humming of the
aeroplanes.  It was a sound which, at that moment, he ardently
desired to hear.



2


Gordon walked homeward against the rattling wind, which blew his
hair backward and gave him more of a 'good' forehead than ever.
His manner conveyed to the passers-by--at least, he hoped it did--
that if he wore no overcoat it was from pure caprice.  His overcoat
was up the spout for fifteen shillings, as a matter of fact.

Willowbed Road, NW, was not definitely slummy, only dingy and
depressing.  There were real slums hardly five minutes' walk away.
Tenement houses where families slept five in a bed, and, when one
of them died, slept every night with the corpse until it was
buried; alley-ways where girls of fifteen were deflowered by boys
of sixteen against leprous plaster walls.  But Willowbed Road
itself contrived to keep up a kind of mingy, lower-middle-class
decency.  There was even a dentist's brass plate on one of the
houses.  In quite two-thirds of them, amid the lace curtains of the
parlour window, there was a green card with 'Apartments' on it in
silver lettering, above the peeping foliage of an aspidistra.

Mrs Wisbeach, Gordon's landlady, specialized in 'single gentlemen'.
Bed-sitting-rooms, with gaslight laid on and find your own heating,
baths extra (there was a geyser), and meals in the tomb-dark
dining-room with the phalanx of clotted sauce-bottles in the middle
of the table.  Gordon, who came home for his midday dinner, paid
twenty-seven and six a week.

The gaslight shone yellow through the frosted transom above the
door of Number 31.  Gordon took out his key and fished about in the
keyhole--in that kind of house the key never quite fits the lock.
The darkish little hallway--in reality it was only a passage--smelt
of dishwater, cabbage, rag mats, and bedroom slops.  Gordon glanced
at the japanned tray on the hall-stand.  No letters, of course.  He
had told himself not to hope for a letter, and nevertheless had
continued to hope.  A stale feeling, not quite a pain, settled upon
his breast.  Rosemary might have written!  It was four days now
since she had written.  Moreover, there were a couple of poems that
he had sent out to magazines and had not yet had returned to him.
The one thing that made the evening bearable was to find a letter
waiting for him when he got home.  But he received very few
letters--four or five in a week at the very most.

On the left of the hall was the never-used parlour, then came the
staircase, and beyond that the passage ran down to the kitchen and
to the unapproachable lair inhabited by Mrs Wisbeach herself.  As
Gordon came in, the door at the end of the passage opened a foot or
so.  Mrs Wisbeach's face emerged, inspected him briefly but
suspiciously, and disappeared again.  It was quite impossible to
get in or out of the house, at any time before eleven at night,
without being scrutinized in this manner.  Just what Mrs Wisbeach
suspected you of it was hard to say; smuggling women into the
house, possibly.  She was one of those malignant respectable women
who keep lodging-houses.  Age about forty-five, stout but active,
with a pink, fine-featured, horribly observant face, beautifully
grey hair, and a permanent grievance.

Gordon halted at the foot of the narrow stairs.  Above, a coarse
rich voice was singing, 'Who's afraid of the Big Bad Wolf?'  A very
fat man of thirty-eight or nine came round the angle of the stairs,
with the light dancing step peculiar to fat men, dressed in a smart
grey suit, yellow shoes, a rakish trilby hat, and a belted blue
overcoat of startling vulgarity.  This was Flaxman, the first-floor
lodger and travelling representative of the Queen of Sheba Toilet
Requisites Co.  He saluted Gordon with a lemon-coloured glove as he
came down.

'Hullo, chappie!' he said blithely.  (Flaxman called everyone
'chappie'.)  'How's life with you?'

'Bloody,' said Gordon shortly.

Flaxman had reached the bottom of the stairs.  He threw a roly-poly
arm affectionately round Gordon's shoulders.

'Cheer up, old man, cheer up!  You look like a bloody funeral.  I'm
off down to the Crichton.  Come on down and have a quick one.'

'I can't.  I've got to work.'

'Oh, hell!  Be matey, can't you?  What's the good of mooning about
up here?  Come on down to the Cri and we'll pinch the barmaid's
bum.'

Gordon wriggled free of Flaxman' s arm.  Like all small frail
people, he hated being touched.  Flaxman merely grinned, with the
typical fat man's good humour.  He was really horribly fat.  He
filled his trousers as though he had been melted and then poured
into them.  But of course, like other fat people, he never admitted
to being fat.  No fat person ever uses the word 'fat' if there is
any way of avoiding it.  'Stout' is the word they use--or, better
still, 'robust'.  A fat man is never so happy as when he is
describing himself as 'robust'.  Flaxman, at his first meeting with
Gordon, had been on the point of calling himself 'robust', but
something in Gordon's greenish eye had deterred him.  He compromised
on 'stout' instead.

'I do admit, chappie,' he said, 'to being--well, just a wee bit on
the stout side.  Nothing unwholesome, you know.'  He patted the
vague frontier between his belly and his chest.  'Good firm flesh.
I'm pretty nippy on my feet, as a matter of fact.  But--well, I
suppose you might call me STOUT.'

'Like Cortez,' Gordon suggested.

'Cortez?  Cortez?  Was that the chappie who was always wandering
about in the mountains in Mexico?'

'That's the fellow.  He was stout, but he had eagle eyes.'

'Ah?  Now that's funny.  Because the wife said something rather
like that to me once.  "George," she said, "you've got the most
wonderful eyes in the world.  You've got eyes just like an eagle,"
she said.  That would be before she married me, you'll understand.'

Flaxman was living apart from his wife at the moment.  A little
while back the Queen of Sheba Toilet Requisites Co. had
unexpectedly paid out a bonus of thirty pounds to all its
travellers, and at the same time Flaxman and two others had been
sent across to Paris to press the new Sexapeal Naturetint lipstick
on various French firms.  Flaxman had not thought it necessary to
mention the thirty pounds to his wife.  He had had the time of his
life on that Paris trip, of course.  Even now, three months
afterwards, his mouth watered when he spoke of it.  He used to
entertain Gordon with luscious descriptions.  Ten days in Paris
with thirty quid that wifie hadn't heard about!  Oh boy!  But
unfortunately there had been a leakage somewhere; Flaxman had got
home to find retribution awaiting him.  His wife had broken his
head with a cut-glass whisky decanter, a wedding present which they
had had for fourteen years, and then fled to her mother's house,
taking the children with her.  Hence Flaxman's exile in Willowbed
Road.  But he wasn't letting it worry him.  It would blow over, no
doubt; it had happened several times before.

Gordon made another attempt to get past Flaxman and escape up the
stairs.  The dreadful thing was that in his heart he was pining to
go with him.  He needed a drink so badly--the mere mention of the
Crichton Arms had made him feel thirsty.  But it was impossible, of
course; he had no money.  Flaxman put an arm across the stairs,
barring his way.  He was genuinely fond of Gordon.  He considered
him 'clever'--'cleverness', to him, being a kind of amiable lunacy.
Moreover, he detested being alone, even for so short a time as it
would take him to walk to the pub.

'Come on, chappie!' he urged.  'You want a Guinness to buck you up,
that's what you want.  You haven't seen the new girl they've got in
the saloon bar yet.  Oh, boy!  There's a peach for you!'

'So that's why you're all dolled up, is it?' said Gordon, looking
coldly at Flaxman's yellow gloves.

'You bet it is, chappie!  Coo, what a peach!  Ash blonde she is.
And she knows a thing or two, that girlie does.  I gave her a stick
of our Sexapeal Naturetint last night.  You ought to have seen her
wag her little bottom at me as she went past my table.  Does she
give me the palpitations?  Does she?  Oh, boy!'

Flaxman wriggled lascivously.  His tongue appeared between his
lips.  Then, suddenly pretending that Gordon was the ash-blonde
barmaid, he seized him by the waist and gave him a tender squeeze.
Gordon shoved him away.  For a moment the desire to go down to the
Crichton Arms was so ravishing that it almost overcame him.  Oh,
for a pint of beer!  He seemed almost to feel it going down his
throat.  If only he had had any money!  Even sevenpence for a pint.
But what was the use?  Twopence halfpenny in pocket.  You can't let
other people buy your drinks for you.

'Oh, leave me alone, for God's sake!' he said irritably, stepping
out of Flaxman's reach, and went up the stairs without looking
back.

Flaxman settled his hat on his head and made for the front door,
mildly offended.  Gordon reflected dully that it was always like
this nowadays.  He was for ever snubbing friendly advances.  Of
course it was money that was at the bottom of it, always money.
You can't be friendly, you can't even be civil, when you have no
money in your pocket.  A spasm of self-pity went through him.  His
heart yearned for the saloon bar at the Crichton; the lovely smell
of beer, the warmth and bright lights, the cheery voices, the
clatter of glasses on the beer-wet bar.  Money, money!  He went on,
up the dark evil-smelling stairs.  The thought of his cold lonely
bedroom at the top of the house was like a doom before him.

On the second floor lived Lorenheim, a dark, meagre, lizard-like
creature of uncertain age and race, who made about thirty-five
shillings a week by touting vacuum-cleaners.  Gordon always went
very hurriedly past Lorenheim's door.  Lorenheim was one of those
people who have not a single friend in the world and who are
devoured by a lust for company.  His loneliness was so deadly that
if you so much as slowed your pace outside his door he was liable
to pounce out upon you and half drag, half wheedle you in to listen
to interminable paranoiac tales of girls he had seduced and
employers he had scored off.  And his room was more cold and
squalid than even a lodging-house bedroom has any right to be.
There were always half-eaten bits of bread and margarine lying
about everywhere.  The only other lodger in the house was an
engineer of some kind, employed on nightwork.  Gordon only saw him
occasionally--a massive man with a grim, discoloured face, who wore
a bowler hat indoors and out.

In the familiar darkness of his room, Gordon felt for the gas-jet
and lighted it.  The room was medium-sized, not big enough to be
curtained into two, but too big to be sufficiently warmed by one
defective oil lamp.  It had the sort of furniture you expect in a
top floor back.  White-quilted single-bed; brown lino floor-
covering; wash-hand-stand with jug and basin of that cheap white
ware which you can never see without thinking of chamberpots.  On
the window-sill there was a sickly aspidistra in a green-glazed
pot.

Up against this, under the window, there was a kitchen table with
an inkstained green cloth.  This was Gordon's 'writing' table.  It
was only after a bitter struggle that he had induced Mrs Wisbeach
to give him a kitchen table instead of the bamboo 'occasional'
table--a mere stand for the aspidistra--which she considered proper
for a top floor back.  And even now there was endless nagging
because Gordon would never allow his table to be 'tidied up'.  The
table was in a permanent mess.  It was almost covered with a muddle
of papers, perhaps two hundred sheets of sermon paper, grimy and
dog-eared, and all written on and crossed out and written on again--
a sort of sordid labyrinth of papers to which only Gordon possessed
the key.  There was a film of dust over everything, and there were
several foul little trays containing tobacco ash and the twisted
stubs of cigarettes.  Except for a few books on the mantelpiece,
this table, with its mess of papers, was the sole mark Gordon's
personality had left on the room.

It was beastly cold.  Gordon thought he would light the oil lamp.
He lifted it--it felt very light; the spare oil can also was empty--
no oil till Friday.  He applied a match; a dull yellow flame crept
unwillingly round the wick.  It might burn for a couple of hours,
with any luck.  As Gordon threw away the match his eye fell upon
the aspidistra in its grass-green pot.  It was a peculiarly mangy
specimen.  It had only seven leaves and never seemed to put forth
any new ones.  Gordon had a sort of secret feud with the
aspidistra.  Many a time he had furtively attempted to kill it--
starving it of water, grinding hot cigarette-ends against its stem,
even mixing salt with its earth.  But the beastly things are
practically immortal.  In almost any circumstances they can
preserve a wilting, diseased existence.  Gordon stood up and
deliberately wiped his kerosiny fingers on the aspidistra leaves.

At this moment Mrs Wisbeach's voice rang shrewishly up the stairs:

'Mister Com-stock!'

Gordon went to the door.  'Yes?' he called down.

'Your supper's been waiting for you this ten minutes.  Why can't
you come down and have it, 'stead of keeping me waiting for the
washing up?'

Gordon went down.  The dining-room was on the first floor, at the
back, opposite Flaxman's room.  It was a cold, close-smelling room,
twilit even at midday.  There were more aspidistras in it than
Gordon had ever accurately counted.  They were all over the place--
on the sideboard, on the floor, on 'occasional' tables; in the
window there was a sort of florist's stand of them, blocking out
the light.  In the half-darkness, with aspidistras all about you,
you had the feeling of being in some sunless aquarium amid the
dreary foliage of water-flowers.  Gordon's supper was set out,
waiting for him, in the circle of white light that the cracked gas-
jet cast upon the table cloth.  He sat down with his back to the
fireplace (there was an aspidistra in the grate instead of a fire)
and ate his plate of cold beef and his two slices of crumbly white
bread, with Canadian butter, mousetrap cheese and Pan Yan pickle,
and drank a glass of cold but musty water.

When he went back to his room the oil lamp had got going, more or
less.  It was hot enough to boil a kettle by, he thought.  And now
for the great event of the evening--his illicit cup of tea.  He
made himself a cup of tea almost every night, in the deadliest
secrecy.  Mrs Wisbeach refused to give her lodgers tea with their
supper, because she 'couldn't be bothered with hotting up extra
water', but at the same time making tea in your bedroom was
strictly forbidden.  Gordon looked with disgust at the muddled
papers on the table.  He told himself defiantly that he wasn't
going to do any work tonight.  He would have a cup of tea and smoke
up his remaining cigarettes, and read King Lear or Sherlock Holmes.
His books were on the mantelpiece beside the alarm clock--
Shakespeare in the Everyman edition, Sherlock Holmes, Villon's
poems, Roderick Random, Les Fleurs du Mal, a pile of French novels.
But he read nothing nowadays, except Shakespeare and Sherlock
Holmes.  Meanwhile, that cup of tea.

Gordon went to the door, pushed it ajar, and listened.  No sound of
Mrs Wisbeach.  You had to be very careful; she was quite capable of
sneaking upstairs and catching you in the act.  This tea-making was
the major household offence, next to bringing a woman in.  Quietly
he bolted the door, dragged his cheap suitcase from under the bed,
and unlocked it.  From it he extracted a sixpenny Woolworth's
kettle, a packet of Lyons' tea, a tin of condensed milk, a tea-pot,
and a cup.  They were all packed in newspaper to prevent them from
chinking.

He had his regular procedure for making tea.  First he half filled
the kettle with water from the jug and set it on the oil stove.
Then he knelt down and spread out a piece of newspaper.  Yesterday's
tea-leaves were still in the pot, of course.  He shook them out on
to the newspaper, cleaned out the pot with his thumb and folded the
leaves into a bundle.  Presently he would smuggle them downstairs.
That was always the most risky part--getting rid of the used
tea-leaves.  It was like the difficulty murderers have in disposing
of the body.  As for the cup, he always washed it in his hand basin
in the morning.  A squalid business.  It sickened him, sometimes.
It was queer how furtively you had to live in Mrs Wisbeach's house.
You had the feeling that she was always watching you; and indeed,
she was given to tiptoeing up and downstairs at all hours, in hope
of catching the lodgers up to mischief.  It was one of those houses
where you cannot even go to the W.C. in peace because of the
feeling that somebody is listening to you.

Gordon unbolted the door again and listened intently.  No one
stirring.  Ah!  A clatter of crockery far below.  Mrs Wisbeach was
washing up the supper things.  Probably safe to go down, then.

He tiptoed down, clutching the damp bundle of tea-leaves against
his breast.  The W.C. was on the second floor.  At the angle of
the stairs he halted, listened a moment longer.  Ah!  Another
clatter of crockery.

All clear!  Gordon Comstock, poet ('of exceptional promise', The
Times Lit. Supp. had said), hurriedly slipped into the W.C., flung
his tea-leaves down the waste-pipe, and pulled the plug.  Then he
hurried back to his room, rebolted the door, and, with precautions
against noise, brewed himself a fresh pot of tea.

The room was passably warm by now.  The tea and a cigarette worked
their short-lived magic.  He began to feel a little less bored and
angry.  Should he do a spot of work after all?  He ought to work,
of course.  He always hated himself afterwards when he had wasted a
whole evening.  Half unwillingly, he shoved his chair up to the
table.  It needed an effort even to disturb that frightful jungle
of papers.  He pulled a few grimy sheets towards him, spread them
out, and looked at them.  God, what a mess!  Written on, scored
out, written over, scored out again, till they were like poor
old hacked cancer-patients after twenty operations.  But the
handwriting, where it was not crossed out, was delicate and
'scholarly'.  With pain and trouble Gordon had acquired that
'scholarly' hand, so different from the beastly copper-plate they
had taught him at school.

Perhaps he WOULD work; for a little while, anyway.  He rummaged in
the litter of papers.  Where was that passage he had been working
on yesterday?  The poem was an immensely long one--that is, it was
going to be immensely long when it was finished--two thousand lines
or so, in rhyme royal, describing a day in London.  London
Pleasures, its name was.  It was a huge, ambitious project--the
kind of thing that should only be undertaken by people with endless
leisure.  Gordon had not grasped that fact when he began the poem;
he grasped it now, however.  How light-heartedly he had begun it,
two years ago!  When he had chucked up everything and descended
into the slime of poverty, the conception of this poem had been at
least a part of his motive.  He had felt so certain, then, that he
was equal to it.  But somehow, almost from the start, London
Pleasures had gone wrong.  It was too big for him, that was the
truth.  It had never really progressed, it had simply fallen apart
into a series of fragments.  And out of two years' work that was
all that he had to show--just fragments, incomplete in themselves
and impossible to join together.  On every one of those sheets of
paper there was some hacked scrap of verse which had been written
and rewritten and rewritten over intervals of months.  There were
not five hundred lines that you could say were definitely finished.
And he had lost the power to add to it any longer; he could only
tinker with this passage or that, groping now here, now there, in
its confusion.  It was no longer a thing that he created, it was
merely a nightmare with which he struggled.

For the rest, in two whole years he had produced nothing except a
handful of short poems--perhaps a score in all.  It was so rarely
that he could attain the peace of mind in which poetry, or prose
for that matter, has got to be written.  The times when he 'could
not' work grew commoner and commoner.  Of all types of human being,
only the artist takes it upon him to say that he 'cannot' work.
But it is quite true; there ARE times when one cannot work.  Money
again, always money!  Lack of money means discomfort, means squalid
worries, means shortage of tobacco, means ever-present consciousness
of failure--above all, it means loneliness.  How can you be anything
but lonely on two quid a week?  And in loneliness no decent book was
ever written.  It was quite certain that London Pleasures would
never be the poem he had conceived--it was quite certain, indeed,
that it would never even be finished.  And in the moments when he
faced facts Gordon himself was aware of this.

Yet all the same, and all the more for that very reason, he went on
with it.  It was something to cling to.  It was a way of hitting
back at his poverty and his loneliness.  And after all, there were
times when the mood of creation returned, or seemed to return.  It
returned tonight, for just a little while--just as long as it takes
to smoke two cigarettes.  With smoke tickling his lungs, he
abstracted himself from the mean and actual world.  He drove his
mind into the abyss where poetry is written.  The gas-jet sang
soothing overhead.  Words became vivid and momentous things.  A
couplet, written a year ago and left as unfinished, caught his eye
with a note of doubt.  He repeated it to himself, over and over.
It was wrong, somehow.  It had seemed all right, a year ago; now,
on the other hand, it seemed subtly vulgar.  He rummaged among the
sheets of foolscap till he found one that had nothing written on
the back, turned it over, wrote the couplet out anew, wrote a dozen
different versions of it, repeated each of them over and over to
himself.  Finally there was none that satisfied him.  The couplet
would have to go.  It was cheap and vulgar.  He found the original
sheet of paper and scored the couplet out with thick lines.  And in
doing this there was a sense of achievement, of time not wasted, as
though the destruction of much labour were in some way an act of
creation.

Suddenly a double knock deep below made the whole house rattle.
Gordon started.  His mind fled upwards from the abyss.  The post!
London Pleasures was forgotten.

His heart fluttered.  Perhaps Rosemary HAD written.  Besides, there
were those two poems he had sent to the magazines.  One of them,
indeed, he had almost given up as lost; he had sent it to an
American paper, the Californian Review, months ago.  Probably they
wouldn't even bother to send it back.  But the other was with an
English paper, the Primrose Quarterly.  He had wild hopes of that
one.  The Primrose Quarterly was one of those poisonous literary
papers in which the fashionable Nancy Boy and the professional
Roman Catholic walk bras dessus, bras dessous.  It was also by a
long way the most influential literary paper in England.  You were
a made man once you had had a poem in it.  In his heart Gordon knew
that the Primrose Quarterly would never print his poems.  He wasn't
up to their standard.  Still, miracles sometimes happen; or, if not
miracles, accidents.  After all, they'd had his poem six weeks.
Would they keep it six weeks if they didn't mean to accept it?  He
tried to quell the insane hope.  But at the worst there was a
chance that Rosemary had written.  It was four whole days since she
had written.  She wouldn't do it, perhaps, if she knew how it
disappointed him.  Her letters--long, ill-spelt letters, full of
absurd jokes and protestations of love for him--meant far more to
him than she could ever understand.  They were a reminder that
there was still somebody in the world who cared for him.  They even
made up for the times when some beast had sent back one of his
poems; and, as a matter of fact, the magazines always did send back
his poems, except Antichrist, whose editor, Ravelston, was his
personal friend.

There was a shuffling below.  It was always some minutes before Mrs
Wisbeach brought the letters upstairs.  She liked to paw them
about, feel them to see how thick they were, read their postmarks,
hold them up to the light and speculate on their contents, before
yielding them to their rightful owners.  She exercised a sort of
droit du seigneur over letters.  Coming to her house, they were,
she felt, at least partially hers.  If you had gone to the front
door and collected your own letters she would have resented it
bitterly.  On the other hand, she also resented the labour of
carrying them upstairs.  You would hear her footsteps very slowly
ascending, and then, if there was a letter for you, there would be
loud aggrieved breathing on the landing--this to let you know that
you had put Mrs Wisbeach out of breath by dragging her up all those
stairs.  Finally, with a little impatient grunt, the letters would
be shoved under your door.

Mrs Wisbeach was coming up the stairs.  Gordon listened.  The
footsteps paused on the first floor.  A letter for Flaxman.  They
ascended, paused again on the second floor.  A letter for the
engineer.  Gordon's heart beat painfully.  A letter, please God, a
letter!  More footsteps.  Ascending or descending?  They were
coming nearer, surely!  Ah, no, no!  The sound grew fainter.  She
was going down again.  The footsteps died away.  No letters.

He took up his pen again.  It was a quite futile gesture.  She
hadn't written after all!  The little beast!  He had not the
smallest intention of doing any more work.  Indeed, he could not.
The disappointment had taken all the heart out of him.  Only five
minutes ago his poem had still seemed to him a living thing; now he
knew it unmistakably for the worthless tripe that it was.  With a
kind of nervous disgust he bundled the scattered sheets together,
stacked them in an untidy heap, and dumped them on the other side
of the table, under the aspidistra.  He could not even bear to look
at them any longer.

He got up.  It was too early to go to bed; at least, he was not in
the mood for it.  He pined for a bit of amusement--something cheap
and easy.  A seat in the pictures, cigarettes, beer.  Useless!  No
money to pay for any of them.  He would read King Lear and forget
this filthy century.  Finally, however, it was The Adventures of
Sherlock Holmes that he took from the mantelpiece.  Sherlock Holmes
was his favourite of all books, because he knew it by heart.  The
oil in the lamp was giving out and it was getting beastly cold.
Gordon dragged the quilt from his bed, wrapped it round his legs,
and sat down to read.  His right elbow on the table, his hands
under his coat to keep them warm, he read through 'The Adventure of
the Speckled Band.'  The little gas-mantle sighed above, the
circular flame of the oil lamp burned low, a thin bracket of fire,
giving out no more heat than a candle.

Down in Mrs Wisbeach's lair the clock struck half past ten.  You
could always hear it striking at night.  Ping-ping, ping-ping--a
note of doom!  The ticking of the alarm clock on the mantelpiece
became audible to Gordon again, bringing with it the consciousness
of the sinister passage of time.  He looked about him.  Another
evening wasted.  Hours, days, years slipping by.  Night after
night, always the same.  The lonely room, the womanless bed; dust,
cigarette ash, the aspidistra leaves.  And he was thirty, nearly.
In sheer self-punishment he dragged forth a wad of London
Pleasures, spread out the grimy sheets, and looked at them as one
looks at a skull for a memento mori.  London Pleasures, by Gordon
Comstock, author of Mice.  His magnum opus.  The fruit (fruit,
indeed!) of two years' work--that labyrinthine mess of words!  And
tonight's achievement--two lines crossed out; two lines backward
instead of forward.

The lamp made a sound like a tiny hiccup and went out.  With an
effort Gordon stood up and flung the quilt back on to his bed.
Better get to bed, perhaps, before it got any colder.  He wandered
over towards the bed.  But wait.  Work tomorrow.  Wind the clock,
set the alarm.  Nothing accomplished, nothing done, has earned a
night's repose.

It was some time before he could find the energy to undress.  For a
quarter of an hour, perhaps, he lay on the bed fully dressed, his
hands under his head.  There was a crack on the ceiling that
resembled the map of Australia.  Gordon contrived to work off his
shoes and socks without sitting up.  He held up one foot and looked
at it.  A smallish, delicate foot.  Ineffectual, like his hands.
Also, it was very dirty.  It was nearly ten days since he had a
bath.  Becoming ashamed of the dirtiness of his feet, he sagged
into a sitting position and undressed himself, throwing his clothes
on to the floor.  Then he turned out the gas and slid between the
sheets, shuddering, for he was naked.  He always slept naked.  His
last suit of pyjamas had gone west more than a year ago.

The clock downstairs struck eleven.  As the first coldness of the
sheets wore off, Gordon's mind went back to the poem he had begun
that afternoon.  He repeated in a whisper the single stanza that
was finished:


Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over
The bending poplars, newly bare,
And dark ribbons of the chimneys
Veer downward; flicked by whips of air,
Torn posters flutter.


The octosyllables flicked to and fro.  Click-click, click-click!
The awful, mechanical emptiness of it appalled him.  It was like
some futile little machine ticking over.  Rhyme to rhyme, click-
click, click-click.  Like the nodding of a clock-work doll.
Poetry!  The last futility.  He lay awake, aware of his own
futility, of his thirty years, of the blind alley into which he
had led his life.

The clock struck twelve.  Gordon had stretched his legs out
straight.  The bed had grown warm and comfortable.  The upturned
beam of a car, somewhere in the street parallel to Willowbed Road,
penetrated the blind and threw into silhouette a leaf of the
aspidistra, shaped like Agamemnon's sword.



3


'Gordon Comstock' was a pretty bloody name, but then Gordon came
from a pretty bloody family.  The 'Gordon' part of it was Scotch,
of course.  The prevalence of such names nowadays is merely a part
of the Scotchification of England that has been going on these last
fifty years.  'Gordon', 'Colin', 'Malcolm', 'Donald'--these are the
gifts of Scotland to the world, along with golf, whisky, porridge,
and the works of Barrie and Stevenson.

The Comstocks belonged to the most dismal of all classes, the
middle-middle class, the landless gentry.  In their miserable
poverty they had not even the snobbish consolation of regarding
themselves as an 'old' family fallen on evil days, for they were
not an 'old' family at all, merely one of those families which rose
on the wave of Victorian prosperity and then sank again faster than
the wave itself.  They had had at most fifty years of comparative
wealth, corresponding with the lifetime of Gordon's grandfather,
Samuel Comstock--Gran'pa Comstock, as Gordon was taught to call
him, though the old man died four years before he was born.

Gran'pa Comstock was one of those people who even from the grave
exert a powerful influence.  In life he was a tough old scoundrel.
He plundered the proletariat and the foreigner of fifty thousand
pounds, he built himself a red brick mansion as durable as a
pyramid, and he begot twelve children, of whom eleven survived.
Finally he died quite suddenly, of a cerebral haemorrhage.  In
Kensal Green his children placed over him a monolith with the
following inscription:


IN EVER LOVING MEMORY OF

SAMUEL EZEKIEL COMSTOCK,

A FAITHFUL HUSBAND, A TENDER FATHER AND

AN UPRIGHT AND GODLY MAN,

WHO WAS BORN ON 9 JULY 1828, AND

DEPARTED THIS LIFE 5 SEPTEMBER 1901,

THIS STONE IS ERECTED BY

HIS SORROWING CHILDREN.

HE SLEEPS IN THE ARMS OF JESUS.


No need to repeat the blasphemous comments which everyone who had
known Gran'pa Comstock made on that last sentence.  But it is worth
pointing out that the chunk of granite on which it was inscribed
weighed close on five tons and was quite certainly put there with
the intention, though not the conscious intention, of making sure
that Gran'pa Comstock shouldn't get up from underneath it.  If you
want to know what a dead man's relatives really think of him, a
good rough test is the weight of his tombstone.

The Comstocks, as Gordon knew them, were a peculiarly dull, shabby,
dead-alive, ineffectual family.  They lacked vitality to an extent
that was surprising.  That was Gran'pa Comstock's doing, of course.
By the time when he died all his children were grown up and some of
them were middle-aged, and he had long ago succeeded in crushing
out of them any spirit they might ever have possessed.  He had lain
upon them as a garden roller lies upon daisies, and there was no
chance of their flattened personalities ever expanding again.  One
and all they turned out listless, gutless, unsuccessful sort of
people.  None of the boys had proper professions, because Gran'pa
Comstock had been at the greatest pains to drive all of them into
professions for which they were totally unsuited.  Only one of
them--John, Gordon's father--had even braved Gran'pa Comstock to
the extent of getting married during the latter's lifetime.  It was
impossible to imagine any of them making any sort of mark in the
world, or creating anything, or destroying anything, or being
happy, or vividly unhappy, or fully alive, or even earning a decent
income.  They just drifted along in an atmosphere of semi-genteel
failure.  They were one of those depressing families, so common
among the middle-middle classes, in which NOTHING EVER HAPPENS.

From his earliest childhood Gordon's relatives had depressed him
horribly.  When he was a little boy he still had great numbers of
uncles and aunts living.  They were all more or less alike--grey,
shabby, joyless people, all rather sickly in health and all
perpetually harassed by money-worries which fizzled along without
ever reaching the sensational explosion of bankruptcy.  It was
noticeable even then that they had lost all impulse to reproduce
themselves.  Really vital people, whether they have money or
whether they haven't, multiply almost as automatically as animals.
Gran'pa Comstock, for instance, himself one of a litter of twelve,
had produced eleven progeny.  Yet all those eleven produced only
two progeny between them, and those two--Gordon and his sister
Julia--had produced, by 1934, not even one.  Gordon, last of the
Comstocks, was born in 1905, an unintended child; and thereafter,
in thirty long, long years, there was not a single birth in the
family, only deaths.  And not only in the matter of marrying and
begetting, but in every possible way, NOTHING EVER HAPPENED in the
Comstock family.  Every one of them seemed doomed, as though by a
curse, to a dismal, shabby, hole-and-corner existence.  None of
them ever DID anything.  They were the kind of people who in every
conceivable activity, even if it is only getting on to a bus, are
automatically elbowed away from the heart of things.  All of them,
of course, were hopeless fools about money.  Gran'pa Comstock had
finally divided his money among them more or less equally, so that
each received, after the sale of the red-brick mansion, round about
five thousand pounds.  And no sooner was Gran'pa Comstock underground
than they began to fritter their money away.  None of them had the
guts to lose it in sensational ways such as squandering it on women
or at the races; they simply dribbled it away and dribbled it away,
the women in silly investments and the men in futile little business
ventures that petered out after a year or two, leaving a net loss.
More than half of them went unmarried to their graves.  Some of the
women did make rather undesirable middle-aged marriages after their
father was dead, but the men, because of their incapacity to earn a
proper living, were the kind who 'can't afford' to marry.  None of
them, except Gordon's Aunt Angela, ever had so much as a home to
call their own; they were the kind of people who live in godless
'rooms' and tomb-like boarding-houses.  And year after year they
died off and died off, of dingy but expensive little diseases that
swallowed up the last penny of their capital.  One of the women,
Gordon's Aunt Charlotte, wandered off into the Mental Home at
Clapham in 1916.  The Mental Homes of England, how chock-a-block
they stand!  And it is above all derelict spinsters of the middle-
classes who keep them going.  By 1934 only three of that generation
survived; Aunt Charlotte already mentioned, and Aunt Angela, who by
some happy chance had been induced to buy a house and a tiny annuity
in 1912, and Uncle Walter, who dingily existed on the few hundred
pounds that were left out of his five thousand and by running
short-lived 'agencies' for this and that.

Gordon grew up in the atmosphere of cut-down clothes and stewed
neck of mutton.  His father, like the other Comstocks, was a
depressed and therefore depressing person, but he had some brains
and a slight literary turn.  And seeing that his mind was of the
literary type and he had a shrinking horror of anything to do with
figures, it had seemed only natural to Gran'pa Comstock to make him
into a chartered accountant.  So he practised, ineffectually, as a
chartered accountant, and was always buying his way into
partnerships which were dissolved after a year or two, and his
income fluctuated, sometimes rising to five hundred a year and
sometimes falling to two hundred, but always with a tendency to
decrease.  He died in 1922, aged only fifty-six, but worn out--
he had suffered from a kidney disease for a long time past.

Since the Comstocks were genteel as well as shabby, it was
considered necessary to waste huge sums on Gordon's 'education'.
What a fearful thing it is, this incubus of 'education'!  It means
that in order to send his son to the right kind of school (that is,
a public school or an imitation of one) a middle-class man is
obliged to live for years on end in a style that would be scorned
by a jobbing plumber.  Gordon was sent to wretched, pretentious
schools whose fees were round about 120 pounds a year.  Even these
fees, of course, meant fearful sacrifices at home.  Meanwhile
Julia, who was five years older than he, received as nearly as
possible no education at all.  She was, indeed, sent to one or two
poor, dingy little boarding schools, but she was 'taken away' for
good when she was sixteen.  Gordon was 'the boy' and Julia was 'the
girl', and it seemed natural to everyone that 'the girl' should be
sacrificed to 'the boy'.  Moreover, it had early been decided in
the family that Gordon was 'clever'.  Gordon, with his wonderful
'cleverness', was to win scholarships, make a brilliant success in
life, and retrieve the family fortunes--that was the theory, and no
one believed in it more firmly than Julia.  Julia was a tall,
ungainly girl, much taller than Gordon, with a thin face and a neck
just a little too long--one of those girls who even at their most
youthful remind one irresistibly of a goose.  But her nature was
simple and affectionate.  She was a self-effacing, home-keeping,
ironing, darning, and mending kind of girl, a natural spinster-
soul.  Even at sixteen she had 'old maid' written all over her.
She idolized Gordon.  All through his childhood she watched over
him, nursed him, spoiled him, went in rags so that he might have
the right clothes to go to school in, saved up her wretched pocket-
money to buy him Christmas presents and birthday presents.  And of
course he repaid her, as soon as he was old enough, by despising
her because she was not pretty and not 'clever'.

Even at the third-rate schools to which Gordon was sent nearly all
the boys were richer than himself.  They soon found out his
poverty, of course, and gave him hell because of it.  Probably the
greatest cruelty one can inflict on a child is to send it to school
among children richer than itself.  A child conscious of poverty
will suffer snobbish agonies such as a grown-up person can scarcely
imagine.  In those days, especially at his preparatory school,
Gordon's life had been one long conspiracy to keep his end up and
pretend that his parents were richer than they were.  Ah, the
humiliations of those days!  That awful business, for instance,
at the beginning of each term, when you had to 'give in' to the
headmaster, publicly, the money you had brought back with you; and
the contemptuous, cruel sniggers from the other boys when you
didn't 'give in' ten bob or more.  And the time when the others
found out that Gordon was wearing a ready-made suit which had cost
thirty-five shillings!  The times that Gordon dreaded most of all
were when his parents came down to see him.  Gordon, in those days
still a believer, used actually to pray that his parents wouldn't
come down to school.  His father, especially, was the kind of
father you couldn't help being ashamed of; a cadaverous, despondent
man, with a bad stoop, his clothes dismally shabby and hopelessly
out of date.  He carried about with him an atmosphere of failure,
worry, and boredom.  And he had such a dreadful habit, when he was
saying good-bye, of tipping Gordon half a crown right in front of
the other boys, so that everyone could see that it was only half a
crown and not, as it ought to have been, ten bob!  Even twenty
years afterwards the memory of that school made Gordon shudder.

The first effect of all this was to give him a crawling reverence
for money.  In those days he actually hated his poverty-stricken
relatives--his father and mother, Julia, everybody.  He hated them
for their dingy homes, their dowdiness, their joyless attitude to
life, their endless worrying and groaning over threepences and
sixpences.  By far the commonest phrase in the Comstock household
was, 'We can't afford it.'  In those days he longed for money as
only a child can long.  Why SHOULDN'T one have decent clothes and
plenty of sweets and go to the pictures as often as one wanted to?
He blamed his parents for their poverty as though they had been
poor on purpose.  Why couldn't they be like other boys' parents?
They PREFERRED being poor, it seemed to him.  That is how a child's
mind works.

But as he grew older he grew--not less unreasonable, exactly, but
unreasonable in a different way.  By this time he had found his
feet at school and was less violently oppressed.  He never was very
successful at school--he did no work and won no scholarships--but
he managed to develop his brain along the lines that suited it.  He
read the books which the headmaster denounced from the pulpit, and
developed unorthodox opinions about the C. of E., patriotism, and
the Old Boys' tie.  Also he began writing poetry.  He even, after a
year or two, began to send poems to the Athenaeum, the New Age, and
the Weekly Westminster; but they were invariably rejected.  Of
course there were other boys of similar type with whom he
associated.  Every public school has its small self-conscious
intelligentsia.  And at that moment, in the years just after the
War, England was so full of revolutionary opinion that even the
public schools were infected by it.  The young, even those who had
been too young to fight, were in a bad temper with their elders, as
well they might be; practically everyone with any brains at all was
for the moment a revolutionary.  Meanwhile the old--those over
sixty, say--were running in circles like hens, squawking about
'subversive ideas'.  Gordon and his friends had quite an exciting
time with their 'subversive ideas'.  For a whole year they ran an
unofficial monthly paper called the Bolshevik, duplicated with a
jellygraph.  It advocated Socialism, free love, the dismemberment
of the British Empire, the abolition of the Army and Navy, and so
on and so forth.  It was great fun.  Every intelligent boy of
sixteen is a Socialist.  At that age one does not see the hook
sticking out of the rather stodgy bait.

In a crude, boyish way, he had begun to get the hang of this money-
business.  At an earlier age than most people he grasped that ALL
modern commerce is a swindle.  Curiously enough, it was the
advertisements in the Underground stations that first brought it
home to him.  He little knew, as the biographers say, that he
himself would one day have a job in an advertising firm.  But there
was more to it than the mere fact that business is a swindle.  What
he realized, and more clearly as time went on, was that money-
worship has been elevated into a religion.  Perhaps it is the only
real religion--the only really FELT religion--that is left to us.
Money is what God used to be.  Good and evil have no meaning any
longer except failure and success.  Hence the profoundly
significant phrase, to MAKE GOOD.  The decalogue has been reduced
to two commandments.  One for the employers--the elect, the money-
priesthood as it were--'Thou shalt make money'; the other for the
employed--the slaves and underlings--'Thou shalt not lose thy job.'
It was about this time that he came across The Ragged Trousered
Philanthropists and read about the starving carpenter who pawns
everything but sticks to his aspidistra.  The aspidistra became a
sort of symbol for Gordon after that.  The aspidistra, flower of
England!  It ought to be on our coat of arms instead of the lion
and the unicorn.  There will be no revolution in England while
there are aspidistras in the windows.

He did not hate and despise his relatives now--or not so much, at
any rate.  They still depressed him greatly--those poor old
withering aunts and uncles, of whom two or three had already died,
his father, worn out and spiritless, his mother, faded, nervy, and
'delicate' (her lungs were none too strong), Julia, already, at
one-and-twenty, a dutiful, resigned drudge who worked twelve hours
a day and never had a decent frock.  But he grasped now what was
the matter with them.  It was not MERELY the lack of money.  It was
rather that, having no money, they still lived mentally in the
money-world--the world in which money is virtue and poverty is
crime.  It was not poverty but the down-dragging of RESPECTABLE
poverty that had done for them.  They had accepted the money-code,
and by that code they were failures.  They had never had the sense
to lash out and just LIVE, money or no money, as the lower classes
do.  How right the lower classes are!  Hats off to the factory lad
who with fourpence in the world puts his girl in the family way!
At least he's got blood and not money in his veins.

Gordon thought it all out, in the naive selfish manner of a boy.
There are two ways to live, he decided.  You can be rich, or you
can deliberately refuse to be rich.  You can possess money, or you
can despise money; the one fatal thing is to worship money and fail
to get it.  He took it for granted that he himself would never be
able to make money.  It hardly even occurred to him that he might
have talents which could be turned to account.  That was what his
schoolmasters had done for him; they had rubbed it into him that he
was a seditious little nuisance and not likely to 'succeed' in
life.  He accepted this.  Very well, then, he would refuse the
whole business of 'succeeding'; he would make it his especial
purpose NOT to 'succeed'.  Better to reign in hell than serve in
heaven; better to serve in hell than serve in heaven, for that
matter.  Already, at sixteen, he knew which side he was on.  He was
AGAINST the money-god and all his swinish priesthood.  He had
declared war on money; but secretly, of course.

It was when he was seventeen that his father died, leaving about
two hundred pounds.  Julia had been at work for some years now.
During 1918 and 1919 she had worked in a Government office, and
after that she took a course of cookery and got a job in a nasty,
ladylike little teashop near Earl's Court Underground Station.  She
worked a seventy-two hour week and was given her lunch and tea and
twenty-five shillings; out of this she contributed twelve shillings
a week, often more, to the household expenses.  Obviously the best
thing to do, now that Mr Comstock was dead, would have been to take
Gordon away from school, find him a job, and let Julia have the two
hundred pounds to set up a teashop of her own.  But here the
habitual Comstock folly about money stepped in.  Neither Julia nor
her mother would hear of Gordon leaving school.  With the strange
idealistic snobbishness of the middle classes, they were willing to
go to the workhouse sooner than let Gordon leave school before the
statutory age of eighteen.  The two hundred pounds, or more than
half of it, must be used in completing Gordon's 'education'.
Gordon let them do it.  He had declared war on money but that did
not prevent him from being damnably selfish.  Of course he dreaded
this business of going to work.  What boy wouldn't dread it?  Pen-
pushing in some filthy office--God!  His uncles and aunts were
already talking dismally about 'getting Gordon settled in life'.
They saw everything in terms of 'good' jobs.  Young Smith had got
such a 'good' job in a bank, and young Jones had got such a 'good'
job in an insurance office.  It made him sick to hear them.  They
seemed to want to see every young man in England nailed down in the
coffin of a 'good' job.

Meanwhile, money had got to be earned.  Before her marriage
Gordon's mother had been a music teacher, and even since then she
had taken pupils, sporadically, when the family were in lower water
than usual.  She now decided that she would start giving lessons
again.  It was fairly easy to get pupils in the suburbs--they were
living in Acton--and with the music fees and Julia's contribution
they could probably 'manage' for the next year or two.  But the
state of Mrs Comstock's lungs was now something more than
'delicate'.  The doctor who had attended her husband before his
death had put his stethoscope to her chest and looked serious.  He
had told her to take care of herself, keep warm, eat nourishing
food, and, above all, avoid fatigue.  The fidgeting, tiring job of
giving piano lessons was, of course, the worst possible thing for
her.  Gordon knew nothing of this.  Julia knew, however.  It was a
secret between the two women, carefully kept from Gordon.

A year went by.  Gordon spent it rather miserably, more and more
embarrassed by his shabby clothes and lack of pocket-money, which
made girls an object of terror to him.  However, the New Age
accepted one of his poems that year.  Meanwhile, his mother sat on
comfortless piano stools in draughty drawing-rooms, giving lessons
at two shillings an hour.  And then Gordon left school, and fat
interfering Uncle Walter, who had business connexions in a small
way, came forward and said that a friend of a friend of his could
get Gordon ever such a 'good' job in the accounts department of a
red lead firm.  It was really a splendid job--a wonderful opening
for a young man.  If Gordon buckled to work in the right spirit he
might be a Big Pot one of these days.  Gordon's soul squirmed.
Suddenly, as weak people do, he stiffened, and, to the horror of
the whole family, refused even to try for the job.

There were fearful rows, of course.  They could not understand him.
It seemed to them a kind of blasphemy to refuse such a 'good' job
when you got the chance of it.  He kept reiterating that he didn't
want THAT KIND of job.  Then what DID he want? they all demanded.
He wanted to 'write', he told them sullenly.  But how could he
possibly make a living by 'writing'? they demanded again.  And of
course he couldn't answer.  At the back of his mind was the idea
that he could somehow live by writing poetry; but that was too
absurd even to be mentioned.  But at any rate, he wasn't going into
business, into the money-world.  He would have a job, but not a
'good' job.  None of them had the vaguest idea what he meant.  His
mother wept, even Julia 'went for' him, and all round him there
were uncles and aunts (he still had six or seven of them left)
feebly volleying and incompetently thundering.  And after three
days a dreadful thing happened.  In the middle of supper his mother
was seized by a violent fit of coughing, put her hand to her
breast, fell forward, and began bleeding at the mouth.

Gordon was terrified.  His mother did not die, as it happened, but
she looked deathly as they carried her upstairs.  Gordon rushed for
the doctor.  For several days his mother lay at death's door.  It
was the draughty drawing-rooms and the trudging to and fro in all
weathers that had done it.  Gordon hung helplessly about the house,
a dreadful feeling of guilt mingling with his misery.  He did not
exactly know but he half divined, that his mother had killed
herself in order to pay his school fees.  After this he could not
go on opposing her any longer.  He went to Uncle Walter and told
him that he would take that job in the red lead firm, if they would
give it him.  So Uncle Walter spoke to his friend, and the friend
spoke to his friend, and Gordon was sent for and interviewed by an
old gentleman with badly fitting false teeth, and finally was given
a job, on probation.  He started on twenty-five bob a week.  And
with this firm he remained six years.

They moved away from Acton and took a flat in a desolate red block
of flats somewhere in the Paddington district.  Mrs Comstock had
brought her piano, and when she had got some of her strength back
she gave occasional lessons.  Gordon's wages were gradually raised,
and the three of them 'managed', more or less.  It was Julia and
Mrs Comstock who did most of the 'managing'.  Gordon still had a
boy's selfishness about money.  At the office he got on not
absolutely badly.  It was said of him that he was worth his wages
but wasn't the type that Makes Good.  In a way the utter contempt
that he had for his work made things easier for him.  He could put
up with this meaningless office-life, because he never for an
instant thought of it as permanent.  Somehow, sometime, God knew
how or when, he was going to break free of it.  After all, there
was always his 'writing'.  Some day, perhaps, he might be able to
make a living of sorts by 'writing'; and you'd feel you were free
of the money-stink if you were a 'writer', would you not?  The
types he saw all round him, especially the older men, made him
squirm.  That was what it meant to worship the money-god!  To
settle down, to Make Good, to sell your soul for a villa and an
aspidistra!  To turn into the typical little bowler-hatted sneak--
Strube's 'little man'--the little docile cit who slips home by the
six-fifteen to a supper of cottage pie and stewed tinned pears,
half an hour's listening-in to the B. B. C. Symphony Concert, and
then perhaps a spot of licit sexual intercourse if his wife 'feels
in the mood'!  What a fate!  No, it isn't like that that one was
meant to live.  One's got to get right out of it, out of the money-
stink.  It was a kind of plot that he was nursing.  He was as
though dedicated to this war against money.  But it was still a
secret.  The people at the office never suspected him of unorthodox
ideas.  They never even found out that he wrote poetry--not that
there was much to find out, for in six years he had less than
twenty poems printed in the magazines.  To look at, he was just the
same as any other City clerk--just a soldier in the strap-hanging
army that sways eastward at morning, westward at night in the
carriages of the Underground.

He was twenty-four when his mother died.  The family was breaking
up.  Only four of the older generation of Comstocks were left now--
Aunt Angela, Aunt Charlotte, Uncle Walter, and another uncle who
died a year later.  Gordon and Julia gave up the flat.  Gordon took
a furnished room in Doughty Street (he felt vaguely literary,
living in Bloomsbury), and Julia moved to Earl's Court, to be near
the shop.  Julia was nearly thirty now, and looked much older.  She
was thinner than ever, though healthy enough, and there was grey in
her hair.  She still worked twelve hours a day, and in six years
her wages had only risen by ten shillings a week.  The horribly
ladylike lady who kept the teashop was a semi-friend as well as an
employer, and thus could sweat and bully Julia to the tune of
'dearest' and 'darling'.  Four months after his mother's death
Gordon suddenly walked out of his job.  He gave the firm no
reasons.  They imagined that he was going to 'better himself', and--
luckily, as it turned out--gave him quite good references.  He had
not even thought of looking for another job.  He wanted to burn his
boats.  From now on he would breathe free air, free of the money-
stink.  He had not consciously waited for his mother to die before
doing this; still, it was his mother's death that had nerved him to
it.

Of course there was another and more desolating row in what was
left of the family.  They thought Gordon must have gone mad.  Over
and over again he tried, quite vainly, to explain to them why he
would not yield himself to the servitude of a 'good' job.  'But
what are you going to live on?  What are you going to live on?' was
what they all wailed at him.  He refused to think seriously about
it.  Of course, he still harboured the notion that he could make a
living of sorts by 'writing'.  By this time he had got to know
Ravelston, editor of Antichrist, and Ravelston, besides printing
his poems, managed to get him books to review occasionally.  His
literary prospects were not so bleak as they had been six years
ago.  But still, it was not the desire to 'write' that was his real
motive.  To get out of the money-world--that was what he wanted.
Vaguely he looked forward to some kind of moneyless, anchorite
existence.  He had a feeling that if you genuinely despise money
you can keep going somehow, like the birds of the air.  He forgot
that the birds of the air don't pay room-rent.  The poet starving
in a garret--but starving, somehow, not uncomfortably--that was his
vision of himself.

The next seven months were devastating.  They scared him and almost
broke his spirit.  He learned what it means to live for weeks on
end on bread and margarine, to try to 'write' when you are half
starved, to pawn your clothes, to sneak trembling up the stairs
when you owe three weeks' rent and your landlady is listening for
you.  Moreover, in those seven months he wrote practically nothing.
The first effect of poverty is that it kills thought.  He grasped,
as though it were a new discovery, that you do not escape from
money merely by being moneyless.  On the contrary, you are the
hopeless slave of money until you have enough of it to live on--a
'competence', as the beastly middle-class phrase goes.  Finally he
was turned out of his room, after a vulgar row.  He was three days
and four nights in the street.  It was bloody.  Three mornings, on
the advice of another man he met on the Embankment, he spent in
Billingsgate, helping to shove fish-barrows up the twisty little
hills from Billingsgate into Eastcheap.  'Twopence an up' was what
you got, and the work knocked hell out of your thigh muscles.
There were crowds of people on the same job, and you had to wait
your turn; you were lucky if you made eighteen-pence between four
in the morning and nine.  After three days of it Gordon gave up.
What was the use?  He was beaten.  There was nothing for it but to
go back to his family, borrow some money, and find another job.

But now, of course, there was no job to be had.  For months he
lived by cadging on the family.  Julia kept him going till the last
penny of her tiny savings was gone.  It was abominable.  Here was
the outcome of all his fine attitudes!  He had renounced ambition,
made war on money, and all it led to was cadging from his sister!
And Julia, he knew, felt his failure far more than she felt the
loss of her savings.  She had had such hopes of Gordon.  He alone
of all the Comstocks had had it in him to 'succeed'.  Even now she
believed that somehow, some day, he was going to retrieve the
family fortunes.  He was so 'clever'--surely he could make money if
he tried!  For two whole months Gordon stayed with Aunt Angela in
her little house at Highgate--poor, faded, mummified Aunt Angela,
who even for herself had barely enough to eat.  All this time he
searched desperately for work.  Uncle Walter could not help him.
His influence in the business world, never large, was now
practically nil.  At last, however, in a quite unexpected way, the
luck turned.  A friend of a friend of Julia's employer's brother
managed to get Gordon a job in the accounts department of the New
Albion Publicity Company.

The New Albion was one of those publicity firms which have sprung
up everywhere since the War--the fungi, as you might say, that
sprout from a decaying capitalism.  It was a smallish rising firm
and took every class of publicity it could get.  It designed a
certain number of large-scale posters for oatmeal stout, self-
raising flour, and so forth, but its main line was millinery and
cosmetic advertisements in the women's illustrated papers, besides
minor ads in twopenny weeklies, such as Whiterose Pills for Female
Disorders, Your Horoscope Cast by Professor Raratongo, The Seven
Secrets of Venus, New Hope for the Ruptured, Earn Five Pounds a
Week in your Spare Time, and Cyprolax Hair Lotion Banishes all
Unpleasant Intruders.  There was a large staff of commercial
artists, of course.  It was here that Gordon first made the
acquaintance of Rosemary.  She was in the 'studio' and helped to
design fashion plates.  It was a long time before he actually spoke
to her.  At first he knew her merely as a remote personage, small,
dark, with swift movements, distinctly attractive but rather
intimidating.  When they passed one another in the corridors she
eyed him ironically, as though she knew all about him and
considered him a bit of a joke; nevertheless she seemed to look at
him a little oftener than was necessary.  He had nothing to do with
her side of the business.  He was in the accounts department, a
mere clerk on three quid a week.

The interesting thing about the New Albion was that it was so
completely modern in spirit.  There was hardly a soul in the firm
who was not perfectly well aware that publicity--advertising--is
the dirtiest ramp that capitalism has yet produced.  In the red
lead firm there had still lingered certain notions of commercial
honour and usefulness.  But such things would have been laughed at
in the New Albion.  Most of the employees were the hard-boiled,
Americanized, go-getting type to whom nothing in the world is
sacred, except money.  They had their cynical code worked out.  The
public are swine; advertising is the rattling of a stick inside a
swill-bucket.  And yet beneath their cynicism there was the final
naivete, the blind worship of the money-god.  Gordon studied them
unobtrusively.  As before, he did his work passably well and his
fellow-employees looked down on him.  Nothing had changed in his
inner mind.  He still despised and repudiated the money-code.
Somehow, sooner or later, he was going to escape from it; even now,
after his first fiasco, he still plotted to escape.  He was IN the
money world, but not OF it.  As for the types about him, the little
bowler-hatted worms who never turned, and the go-getters, the
American business-college gutter-crawlers, they rather amused him
than not.  He liked studying their slavish keep-your-job mentality.
He was the chiel amang them takin' notes.

One day a curious thing happened.  Somebody chanced to see a poem
of Gordon's in a magazine, and put it about that they 'had a poet
in the office'.  Of course Gordon was laughed at, not ill-
naturedly, by the other clerks.  They nicknamed him 'the bard' from
that day forth.  But though amused, they were also faintly
contemptuous.  It confirmed all their ideas about Gordon.  A fellow
who wrote poetry wasn't exactly the type to Make Good.  But the
thing had an unexpected sequel.  About the time when the clerks
grew tired of chaffing Gordon, Mr Erskine, the managing director,
who had hitherto taken only the minimum notice of him, sent for him
and interviewed him.

Mr Erskine was a large, slow-moving man with a broad, healthy,
expressionless face.  From his appearance and the slowness of his
speech you would have guessed with confidence that he had something
to do with either agriculture or cattle-breeding.  His wits were as
slow as his movements, and he was the kind of man who never hears
of anything until everybody else has stopped talking about it.  How
such a man came to be in charge of an advertising agency, only the
strange gods of capitalism know.  But he was quite a likeable
person.  He had not that sniffish, buttoned-up spirit that usually
goes with an ability to make money.  And in a way his fat-
wittedness stood him in good stead.  Being insensible to popular
prejudice, he could assess people on their merits; consequently, he
was rather good at choosing talented employees.  The news that
Gordon had written poems, so far from shocking him, vaguely
impressed him.  They wanted literary talents in the New Albion.
Having sent for Gordon, he studied him in a somnolent, sidelong way
and asked him a number of inconclusive questions.  He never
listened to Gordon's answers, but punctuated his questions with a
noise that sounded like 'Hm, hm, hm.'  Wrote poetry, did he?  Oh
yes?  Hm.  And had it printed in the papers?  Hm, hm.  Suppose they
paid you for that kind of thing?  Not much, eh?  No, suppose not.
Hm, hm.  Poetry?  Hm.  A bit difficult, that must be.  Getting the
lines the same length, and all that.  Hm, hm.  Write anything else?
Stories, and so forth?  Hm.  Oh yes?  Very interesting.  Hm!

Then, without further questions, he promoted Gordon to a special
post as secretary--in effect, apprentice--to Mr Clew, the New
Albion's head copywriter.  Like every other advertising agency, the
New Albion was constantly in search of copywriters with a touch of
imagination.  It is a curious fact, but it is much easier to find
competent draughtsmen than to find people who can think of slogans
like 'Q. T. Sauce keeps Hubby Smiling' and 'Kiddies clamour for
their Breakfast Crisps'.  Gordon's wages were not raised for the
moment, but the firm had their eye on him.  With luck he might be a
full-fledged copywriter in a year's time.  It was an unmistakable
chance to Make Good.

For six months he was working with Mr Clew.  Mr Clew was a harassed
man of about forty, with wiry hair into which he often plunged his
fingers.  He worked in a stuffy little office whose walls were
entirely papered with his past triumphs in the form of posters.  He
took Gordon under his wing in a friendly way, showed him the ropes,
and was even ready to listen to his suggestions.  At that time they
were working on a line of magazine ads for April Dew, the great new
deodorant which the Queen of Sheba Toilet Requisites Co. (this was
Flaxman's firm, curiously enough) were putting on the market.
Gordon started on the job with secret loathing.  But now there was
a quite unexpected development.  It was that Gordon showed, almost
from the start, a remarkable talent for copywriting.  He could
compose an ad as though he had been born to it.  The vivid phrase
that sticks and rankles, the neat little para. that packs a world
of lies into a hundred words--they came to him almost unsought.  He
had always had a gift for words, but this was the first time he had
used it successfully.  Mr Clew thought him very promising.  Gordon
watched his own development, first with surprise, then with
amusement, and finally with a kind of horror.  THIS, then, was what
he was coming to!  Writing lies to tickle the money out of fools'
pockets!  There was a beastly irony, too, in the fact that he, who
wanted to be a 'writer', should score his sole success in writing
ads for deodorants.  However, that was less unusual than he
imagined.  Most copywriters, they say, are novelists manques; or is
it the other way about?

The Queen of Sheba were very pleased with their ads.  Mr Erskine
also was pleased.  Gordon's wages were raised by ten shillings a
week.  And it was now that Gordon grew frightened.  Money was
getting him after all.  He was sliding down, down, into the money-
sty.  A little more and he would be stuck in it for life.  It is
queer how these things happen.  You set your face against success,
you swear never to Make Good--you honestly believe that you
couldn't Make Good even if you wanted to; and then something
happens along, some mere chance, and you find yourself Making Good
almost automatically.  He saw that now or never was the time to
escape.  He had got to get out of it--out of the money-world,
irrevocably, before he was too far involved.

But this time he wasn't going to be starved into submission.  He
went to Ravelston and asked his help.  He told him that he wanted
some kind of job; not a 'good' job, but a job that would keep his
body without wholly buying his soul.  Ravelston understood
perfectly.  The distinction between a job and a 'good' job did not
have to be explained to him; nor did he point out to Gordon the
folly of what he was doing.  That was the great thing about
Ravelston.  He could always see another person's point of view.  It
was having money that did it, no doubt; for the rich can afford to
be intelligent.  Moreover, being rich himself, he could find jobs
for other people.  After only a fortnight he told Gordon of
something that might suit him.  A Mr McKechnie, a rather
dilapidated second-hand bookseller with whom Ravelston dealt
occasionally, was looking for an assistant.  He did not want a
trained assistant who would expect full wages; he wanted somebody
who looked like a gentleman and could talk about books--somebody to
impress the more bookish customers.  It was the very reverse of a
'good' job.  The hours were long, the pay was wretched--two pounds
a week--and there was no chance of advancement.  It was a blind-
alley job.  And, of course, a blind-alley job was the very thing
Gordon was looking for.  He went and saw Mr McKechnie, a sleepy,
benign old Scotchman with a red nose and a white beard stained by
snuff, and was taken on without demur.  At this time, too, his
volume of poems, Mice, was going to press.  The seventh publisher
to whom he had sent it had accepted it.  Gordon did not know that
this was Ravelston's doing.  Ravelston was a personal friend of the
publisher.  He was always arranging this kind of thing, stealthily,
for obscure poets.  Gordon thought the future was opening before
him.  He was a made man--or, by Smilesian, aspidistral standards,
UNmade.

He gave a month's notice at the office.  It was a painful business
altogether.  Julia, of course, was more distressed than ever at
this second abandonment of a 'good' job.  By this time Gordon had
got to know Rosemary.  She did not try to prevent him from throwing
up his job.  It was against her code to interfere--'You've got to
live your own life,' was always her attitude.  But she did not in
the least understand why he was doing it.  The thing that most
upset him, curiously enough, was his interview with Mr Erskine.  Mr
Erskine was genuinely kind.  He did not want Gordon to leave the
firm, and said so frankly.  With a sort of elephantine politeness
he refrained from calling Gordon a young fool.  He did, however,
ask him why he was leaving.  Somehow, Gordon could not bring
himself to avoid answering or to say--the only thing Mr Erskine
would have understood--that he was going after a better-paid job.
He blurted out shamefacedly that he 'didn't think business suited
him' and that he 'wanted to go in for writing'.  Mr Erskine was
noncommittal.  Writing, eh?  Hm.  Much money in that sort of thing
nowadays?  Not much, eh?  Hm.  No, suppose not.  Hm.  Gordon,
feeling and looking ridiculous, mumbled that he had 'got a book
just coming out'.  A book of poems, he added with difficulty in
pronouncing the word.  Mr Erskine regarded him sidelong before
remarking:

'Poetry, eh?  Hm.  Poetry?  Make a living out of that sort of
thing, do you think?'

'Well--not a living, exactly.  But it would help.'

'Hm--well!  You know best, I expect.  If you want a job any time,
come back to us.  I dare say we could find room for you.  We can do
with your sort here.  Don't forget.'

Gordon left with a hateful feeling of having behaved perversely and
ungratefully.  But he had got to do it; he had got to get out of
the money-world.  It was queer.  All over England young men were
eating their hearts out for lack of jobs, and here was he, Gordon,
to whom the very word 'job' was faintly nauseous, having jobs
thrust unwanted upon him.  It was an example of the fact that you
can get anything in this world if you genuinely don't want it.
Moreover, Mr Erskine's words stuck in his mind.  Probably he had
meant what he said.  Probably there WOULD be a job waiting for
Gordon if he chose to go back.  So his boats were only half burned.
The New Albion was a doom before him as well as behind.

But how happy had he been, just at first, in Mr McKechnie's
bookshop!  For a little while--a very little while--he had the
illusion of being really out of the money-world.  Of course the
book-trade was a swindle, like all other trades; but how different
a swindle!  Here was no hustling and Making Good, no gutter-
crawling.  No go-getter could put up for ten minutes with the
stagnant air of the book-trade.  As for the work, it was very
simple.  It was mainly a question of being in the shop ten hours a
day.  Mr McKechnie wasn't a bad old stick.  He was a Scotchman, of
course, but Scottish is as Scottish does.  At any rate he was
reasonably free from avarice--his most distinctive trait seemed to
be laziness.  He was also a teetotaller and belonged to some
Nonconformist sect or other, but this did not affect Gordon.
Gordon had been at the shop about a month when Mice was published.
No less than thirteen papers reviewed it!  And The Times Lit. Supp.
said that it showed 'exceptional promise'.  It was not till months
later that he realized what a hopeless failure Mice had really
been.

And it was only now, when he was down to two quid a week and had
practically cut himself off from the prospect of earning more, that
he grasped the real nature of the battle he was fighting.  The
devil of it is that the glow of renunciation never lasts.  Life on
two quid a week ceases to be a heroic gesture and becomes a dingy
habit.  Failure is as great a swindle as success.  He had thrown up
his 'good' job and renounced 'good' jobs for ever.  Well, that was
necessary.  He did not want to go back on it.  But it was no use
pretending that because his poverty was self-imposed he had escaped
the ills that poverty drags in its train.  It was not a question of
hardship.  You don't suffer real physical hardship on two quid a
week, and if you did it wouldn't matter.  It is in the brain and
the soul that lack of money damages you.  Mental deadness,
spiritual squalor--they seem to descend upon you inescapably when
your income drops below a certain point.  Faith, hope, money--only
a saint could have the first two without having the third.

He was growing more mature.  Twenty-seven, twenty-eight, twenty-
nine.  He had reached the age when the future ceases to be a rosy
blur and becomes actual and menacing.  The spectacle of his
surviving relatives depressed him more and more.  As he grew older
he felt himself more akin to them.  That was the way he was going!
A few years more, and he would be like that, just like that!  He
felt this even with Julia, whom he saw oftener than his uncle and
aunt.  In spite of various resolves never to do it again, he still
borrowed money off Julia periodically.  Julia's hair was greying
fast; there was a deep line scored down each of her thin red
cheeks.  She had settled her life into a routine in which she was
not unhappy.  There was her work at the shop, her 'sewing' at
nights in her Earl's Court bed-sitting-room (second floor, back,
nine bob a week unfurnished), her occasional forgatherings with
spinster friends as lonely as herself.  It was the typical
submerged life of the penniless unmarried woman; she accepted it,
hardly realizing that her destiny could ever have been different.
Yet in her way she suffered, more for Gordon than for herself.  The
gradual decay of the family, the way they had died off and died off
and left nothing behind, was a sort of tragedy in her mind.  Money,
money!  'None of us ever seems to make any money!' was her
perpetual lament.  And of them all, Gordon alone had had the chance
to make money; and Gordon had chosen not to.  He was sinking
effortless into the same rut of poverty as the others.  After the
first row was over, she was too decent to 'go for' him again
because he had thrown up his job at the New Albion.  But his
motives were quite meaningless to her.  In her wordless feminine
way she knew that the sin against money is the ultimate sin.

And as for Aunt Angela and Uncle Walter--oh dear, oh dear!  What a
couple!  It made Gordon feel ten years older every time he looked
at them.

Uncle Walter, for example.  Uncle Walter was very depressing.  He
was sixty-seven, and what with his various 'agencies' and the
dwindling remnants of his patrimony his income might have been
nearly three pounds a week.  He had a tiny little cabin of an
office off Cursitor Street, and he lived in a very cheap boarding-
house in Holland Park.  That was quite according to precedent; all
the Comstock men drifted naturally into boarding-houses.  When you
looked at poor old uncle, with his large tremulous belly, his
bronchitic voice, his broad, pale, timidly pompous face, rather
like Sargent' s portrait of Henry James, his entirely hairless
head, his pale, pouchy eyes, and his ever-drooping moustache, to
which he tried vainly to give an upward twirl--when you looked at
him, you found it totally impossible to believe that he had ever
been young.  Was it conceivable that such a being had ever felt
life tingle in his veins?  Had he ever climbed a tree, taken a
header off a springboard, or been in love?  Had he ever had a brain
in working order?  Even back in the early nineties, when he was
arithmetically young, had he ever made any kind of stab at life?  A
few furtive half-hearted frolics, perhaps.  A few whiskies in dull
bars, a visit or two to the Empire promenade, a little whoring on
the Q. T.; the sort of dingy, drabby fornications that you can
imagine happening between Egyptian mummies after the museum is
closed for the night.  And after that the long, long quiet years of
business failure, loneliness, and stagnation in godless boarding-
houses.

And yet uncle in his old age was probably not unhappy.  He had one
hobby of never-failing interest, and that was his diseases.  He
suffered, by his own account, from every disease in the medical
dictionary, and was never weary of talking about them.  Indeed, it
seemed to Gordon that none of the people in his uncle's boarding-
house--he had been there occasionally--ever did talk about anything
except their diseases.  All over the darkish drawing-room, ageing,
discoloured people sat about in couples, discussing symptoms.
Their conversation was like the dripping of stalactite to
stalagmite.  Drip, drip.  'How is your lumbago?' says stalactite to
stalagmite.  'I find my Kruschen Salts are doing me good,' says
stalagmite to stalactite.  Drip, drip, drip.

And then there was Aunt Angela, aged sixty-nine.  Gordon tried not
even to think of Aunt Angela oftener than he could help.

Poor, dear, good, kind, depressing Aunt Angela!

Poor, shrivelled, parchment-yellow, skin-and-bone Aunt Angela!
There in her miserable little semi-detached house in Highgate--
Briarbrae, its name was--there in her palace in the northern
mountains, there dwelleth she, Angela the Ever-virgin, of whom no
man either living or among the shades can say truly that upon her
lips he hath pressed the dear caresses of a lover.  All alone she
dwelleth, and all day long she fareth to and fro, and in her hand
is the feather-mop fashioned from the tail feathers of the
contumacious turkey, and with it she polisheth the dark-leaved
aspidistras and flicketh the hated dust from the resplendent never-
to-be-used Crown Derby china tea-service.  And ever and anon she
comforteth her dear heart with draughts of the dark brown tea, both
Flowery Orange and Pekoe Points, which the small-bearded sons of
Coromandel have ferried to her across the wine-dark sea.  Poor,
dear, good, kind, but on the whole unloveable Aunt Angela!  Her
annuity was ninety-eight pounds a year (thirty-eight bob a week,
but she retained a middle-class habit of thinking of her income as
a yearly and not weekly thing), and out of that, twelve and
sixpence a week went on house rates.  She would probably have
starved occasionally if Julia had not smuggled her packets of cakes
and bread and butter from the shop--always, of course, presented as
'Just a few little things that it seemed a pity to throw away',
with the solemn pretence that Aunt Angela didn't really need them.

Yet she too had her pleasures, poor old aunty.  She had become a
great novel-reader in her old age, the public library being only
ten minutes' walk from Briarbrae.  During his lifetime, on some
whim or other, Gran'pa Comstock had forbidden his daughters to read
novels.  Consequently, having only begun to read novels in 1902,
Aunt Angela was always a couple of decades behind the current mode
in fiction.  But she plodded along in the rear, faint yet pursuing.
In the nineteen-hundreds she was still reading Rhoda Broughton and
Mrs Henry Wood.  In the War years she discovered Hall Caine and Mrs
Humphry Ward.  In the nineteen-twenties she was reading Silas
Hocking and H. Seton Merriman, and by the nineteen-thirties she had
almost, but not quite, caught up with W. B. Maxwell and William J.
Locke.  Further she would never get.  As for the post-War
novelists, she had heard of them afar off, with their immorality
and their blasphemies and their devastating 'cleverness'.  But she
would never live to read them.  Walpole we know, and Hichens we
read, but Hemingway, who are you?

Well, this was 1934, and that was what was left of the Comstock
family.  Uncle Walter, with his 'agencies' and his diseases.  Aunt
Angela, dusting the Crown Derby china tea-service in Briarbrae.
Aunt Charlotte, still preserving a vague vegetable existence in the
Mental Home.  Julia, working a seventy-two-hour week and doing her
'sewing' at nights by the tiny gas-fire in her bedsitting-room.
Gordon, nearly thirty, earning two quid a week in a fool's job, and
struggling, as the sole demonstrable object of his existence, with
a dreadful book that never got any further.

Possibly there were some other, more distantly related Comstocks,
for Gran'pa Comstock had been one of a family of twelve.  But if
any survived they had grown rich and lost touch with their poor
relations; for money is thicker than blood.  As for Gordon's branch
of the family, the combined income of the five of them, allowing
for the lump sum that had been paid down when Aunt Charlotte
entered the Mental Home, might have been six hundred a year.  Their
combined ages were two hundred and sixty-three years.  None of them
had ever been out of England, fought in a war, been in prison,
ridden a horse, travelled in an aeroplane, got married, or given
birth to a child.  There seemed no reason why they should not
continue in the same style until they died.  Year in, year out,
NOTHING EVER HAPPENED in the Comstock family.



4


Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over
The bending poplars, newly bare.


As a matter of fact, though, there was not a breath of wind that
afternoon.  It was almost as mild as spring.  Gordon repeated to
himself the poem he had begun yesterday, in a cadenced whisper,
simply for the pleasure of the sound of it.  He was pleased with
the poem at this moment.  It was a good poem--or would be when it
was finished, anyway.  He had forgotten that last night it had
almost made him sick.

The plane trees brooded motionless, dimmed by faint wreaths of
mist.  A tram boomed in the valley far below.  Gordon walked up
Malkin Hill, rustling instep-deep through the dry, drifted leaves.
All down the pavement they were strewn, crinkly and golden, like
the rustling flakes of some American breakfast cereal; as though
the queen of Brobdingnag had upset her packet of Truweet Breakfast
Crisps down the hillside.

Jolly, the windless winter days!  Best time of all the year--or so
Gordon thought at this moment.  He was as happy as you can be when
you haven't smoked all day and have only three-halfpence and a Joey
in the world.  This was Thursday, early-closing day and Gordon's
afternoon off.  He was going to the house of Paul Doring, the
critic, who lived in Coleridge Grove and gave literary tea-parties.

It had taken him an hour or more to get himself ready.  Social life
is so complicated when your income is two quid a week.  He had had
a painful shave in cold water immediately after dinner.  He had put
on his best suit--three years old but just passable when he
remembered to press the trousers under his mattress.  He had turned
his collar inside out and tied his tie so that the torn place
didn't show.  With the point of a match he had scraped enough
blacking from the tin to polish his shoes.  He had even borrowed a
needle from Lorenheim and darned his socks--a tedious job, but
better than inking the places where your ankle shows through.  Also
he had procured an empty Gold Flake packet and put into it a single
cigarette extracted from the penny-in-the-slot-machine.  That was
just for the look of the thing.  You can't, of course, go to other
people's houses with NO cigarettes.  But if you have even one it's
all right, because when people see one cigarette in a packet they
assume that the packet has been full.  It is fairly easy to pass
the thing off as an accident.

'Have a cigarette?' you say casually to someone.

'Oh--thanks.'

You push the packet open and then register surprise.  'Hell!  I'm
down to my last.  And I could have sworn I had a full packet.'

'Oh, I won't take your last.  Have one of MINE,' says the other.

'Oh--thanks.'

And after that, of course, your host and hostess press cigarettes
upon you.  But you must have ONE cigarette, just for honour's sake.

Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over.  He would finish that poem
presently.  He could finish it whenever he chose.  It was queer,
how the mere prospect of going to a literary tea-party bucked him
up.  When your income is two quid a week you at least aren't jaded
by too much human contact.  Even to see the inside of somebody
else's house is a kind of treat.  A padded armchair under your bum,
and tea and cigarettes and the smell of women--you learn to
appreciate such things when you are starved of them.  In practice,
though, Doring's parties never in the least resembled what Gordon
looked forward to.  Those wonderful, witty, erudite conversations
that he imagined beforehand--they never happened or began to
happen.  Indeed there was never anything that could properly be
called conversation at all; only the stupid clacking that goes on
at parties everywhere, in Hampstead or Hong Kong.  No one really
worth meeting ever came to Doring's parties.  Doring was such a
very mangy lion himself that his followers were hardly even worthy
to be called jackals.  Quite half of them were those hen-witted
middle-aged women who have lately escaped from good Christian homes
and are trying to be literary.  The star exhibits were troops of
bright young things who dropped in for half an hour, formed circles
of their own, and talked sniggeringly about the other bright young
things to whom they referred by nicknames.  For the most part
Gordon found himself hanging about on the edges of conversations.
Doring was kind in a slapdash way and introduced him to everybody
as 'Gordon Comstock--YOU know; the poet.  He wrote that dashed
clever book of poems called Mice.  YOU know.'  But Gordon had never
yet encountered anybody who DID know.  The bright young things
summed him up at a glance and ignored him.  He was thirtyish, moth-
eaten, and obviously penniless.  And yet, in spite of the
invariable disappointment, how eagerly he looked forward to those
literary tea-parties!  They were a break in his loneliness, anyway.
That is the devilish thing about poverty, the ever-recurrent thing--
loneliness.  Day after day with never an intelligent person to
talk to; night after night back to your godless room, always alone.
Perhaps it sounds rather fun if you are rich and sought-after; but
how different it is when you do it from necessity!

Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over.  A stream of cars hummed
easily up the hill.  Gordon eyed them without envy.  Who wants a
car, anyway?  The pink doll-faces of upper-class women gazed at him
through the car window.  Bloody nit-witted lapdogs.  Pampered
bitches dozing on their chains.  Better the lone wolf than the
cringing dogs.  He thought of the Tube stations at early morning.
The black hordes of clerks scurrying underground like ants into a
hole; swarms of little ant-like men, each with dispatch-case in
right hand, newspaper in left hand, and the fear of the sack like a
maggot in his heart.  How it eats at them, that secret fear!
Especially on winter days, when they hear the menace of the wind.
Winter, the sack, the workhouse, the Embankment benches!  Ah!


Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over
The bending poplars, newly bare,
And the dark ribbons of the chimneys
Veer downward; flicked by whips of air,
Torn posters flutter; Coldly sound
The boom of trains and the rattle of hooves,
And the clerks who hurry to the station
Look, shuddering, over the eastern rooves,
Thinking--


What do they think?  Winter's coming.  Is my job safe?  The sack
means the workhouse.  Circumcise ye your foreskins, saith the Lord.
Suck the blacking off the boss's boots.  Yes!


Thinking each one, 'Here comes the winter!
Please God I keep my job this year!'
And bleakly, as the cold strikes through
Their entrails like an icy spear,
They think--


'Think' again.  No matter.  What do they think?  Money, money!
Rent, rates, taxes, school bills, season tickets, boots for the
children.  And the life insurance policy and the skivvy's wages.
And, my God, suppose the wife gets in the family way again!  And
did I laugh loud enough when the boss made that joke yesterday?
And the next instalment on the vacuum cleaner.

Neatly, taking a pleasure in his neatness, with the sensation of
dropping piece after piece of a jigsaw puzzle into place, he
fashioned another stanza:


They think of rent, rates, season tickets,
Insurance, coal, the skivvy's wages,
Boots, school bills, and the next instalment
Upon the two twin beds from Drage's.


Not bad, not bad at all.  Finish it presently.  Four or five more
stanzas.  Ravelston would print it.

A starling sat in the naked boughs of a plane tree, crooning self-
pitifully as starlings do on warm winter days when they believe
spring is in the air.  At the foot of the tree a huge sandy cat sat
motionless, mouth open, gazing upwards with rapt desire, plainly
expecting that the starling would drop into its mouth.  Gordon
repeated to himself the four finished stanzas of his poem.  It was
GOOD.  Why had he thought last night that it was mechanical, weak,
and empty?  He was a poet.  He walked more upright, arrogantly
almost, with the pride of a poet.  Gordon Comstock, author of Mice.
'Of exceptional promise,' The Times Lit. Supp. had said.  Author
also of London Pleasures.  For that too would be finished quite
soon.  He knew now that he could finish it when he chose.  Why had
he ever despaired of it?  Three months it might take; soon enough
to come out in the summer.  In his mind's eye he saw the 'slim'
white buckram shape of London Pleasures; the excellent paper, the
wide margins, the good Caslon type, the refined dust-jacket, and
the reviews in all the best papers.  'An outstanding achievement'--
The Times Lit. Supp.  'A welcome relief from the Sitwell school'--
Scrutiny.

Coleridge Grove was a damp, shadowy, secluded road, a blind alley
and therefore void of traffic.  Literary associations of the wrong
kind (Coleridge was rumoured to have lived there for six weeks in
the summer of 1821) hung heavy upon it.  You could not look at its
antique decaying houses, standing back from the road in dank
gardens under heavy trees, without feeling an atmosphere of
outmoded 'culture' envelop you.  In some of those houses,
undoubtedly, Browning Societies still flourished, and ladies in art
serge sat at the feet of extinct poets talking about Swinburne and
Walter Pater.  In spring the gardens were sprinkled with purple and
yellow crocuses, and later with harebells, springing up in little
Wendy rings among the anaemic grass; and even the trees, it seemed
to Gordon, played up to their environment and twisted themselves
into whimsy Rackhamesque attitudes.  It was queer that a prosperous
hack critic like Paul Doring should live in such a place.  For
Doring was an astonishingly bad critic.  He reviewed novels for the
Sunday Post and discovered the great English novel with Walpolean
regularity once a fortnight.  You would have expected him to live
in a flat on Hyde Park Corner.  Perhaps it was a kind of penance
that he had imposed upon himself, as though by living in the
refined discomfort of Coleridge Grove he propitiated the injured
gods of literature.

Gordon came round the corner, turning over in his mind a line from
London Pleasures.  And then suddenly he stopped short.  There was
something wrong about the look of the Dorings' gate.  What was it?
Ah, of course!  There were no cars waiting outside.

He paused, walked on a step or two, and stopped again, like a dog
that smells danger.  It was all wrong.  There OUGHT to be some
cars.  There were always quite a lot of people at the Dorings'
parties, and half of them came in cars.  Why had nobody else
arrived?  Could he be too early?  But no!  They had said half past
three and it was at least twenty to four.

He hastened towards the gate.  Already he felt practically sure
that the party HAD been put off.  A chill like the shadow of a
cloud had fallen across him.  Suppose the Dorings weren't at home!
Suppose the party had been put off!  And this thought, though it
dismayed him, did not strike him as in the least improbable.  It
was his special bugbear, the especial childish dread he carried
about with him, to be invited to people's houses and then find them
not at home.  Even when there was no doubt about the invitation he
always half expected that there would be some hitch or other.  He
was never quite certain of his welcome.  He took it for granted
that people would snub him and forget about him.  Why not, indeed?
He had no money.  When you have no money your life is one long
series of snubs.

He swung the iron gate open.  It creaked with a lonely sound.  The
dank mossy path was bordered with chunks of some Rackhamesque
pinkish stone.  Gordon inspected the house-front narrowly.  He was
so used to this kind of thing.  He had developed a sort of Sherlock
Holmes technique for finding out whether a house was inhabited or
not.  Ah!  Not much doubt about it this time.  The house had a
deserted look.  No smoke coming from the chimneys, no windows
lighted.  It must be getting darkish indoors--surely they would
have lighted the lamps?  And there was not a single footmark on the
steps; that settled it.  Nevertheless with a sort of desperate hope
he tugged at the bell.  An old-fashioned wire bell, of course.  In
Coleridge Grove it would have been considered low and unliterary to
have an electric bell.

Clang, clang, clang! went the bell.

Gordon's last hope vanished.  No mistaking the hollow clangour of a
bell echoing through an empty house.  He seized the handle again
and gave it a wrench that almost broke the wire.  A frightful,
clamorous peal answered him.  But it was useless, quite useless.
Not a foot stirred within.  Even the servants were out.  At this
moment he became aware of a lace cap, some dark hair, and a pair of
youthful eyes regarding him furtively from the basement of the
house next door.  It was a servant-girl who had come out to see
what all the noise was about.  She caught his eye and gazed into
the middle distance.  He looked a fool and knew it.  One always
does look a fool when one rings the bell of an empty house.  And
suddenly it came to him that that girl knew all about him--knew
that the party had been put off and that everyone except Gordon had
been told of it--knew that it was because he had no money that he
wasn't worth the trouble of telling.  SHE knew.  Servants always
know.

He turned and made for the gate.  Under the servant's eye he had to
stroll casually away, as though this were a small disappointment
that scarcely mattered.  But he was trembling so with anger that it
was difficult to control his movements.  The sods!  The bloody
sods!  To have played a trick like that on him!  To have invited
him, and then changed the day and not even bothered to tell him!
There might be other explanations--he just refused to think of
them.  The sods, the bloody sods!  His eye fell upon one of the
Rackhamesque chunks of stone.  How he'd love to pick that thing up
and bash it through the window!  He grasped the rusty gate-bar so
hard that he hurt his hand and almost tore it.  The physical pain
did him good.  It counteracted the agony at his heart.  It was not
merely that he had been cheated of an evening spent in human
company, though that was much.  It was the feeling of helplessness,
of insignificance, of being set aside, ignored--a creature not
worth worrying about.  They'd changed the day and hadn't even
bothered to tell him.  Told everybody else, but not him.  That's
how people treat you when you've no money!  Just wantonly, cold-
bloodedly insult you.  It was likely enough, indeed, that the
Dorings' had honestly forgotten, meaning no harm; it was even
possible that he himself had mistaken the date.  But no!  He
wouldn't think of it.  The Dorings' had done it on purpose.  Of
COURSE they had done it on purpose!  Just hadn't troubled to tell
him, because he had no money and consequently didn't matter.  The
sods!

He walked rapidly away.  There was a sharp pain in his breast.
Human contact, human voices!  But what was the good of wishing?
He'd have to spend the evening alone, as usual.  His friends were
so few and lived so far away.  Rosemary would still be at work;
besides, she lived at the back of beyond, in West Kensington, in a
women's hostel guarded by female dragons.  Ravelston lived nearer,
in the Regent's Park district.  But Ravelston was a rich man and
had many engagements; the chances were always against his being at
home.  Gordon could not even ring him up, because he hadn't the
necessary two pennies; only three halfpence and the Joey.  Besides,
how could he go and see Ravelston when he had no money?  Ravelston
would be sure to say 'Let's go to a pub,' or something!  He
couldn't let Ravelston pay for his drinks.  His friendship with
Ravelston was only possible on the understanding that he paid his
share of everything.

He took out his single cigarette and lighted it.  It gave him no
pleasure to smoke, walking fast; it was a mere reckless gesture.
He did not take much notice of where he was going.  All he wanted
was to tire himself, to walk and walk till the stupid physical
fatigue had obliterated the Dorings' snub.  He moved roughly
southward--through the wastes of Camden Town, down Tottenham Court
Road.  It had been dark for some time now.  He crossed Oxford
Street, threaded through Covent Garden, found himself in the
Strand, and crossed the river by Waterloo Bridge.  With night the
cold had descended.  As he walked his anger grew less violent, but
his mood could not fundamentally improve.  There was a thought that
kept haunting him--a thought from which he fled, but which was not
to be escaped.  It was the thought of his poems.  His empty, silly,
futile poems!  How could he ever have believed in them?  To think
that actually he had imagined, so short a time ago, that even
London Pleasures might one day come to something!  It made him sick
to think of his poems now.  It was like remembering last night's
debauch.  He knew in his bones that he was no good and his poems
were no good.  London Pleasures would never be finished.  If he
lived to be a thousand he would never write a line worth reading.
Over and over, in self-hatred, he repeated those four stanzas of
the poem he had been making up.  Christ, what tripe!  Rhyme to
rhyme--tinkle, tinkle, tinkle!  Hollow as an empty biscuit tin.
THAT was the kind of muck he had wasted his life on.

He had walked a long way, five or seven miles perhaps.  His feet
were hot and swollen from the pavements.  He was somewhere in
Lambeth, in a slummy quarter where the narrow, puddled street
plunged into blackness at fifty yards' distance.  The few lamps,
mist-ringed, hung like isolated stars, illumining nothing save
themselves.  He was getting devilishly hungry.  The coffee-shops
tempted him with their steamy windows and their chalked signs:
'Good Cup of Tea, 2d.  No Urns Used.'  But it was no use, he
couldn't spend his Joey.  He went under some echoing railway arches
and up the alley on to Hungerford Bridge.  On the miry water, lit
by the glare of skysigns, the muck of East London was racing
inland.  Corks, lemons, barrel-staves, a dead dog, hunks of bread.
Gordon walked along the Embankment to Westminster.  The wind made
the plane trees rattle.  Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over.  He
winced.  That tripe again!  Even now, though it was December, a few
poor draggled old wrecks were settling down on the benches, tucking
themselves up in sort of parcels of newspaper.  Gordon looked at
them callously.  On the bum, they called it.  He would come to it
himself some day.  Better so, perhaps?  He never felt any pity for
the genuine poor.  It is the black-coated poor, the middle-middle
class, who need pitying.

He walked up to Trafalgar Square.  Hours and hours to kill.  The
National Gallery?  Ah, shut long ago, of course.  It would be.  It
was a quarter past seven.  Three, four, five hours before he could
sleep.  He walked seven times round the square, slowly.  Four times
clockwise, three times widdershins.  His feet were sore and most of
the benches were empty, but he would not sit down.  If he halted
for an instant the longing for tobacco would come upon him.  In the
Charing Cross Road the teashops called like sirens.  Once the glass
door of a Lyons swung open, letting out a wave of hot cake-scented
air.  It almost overcame him.  After all, why NOT go in?  You could
sit there for nearly an hour.  A cup of tea twopence, two buns a
penny each.  He had fourpence halfpenny, counting the Joey.  But
no!  That bloody Joey!  The girl at the cash desk would titter.  In
a vivid vision he saw the girl at the cash desk, as she handled his
threepenny-bit, grin sidelong at the girl behind the cake-counter.
They'd KNOW it was your last threepence.  No use.  Shove on.  Keep
moving.

In the deadly glare of the Neon lights the pavements were densely
crowded.  Gordon threaded his way, a small shabby figure, with pale
face and unkempt hair.  The crowd slid past him; he avoided and was
avoided.  There is something horrible about London at night; the
coldness, the anonymity, the aloofness.  Seven million people,
sliding to and fro, avoiding contact, barely aware of one another's
existence, like fish in an aquarium tank.  The street swarmed with
pretty girls.  By scores they streamed past him, their faces
averted or unseeing; cold nymph-creatures, dreading the eyes of the
male.  It was queer how many of them seemed to be alone, or with
another girl.  Far more women alone than women with men, he noted.
That too was money.  How many girls alive wouldn't be manless
sooner than take a man who's moneyless?

The pubs were open, oozing sour whiffs of beer.  People were
trickling by ones and twos into the picture-houses.  Gordon halted
outside a great garish picture-house, under the weary eye of the
commissionaire, to examine the photographs.  Greta Garbo in The
Painted Veil.  He yearned to go inside, not for Greta's sake, but
just for the warmth and the softness of the velvet seat.  He hated
the pictures, of course, seldom went there even when he could
afford it.  Why encourage the art that is destined to replace
literature?  But still, there is a kind of soggy attraction about
it.  To sit on the padded seat in the warm smoke-scented darkness,
letting the flickering drivel on the screen gradually overwhelm
you--feeling the waves of its silliness lap you round till you seem
to drown, intoxicated, in a viscous sea--after all, it's the kind
of drug we need.  The right drug for friendless people.  As he
approached the Palace Theatre a tart on sentry-go under the porch
marked him down, stepped forward, and stood in his path.  A short,
stocky Italian girl, very young, with big black eyes.  She looked
agreeable, and, what tarts so seldom are, merry.  For a moment he
checked his step, even allowing himself to catch her eye.  She
looked up at him, ready to break out into a broad-lipped smile.
Why not stop and talk to her?  She looked as though she might
understand him.  But no!  No money!  He looked away and side-
stepped her with the cold haste of a man whom poverty makes
virtuous.  How furious she'd be if he stopped and then she found he
had no money!  He pressed on.  Even to talk costs money.

Up Tottenham Court Road and Camden Road it was a dreary drudge.  He
walked slower, dragging his feet a little.  He had done ten miles
over pavements.  More girls streamed past, unseeing.  Girls alone,
girls with youths, girls with other girls, girls alone.  Their
cruel youthful eyes went over him and through him as though he had
not existed.  He was too tired to resent it.  His shoulders
surrendered to their weariness; he slouched, not trying any longer
to preserve his upright carriage and his you-be-damned air.  They
flee from me that someone did me seek.  How could you blame them?
He was thirty, moth-eaten, and without charm.  Why should any girl
ever look at him again?

He reflected that he must go home at once if he wanted any food--
for Ma Wisbeach refused to serve meals after nine o'clock.  But the
thought of his cold womanless bedroom sickened him.  To climb the
stairs, light the gas, flop down at the table with hours to kill
and nothing to do, nothing to read, nothing to smoke--no, NOT
endurable.  In Camden Town the pubs were full and noisy, though
this was only Thursday.  Three women, red-armed, squat as the beer
mugs in their hands, stood outside a pub door, talking.  From
within came hoarse voices, fag-smoke, the fume of beer.  Gordon
thought of the Crichton Arms.  Flaxman might be there.  Why not
risk it?  A half of bitter, threepence halfpenny.  He had fourpence
halfpenny counting the Joey.  After all, a Joey IS legal tender.

He felt dreadfully thirsty already.  It had been a mistake to let
himself think of beer.  As he approached the Crichton, he heard
voices singing.  The great garish pub seemed to be more brightly
lighted than usual.  There was a concert of something going on
inside.  Twenty ripe male voices were chanting in unison:


'Fo--or REE'S a jorrigoo' fellow,
For REE'S a jorrigoo' fellow,
For REE'S a jorrigoo' fe--ELL--OW--
And toori oori us!'


At least, that was what it sounded like.  Gordon drew nearer,
pierced by a ravishing thirst.  The voices were so soggy, so
infinitely beery.  When you heard them you saw the scarlet faces of
prosperous plumbers.  There was a private room behind the bar where
the Buffaloes held their secret conclaves.  Doubtless it was they
who were singing.  They were giving some kind of commemorative
booze to their president, secretary, Grand Herbivore, or whatever
he is called.  Gordon hesitated outside the Saloon bar.  Better to
go to the public bar, perhaps.  Draught beer in the public, bottled
beer in the saloon.  He went round to the other side of the pub.
The beer-choked voices followed him:


'With a toori oori ay.
An' a toori oori ay!

'Fo--or REE'S a jorrigoo' fellow,
For REE'S a jorrigoo' fellow--'


He felt quite faint for a moment.  But it was fatigue and hunger as
well as thirst.  He could picture the cosy room where those
Buffaloes were singing; the roaring fire, the big shiny table, the
bovine photographs on the wall.  Could picture also, as the singing
ceased, twenty scarlet faces disappearing into pots of beer.  He
put his hand into his pocket and made sure that the threepenny-bit
was still there.  After all, why not?  In the public bar, who would
comment?  Slap the Joey down on the bar and pass it off as a joke.
'Been saving that up from the Christmas pudding--ha, ha!'  Laughter
all round.  Already he seemed to have the metallic taste of draught
beer on his tongue.

He fingered the tiny disc, irresolute.  The Buffaloes had tuned up
again:


'With a toori oori ay,
An' a toori oori ay!

'Fo--or REE'S a jorrigoo' fellow--'


Gordon moved back to the saloon bar.  The window was frosted, and
also steamy from the heat inside.  Still, there were chinks where
you could see through.  He peeped in.  Yes, Flaxman was there.

The saloon bar was crowded.  Like all rooms seen from the outside,
it looked ineffably cosy.  The fire that blazed in the grate
danced, mirrored, in the brass spittoons.  Gordon thought he could
almost smell the beer through the glass.  Flaxman was propping up
the bar with two fish-faced pals who looked like insurance-touts of
the better type.  One elbow on the bar, his foot on the rail, a
beer-streaked glass in the other hand, he was swapping backchat
with the blonde cutie barmaid.  She was standing on a chair behind
the bar, ranging the bottled beer and talking saucily over her
shoulder.  You couldn't hear what they were saying, but you could
guess.  Flaxman let fall some memorable witticism.  The fish-faced
men bellowed with obscene laughter.  And the blonde cutie,
tittering down at him, half shocked and half delighted, wriggled
her neat little bum.

Gordon's heart sickened.  To be in there, just to be in there!
In the warmth and light, with people to talk to, with beer and
cigarettes and a girl to flirt with!  After all, why NOT go in?
You could borrow a bob off Flaxman.  Flaxman would lend it to you
all right.  He pictured Flaxman's careless assent--'What ho,
chappie!  How's life?  What?  A bob?  Sure!  Take two.  Catch,
chappie!'--and the florin flicked along the beer-wet bar.  Flaxman
was a decent sort, in his way.

Gordon put his hand against the swing door.  He even pushed it open
a few inches.  The warm fog of smoke and beer slipped through the
crack.  A familiar, reviving smell; nevertheless as he smelled it
his nerve failed him.  No!  Impossible to go in.  He turned away.
He couldn't go shoving in that saloon bar with only fourpence
halfpenny in his pocket.  Never let other people buy your drinks
for you!  The first commandment of the moneyless.  He made off,
down the dark pavement.


'For REE'S a jorrigoo' fe--ELL--OW--
And toori oori us!

'With a toori oori, ay!
An' a-'


The voices, diminishing with distance, rolled after him, bearing
faint tidings of beer.  Gordon took the threepenny-bit from his
pocket and sent it skimming away into the darkness.

He was going home, if you could call it 'going'.  At any rate he
was gravitating in that direction.  He did not want to go home, but
he had got to sit down.  His legs ached and his feet were bruised,
and that vile bedroom was the sole place in London where he had
purchased the right to sit down.  He slipped in quietly, but, as
usual, not quite so quietly that Mrs Wisbeach failed to hear him.
She gave him a brief nosy glance round the corner of her door.  It
would be a little after nine.  She might get him a meal if he asked
her.  But she would grizzle and make a favour of it, and he would
go to bed hungry sooner than face that.

He started up the stairs.  He was half way up the first flight when
a double knock behind made him jump.  The post!  Perhaps a letter
from Rosemary!

Forced from outside, the letter flap lifted, and with an effort,
like a heron regurgitating a flatfish, vomited a bunch of letters
on to the mat.  Gordon's heart bounded.  There were six or seven of
them.  Surely among all that lot there must be one for himself!
Mrs Wisbeach, as usual, had darted from her lair at the sound of
the postman's knock.  As a matter of fact, in two years Gordon had
never once succeeded in getting hold of a letter before Mrs
Wisbeach laid hands on it.  She gathered the letters jealously to
her breast, and then, holding them up one at a time, scanned their
addresses.  From her manner you could gather that she suspected
each one of them of containing a writ, an improper love letter, or
an ad for Amen Pills.

'One for you, Mr Comstock,' she said sourly, handing him a letter.

His heart shrank and paused in its beat.  A long-shaped envelope.
Not from Rosemary, therefore.  Ah!  It was addressed in his own
handwriting.  From the editor of a paper, then.  He had two poems
'out' at present.  One with the Californian Review, the other with
the Primrose Quarterly.  But this wasn't an American stamp.  And
the Primrose had had his poem at least six weeks!  Good God,
supposing they'd accepted it!

He had forgotten Rosemary's existence.  He said 'Thanks!', stuck
the letter in his pocket, and started up the stairs with outward
calm, but no sooner was he out of Mrs Wisbeach's sight that he
bounded up three steps at a time.  He had got to be alone to open
that letter.  Even before he reached the door he was feeling for
his matchbox, but his fingers were trembling so that in lighting
the gas he chipped the mantle.  He sat down, took the letter from
his pocket, and then quailed.  For a moment he could not nerve
himself to open it.  He held it up to the light and felt it to see
how thick it was.  His poem had been two sheets.  Then, calling
himself a fool, he ripped the envelope open.  Out tumbled his own
poem, and with it a neat--oh, so neat!--little printed slip of
imitation parchment:


The Editor regrets that he is unable to make use of the enclosed
contribution.


The slip was decorated with a design of funereal laurel leaves.

Gordon gazed at the thing with wordless hatred.  Perhaps no snub in
the world is so deadly as this, because none is so unanswerable.
Suddenly he loathed his own poem and was acutely ashamed of it.  He
felt it the weakest, silliest poem ever written.  Without looking
at it again he tore it into small bits and flung them into the
wastepaper basket.  He would put that poem out of his mind for
ever.  The rejection slip, however, he did not tear up yet.  He
fingered it, feeling its loathly sleekness.  Such an elegant little
thing, printed in admirable type.  You could tell at a glance that
it came from a 'good' magazine--a snooty highbrow magazine with the
money of a publishing house behind it.  Money, money!  Money and
culture!  It was a stupid thing that he had done.  Fancy sending a
poem to a paper like the Primrose!  As though they'd accept poems
from people like HIM.  The mere fact that the poem wasn't typed
would tell them what kind of person he was.  He might as well have
dropped a card on Buckingham Palace.  He thought of the people who
wrote for the Primrose; a coterie of moneyed highbrows--those
sleek, refined young animals who suck in money and culture with
their mother's milk.  The idea of trying to horn in among that
pansy crowd!  But he cursed them all the same.  The sods!  The
bloody sods!  'The Editor regrets!'  Why be so bloody mealy-mouthed
about it?  Why not say outright, 'We don't want your bloody poems.
We only take poems from chaps we were at Cambridge with.  You
proletarians keep your distance'?  The bloody, hypocritical sods!

At last he crumpled up the rejection slip, threw it away, and stood
up.  Better get to bed while he had the energy to undress.  Bed was
the only place that was warm.  But wait.  Wind the clock, set the
alarm.  He went through the familiar action with a sense of deadly
staleness.  His eye fell upon the aspidistra.  Two years he had
inhabited this vile room; two mortal years in which nothing had
been accomplished.  Seven hundred wasted days, all ending in the
lonely bed.  Snubs, failures, insults, all of them unavenged.
Money, money, all is money!  Because he had no money the Dorings'
snubbed him, because he had no money the Primrose had turned down
his poem, because he had no money Rosemary wouldn't sleep with him.
Social failure, artistic failure, sexual failure--they are all the
same.  And lack of money is at the bottom of them all.

He must hit back at somebody or something.  He could not go to bed
with that rejection slip as the last thing in his mind.  He thought
of Rosemary.  It was five days now since she had written.  If there
had been a letter from her this evening even that rap over the
knuckles from the Primrose Quarterly would have mattered less.  She
declared that she loved him, and she wouldn't sleep with him,
wouldn't even write to him!  She was the same as all the others.
She despised him and forgot about him because he had no money and
therefore didn't matter.  He would write her an enormous letter,
telling her what it felt like to be ignored and insulted, making
her see how cruelly she had treated him.

He found a clean sheet of paper and wrote in the top right-hand
corner:

'31 Willowbed Road, NW, 1 December, 9.30 p.m.'

But having written that much, he found that he could write no more.
He was in the defeated mood when even the writing of a letter is
too great an effort.  Besides, what was the use?  She would never
understand.  No woman ever understands.  But he must write
something.  Something to wound her--that was what he most wanted,
at this moment.  He meditated for a long time, and at last wrote,
exactly in the middle of the sheet:


You have broken my heart.


No address, no signature.  Rather neat it looked, all by itself,
there in the middle of the sheet, in his small 'scholarly'
handwriting.  Almost like a little poem in itself.  This thought
cheered him up a little.

He stuck the letter in an envelope and went out and posted it at
the post office on the corner, spending his last three halfpence on
a penny stamp and a halfpenny stamp out of the slot machine.



5


'We're printing that poem of yours in next month's Antichrist,'
said Ravelston from his first-floor window.

Gordon, on the pavement below, affected to have forgotten the poem
Ravelston was speaking about; he remembered it intimately, of
course, as he remembered all his poems.

'Which poem?' he said.

'The one about the dying prostitute.  We thought it was rather
successful.'  Gordon laughed a laugh of gratified conceit, and
managed to pass it off as a laugh of sardonic amusement.

'Aha!  A dying prostitute!  That's rather what you might call one
of my subjects.  I'll do you one about an aspidistra next time.'

Ravelston's over-sensitive, boyish face, framed by nice dark-brown
hair, drew back a little from the window.

'It's intolerably cold,' he said.  'You'd better come up and have
some food, or something.'

'No, you come down.  I've had dinner.  Let's go to a pub and have
some beer.'

'All right then.  Half a minute while I get my shoes on.'

They had been talking for some minutes, Gordon on the pavement,
Ravelston leaning out of the window above.  Gordon had announced
his arrival not by knocking at the door but by throwing a pebble
against the window pane.  He never, if he could help it, set foot
inside Ravelston's flat.  There was something in the atmosphere of
the flat that upset him and made him feel mean, dirty, and out of
place.  It was so overwhelmingly, though unconsciously, upper-
class.  Only in the street or in a pub could he feel himself
approximately Ravelston's equal.  It would have astonished
Ravelston to learn that his four-roomed flat, which he thought of
as a poky little place, had this effect upon Gordon.  To Ravelston,
living in the wilds of Regent's Park was practically the same thing
as living in the slums; he had chosen to live there, en bon
socialiste, precisely as your social snob will live in a mews in
Mayfair for the sake of the 'WI' on his notepaper.  It was part of
a lifelong attempt to escape from his own class and become, as it
were, an honorary member of the proletariat.  Like all such
attempts, it was foredoomed to failure.  No rich man ever succeeds
in disguising himself as a poor man; for money, like murder, will
out.

On the street door there was a brass plate inscribed:


P. W. H. RAVELSTON

ANTICHRIST


Ravelston lived on the first floor, and the editorial offices of
Antichrist were downstairs.  Antichrist was a middle- to high-brow
monthly, Socialist in a vehement but ill-defined way.  In general,
it gave the impression of being edited by an ardent Nonconformist
who had transferred his allegiance from God to Marx, and in doing
so had got mixed up with a gang of vers libre poets.  This was not
really Ravelston's character; merely he was softer-hearted than an
editor ought to be, and consequently was at the mercy of his
contributors.  Practically anything got printed in Antichrist if
Ravelston suspected that its author was starving.

Ravelston appeared a moment later, hatless and pulling on a pair of
gauntlet gloves.  You could tell him at a glance for a rich young
man.  He wore the uniform of the moneyed intelligentsia; an old
tweed coat--but it was one of those coats which have been made by a
good tailor and grow more aristocratic as they grow older--very
loose grey flannel bags, a grey pullover, much-worn brown shoes.
He made a point of going everywhere, even to fashionable houses and
expensive restaurants, in these clothes, just to show his contempt
for upper-class conventions; he did not fully realize that it is
only the upper classes who can do these things.  Though he was a
year older than Gordon he looked much younger.  He was very tall,
with a lean, wide-shouldered body and the typical lounging grace
of the upper-class youth.  But there was something curiously
apologetic in his movements and in the expression of his face.  He
seemed always in the act of stepping out of somebody else's way.
When expressing an opinion he would rub his nose with the back of
his left forefinger.  The truth was that in every moment of his
life he was apologizing, tacitly, for the largeness of his income.
You could make him uncomfortable as easily by reminding him that he
was rich as you could make Gordon by reminding him that he was
poor.

'You've had dinner, I gather?' said Ravelston, in his rather
Bloomsbury voice.

'Yes, ages ago.  Haven't you?'

'Oh, yes, certainly.  Oh, quite!'

It was twenty past eight and Gordon had had no food since midday.
Neither had Ravelston.  Gordon did not know that Ravelston was
hungry, but Ravelston knew that Gordon was hungry, and Gordon knew
that Ravelston knew it.  Nevertheless, each saw good reason for
pretending not to be hungry.  They seldom or never had meals
together.  Gordon would not let Ravelston buy his meals for him,
and for himself he could not afford to go to restaurants, not even
to a Lyons or an A.B.C.  This was Monday and he had five and
ninepence left.  He might afford a couple of pints at a pub, but
not a proper meal.  When he and Ravelston met it was always agreed,
with silent manoeuvrings, that they should do nothing that involved
spending money, beyond the shilling or so one spends in a pub.  In
this way the fiction was kept up that there was no serious
difference in their incomes.

Gordon sidled closer to Ravelston as they started down the
pavement.  He would have taken his arm, only of course one can't do
that kind of thing.  Beside Ravelston's taller, comelier figure he
looked frail, fretful, and miserably shabby.  He adored Ravelston
and was never quite at ease in his presence.  Ravelston had not
merely a charm of manner, but also a kind of fundamental decency,
a graceful attitude to life, which Gordon scarcely encountered
elsewhere.  Undoubtedly it was bound up with the fact that
Ravelston was rich.  For money buys all virtues.  Money suffereth
long and is kind, is not puffed up, doth not behave unseemly,
seeketh not her own.  But in some ways Ravelston was not even like
a moneyed person.  The fatty degeneration of the spirit which goes
with wealth had missed him, or he had escaped it by a conscious
effort.  Indeed his whole life was a struggle to escape it.  It was
for this reason that he gave up his time and a large part of his
income to editing an unpopular Socialist monthly.  And apart from
Antichrist, money flowed from him in all directions.  A tribe of
cadgers ranging from poets to pavement-artists browsed upon him
unceasingly.  For himself he lived upon eight hundred a year or
thereabouts.  Even of this income he was acutely ashamed.  It was
not, he realized, exactly a proletarian income; but he had never
learned to get along on less.  Eight hundred a year was a minimum
living wage to him, as two pounds a week was to Gordon.

'How is your work getting on?' said Ravelston presently.

'Oh, as usual.  It's a drowsy kind of job.  Swapping back-chat with
old hens about Hugh Walpole.  I don't object to it.'

'I meant your own work--your writing.  Is London Pleasures getting
on all right?'

'Oh, Christ!  Don't speak of it.  It's turning my hair grey.'

'Isn't it going forward at all?'

'My books don't go forward.  They go backward.'

Ravelston sighed.  As editor of Antichrist, he was used to
encouraging despondent poets that it had become a second nature to
him.  He did not need telling why Gordon 'couldn't' write, and why
all poets nowadays 'can't' write, and why when they do write it is
something as arid as the rattling of a pea inside a big drum.  He
said with sympathetic gloom:

'Of course I admit this isn't a hopeful age to write poetry in.'

'You bet it isn't.'

Gordon kicked his heel against the pavement.  He wished that London
Pleasures had not been mentioned.  It brought back to him the
memory of his mean, cold bedroom and the grimy papers littered
under the aspidistra.  He said abruptly:

'This writing business!  What b--s it all is!  Sitting in a corner
torturing a nerve which won't even respond any longer.  And who
wants poetry nowadays?  Training performing fleas would be more
useful by comparison.'

'Still, you oughtn't to let yourself be discouraged.  After all,
you do produce something, which is more than one can say for a lot
of poets nowadays.  There was Mice, for instance.'

'Oh, Mice!  It makes me spew to think of it.'

He thought with loathing of that sneaky little foolscap octavo.
Those forty or fifty drab, dead little poems, each like a little
abortion in its labelled jar.  'Exceptional promise', The Times
Lit. Supp. had said.  A hundred and fifty-three copies sold and the
rest remaindered.  He had one of those movements of contempt and
even horror which every artist has at times when he thinks of his
own work.

'It's dead,' he said.  'Dead as a blasted foetus in a bottle.'

'Oh, well, I suppose that happens to most books.  You can't
expect an enormous sale for poetry nowadays.  There's too much
competition.'

'I didn't mean that.  I meant the poems themselves are dead.
There's no life in them.  Everything I write is like that.
Lifeless, gutless.  Not necessarily ugly or vulgar; but dead--just
dead.'  The word 'dead' re-echoed in his mind, setting up its own
train of thought.  He added:  'My poems are dead because I'm dead.
You're dead.  We're all dead.  Dead people in a dead world.'

Ravelston murmured agreement, with a curious air of guilt.  And now
they were off upon their favourite subject--Gordon's favourite
subject, anyway; the futility, the bloodiness, the deathliness of
modern life.  They never met without talking for at least half an
hour in this vein.  But it always made Ravelston feel rather
uncomfortable.  In a way, of course, he knew--it was precisely this
that Antichrist existed to point out--that life under a decaying
capitalism is deathly and meaningless.  But this knowledge was only
theoretical.  You can't really feel that kind of thing when your
income is eight hundred a year.  Most of the time, when he wasn't
thinking of coal-miners, Chinese junk-coolies, and the unemployed
in Middlesbrough, he felt that life was pretty good fun.  Moreover,
he had the naive belief that in a little while Socialism is going
to put things right.  Gordon always seemed to him to exaggerate.
So there was subtle disagreement between them, which Ravelston was
too good-mannered to press home.

But with Gordon it was different.  Gordon's income was two pounds a
week.  Therefore the hatred of modern life, the desire to see our
money-civilization blown to hell by bombs, was a thing he genuinely
felt.  They were walking southward, down a darkish, meanly decent
residential street with a few shuttered shops.  From a hoarding on
the blank end of a house the yard-wide face of Corner Table
simpered, pallid in the lamplight.  Gordon caught a glimpse of a
withering aspidistra in a lower window.  London!  Mile after mile
of mean lonely houses, let off in flats and single rooms; not
homes, not communities, just clusters of meaningless lives drifting
in a sort of drowsy chaos to the grave!  He saw men as corpses
walking.  The thought that he was merely objectifying his own inner
misery hardly troubled him.  His mind went back to Wednesday
afternoon, when he had desired to hear the enemy aeroplanes zooming
over London.  He caught Ravelston's arm and paused to gesticulate
at the Corner Table poster.

'Look at that bloody thing up there!  Look at it, just look at it!
Doesn't it make you spew?'

'It's aesthetically offensive, I grant.  But I don't see that it
matters very greatly.'

'Of course it matters--having the town plastered with things like
that.'

'Oh, well, it's merely a temporary phenomenon.  Capitalism in its
last phase.  I doubt whether it's worth worrying about.'

'But there's more in it than that.  Just look at that fellow's face
gaping down at us!  You can see our whole civilization written
there.  The imbecility, the emptiness, the desolation!  You can't
look at it without thinking of French letters and machine guns.  Do
you know that the other day I was actually wishing war would break
out?  I was longing for it--praying for it, almost.'

'Of course, the trouble is, you see, that about half the young men
in Europe are wishing the same thing.'

'Let's hope they are.  Then perhaps it'll happen.'

'My dear old chap, no!  Once is enough, surely.'

Gordon walked on, fretfully.  'This life we live nowadays!  It's
not life, it's stagnation, death-in-life.  Look at all these bloody
houses, and the meaningless people inside them!  Sometimes I think
we're all corpses.  Just rotting upright.'

'But where you make your mistake, don't you see, is in talking as
if all this was incurable.  This is only something that's got to
happen before the proletariat take over.'

'Oh, Socialism!  Don't talk to me about Socialism.'

'You ought to read Marx, Gordon, you really ought.  Then you'd
realize that this is only a phase.  It can't go on for ever.'

'Can't it?  It FEELS as if it was going on for ever.'

'It's merely that we're at a bad moment.  We've got to die before
we can be reborn, if you take my meaning.'

'We're dying right enough.  I don't see much signs of our being
reborn.'

Ravelston rubbed his nose.  'Oh, well, we must have faith, I
suppose.  And hope.'

'We must have money you mean,' said Gordon gloomily.

'Money?'

'It's the price of optimism.  Give me five quid a week and I'D be a
Socialist, I dare say.'

Ravelston looked away, discomforted.  This money-business!
Everywhere it came up against you!  Gordon wished he had not said
it.  Money is the one thing you must never mention when you are
with people richer than yourself.  Or if you do, then it must be
money in the abstract, money with a big 'M', not the actual
concrete money that's in your pocket and isn't in mine.  But the
accursed subject drew him like a magnet.  Sooner or later,
especially when he had a few drinks inside him, he invariably began
talking with self-pitiful detail about the bloodiness of life on
two quid a week.  Sometimes, from sheer nervous impulse to say the
wrong thing, he would come out with some squalid confession--as,
for instance, that he had been without tobacco for two days, or
that his underclothes were in holes and his overcoat up the spout.
But nothing of that sort should happen tonight, he resolved.  They
veered swiftly away from the subject of money and began talking in
a more general way about Socialism.  Ravelston had been trying for
years to convert Gordon to Socialism, without even succeeding in
interesting him in it.  Presently they passed a low-looking pub on
a corner in a side-street.  A sour cloud of beer seemed to hang
about it.  The smell revolted Ravelston.  He would have quickened
his pace to get away from it.  But Gordon paused, his nostrils
tickled.

'Christ!  I could do with a drink,' he said.

'So could I,' said Ravelston gallantly.

Gordon shoved open the door of the public bar, Ravelston following.
Ravelston persuaded himself that he was fond of pubs, especially
low-class pubs.  Pubs are genuinely proletarian.  In a pub you can
meet the working class on equal terms--or that's the theory,
anyway.  But in practice Ravelston never went into a pub unless he
was with somebody like Gordon, and he always felt like a fish out
of water when he got there.  A foul yet coldish air enveloped them.
It was a filthy, smoky room, low-ceilinged, with a sawdusted floor
and plain deal tables ringed by generations of beer-pots.  In one
corner four monstrous women with breasts the size of melons were
sitting drinking porter and talking with bitter intensity about
someone called Mrs Croop.  The landlady, a tall grim woman with a
black fringe, looking like the madame of a brothel, stood behind
the bar, her powerful forearms folded, watching a game of darts
which was going on between four labourers and a postman.  You had
to duck under the darts as you crossed the room, there was a
moment's hush and people glanced inquisitively at Ravelston.  He
was so obviously a gentleman.  They didn't see his type very often
in the public bar.

Ravelston pretended not to notice that they were staring at him.
He lounged towards the bar, pulling off a glove to feel for the
money in his pocket.  'What's yours?' he said casually.

But Gordon had already shoved his way ahead and was tapping a
shilling on the bar.  Always pay for the first round of drinks!  It
was his point of honour.  Ravelston made for the only vacant table.
A navvy leaning on the bar turned on his elbow and gave him a long,
insolent stare 'A ---- toff!' he was thinking.  Gordon came back
balancing two pint glasses of the dark common ale.  They were thick
cheap glasses, thick as jam jars almost, and dim and greasy.  A
thin yellow froth was subsiding on the beer.  The air was thick
with gunpowdery tobacco-smoke.  Ravelston caught sight of a well-
filled spittoon near the bar and averted his eyes.  It crossed his
mind that this beer had been sucked up from some beetle-ridden
cellar through yards of slimy tube, and that the glasses had never
been washed in their lives, only rinsed in beery water.  Gordon was
very hungry.  He could have done with some bread and cheese, but to
order any would have been to betray the fact that he had had no
dinner.  He took a deep pull at his beer and lighted a cigarette,
which made him forget his hunger a little.  Ravelston also
swallowed a mouthful or so and set his glass gingerly down.  It was
typical London beer, sickly and yet leaving a chemical after-taste.
Ravelston thought of the wines of Burgundy.  They went on arguing
about Socialism.

'You know, Gordon, it's really time you started reading Marx,' said
Ravelston, less apologetically than usual, because the vile taste
of the beer had annoyed him.

'I'd sooner read Mrs Humphry Ward,' said Gordon.

'But don't you see, your attitude is so unreasonable.  You're
always tirading against Capitalism, and yet you won't accept the
only possible alternative.  One can't put things right in a hole-
and-corner way.  One's got to accept either Capitalism or
Socialism.  There's no way out of it.'

'I tell you I can't be bothered with Socialism.  The very thought
of it makes me yawn.'

'But what's your objection to Socialism, anyway?'

'There's only one objection to Socialism, and that is that nobody
wants it.'

'Oh, surely it's rather absurd to say that!'

'That's to say, nobody who could see what Socialism would really
mean.'

'But what WOULD Socialism mean, according to your idea of it?'

'Oh!  Some kind of Aldous Huxley Brave New World: only not so
amusing.  Four hours a day in a model factory, tightening up bolt
number 6003.  Rations served out in grease-proof paper at the
communal kitchen.  Community-hikes from Marx Hostel to Lenin Hostel
and back.  Free abortion-clinics on all the corners.  All very well
in its way, of course.  Only we don' t want it.'

Ravelston sighed.  Once a month, in Antichrist, he repudiated this
version of Socialism.  'Well, what DO we want, then?'

'God knows.  All we know is what we don't want.  That's what's
wrong with us nowadays.  We're stuck, like Buridan's donkey.  Only
there are three alternatives instead of two, and all three of them
make us spew.  Socialism's only one of them.'

'And what are the other two?'

'Oh, I suppose suicide and the Catholic Church.'

Ravelston smiled, anticlerically shocked.  'The Catholic Church!
Do you consider that an alternative?'

'Well, it's a standing temptation to the intelligentsia, isn't it?'

'Not what _I_ should call the intelligentsia.  Though there was
Eliot, of course,' Ravelston admitted.

'And there'll be plenty more, you bet.  I dare say it's fairly cosy
under Mother Church's wing.  A bit insanitary, of course--but you'd
feel safe there, anyway.'

Ravelston rubbed his nose reflectively.  'It seems to me that's
only another form of suicide.'

'In a way.  But so's Socialism.  At least it's a counsel of
despair.  But I couldn't commit suicide, real suicide.  It's too
meek and mild.  I'm not going to give up my share of earth to
anyone else.  I'd want to do in a few of my enemies first.'

Ravelston smiled again.  'And who are your enemies?'

'Oh, anyone with over five hundred a year.'

A momentary uncomfortable silence fell.  Ravelston's income, after
payment of income tax, was probably two thousand a year.  This was
the kind of thing Gordon was always saying.  To cover the
awkwardness of the moment, Ravelston took up his glass, steeled
himself against the nauseous taste, and swallowed about two-thirds
of his beer--enough at any rate, to give the impression that he had
finished it.

'Drink up!' he said with would-be heartiness.  'It's time we had
the other half of that.'

Gordon emptied his glass and let Ravelston take it.  He did not
mind letting Ravelston pay for the drinks now.  He had paid the
first round and honour was satisfied.  Ravelston walked self-
consciously to the bar.  People began staring at him again as soon
as he stood up.  The navvy, still leaning against the bar over his
untouched pot of beer, gazed at him with quiet insolence.
Ravelston resolved that he would drink no more of this filthy
common ale.

'Two double whiskies, would you, please?' he said apologetically.

The grim landlady stared.  'What?' she said.

'Two double whiskies, please.'

'No whisky 'ere.  We don't sell spirits.  Beer 'ouse, we are.'

The navvy smiled flickering under his moustache.  '---- ignorant
toff!' he was thinking.  'Asking for a whisky in a ---- beer
'ouse!'  Ravelston's pale face flushed slightly.  He had not known
till this moment that some of the poorer pubs cannot afford a
spirit licence.

'Bass, then, would you?  Two pint bottles of Bass.'

There were no pint bottles, they had to have four half pints.  It
was a very poor house.  Gordon took a deep, satisfying swallow of
Bass.  More alcoholic than the draught beer, it fizzed and prickled
in his throat, and because he was hungry it went a little to his
head.  He felt at once more philosophic and more self-pitiful.  He
had made up his mind not to begin belly-aching about his poverty;
but now he was going to begin after all.  He said abruptly:

'This is all b--s that we've been talking.'

'What's all b--s?'

'All this about Socialism and Capitalism and the state of the
modern world and God knows what.  I don't give a ---- for the state
of the modern world.  If the whole of England was starving except
myself and the people I care about, I wouldn't give a damn.'

'Don't you exaggerate just a little?'

'No.  All this talk we make--we're only objectifying our own
feelings.  It's all dictated by what we've got in our pockets.
I go up and down London saying it's a city of the dead, and our
civilization's dying, and I wish war would break out, and God knows
what; and all it means is that my wages are two quid a week and I
wish they were five.'

Ravelston, once again reminded obliquely of his income, stroked his
nose slowly with the knuckle of his left forefinger.

'Of course, I'm with you up to a point.  After all, it's only
what Marx said.  Every ideology is a reflection of economic
circumstances.'

'Ah, but you only understand it out of Marx!  You don't know what
it means to have to crawl along on two quid a week.  It isn't a
question of hardship--it's nothing so decent as hardship.  It's the
bloody, sneaking, squalid meaness of it.  Living alone for weeks on
end because when you've no money you've no friends.  Calling
yourself a writer and never even producing anything because you're
always too washed out to write.  It's a sort of filthy sub-world
one lives in.  A sort of spiritual sewer.'

He had started now.  They were never together long without Gordon
beginning to talk in this strain.  It was the vilest manners.  It
embarrassed Ravelston horribly.  And yet somehow Gordon could not
help it.  He had got to retail his troubles to somebody, and
Ravelston was the only person who understood.  Poverty, like every
other dirty wound, has got to be exposed occasionally.  He began to
talk in obscene detail of his life in Willowbed Road.  He dilated
on the smell of slops and cabbage, the clotted sauce-bottles in the
dining-room, the vile food, the aspidistras.  He described his
furtive cups of tea and his trick of throwing used tea-leaves down
the W.C.  Ravelston, guilty and miserable, sat staring at his glass
and revolving it slowly between his hands.  Against his right
breast he could feel, a square accusing shape, the pocket-book in
which, as he knew, eight pound notes and two ten-bob notes nestled
against his fat green cheque-book.  How awful these details of
poverty are!  Not that what Gordon was describing was real poverty.
It was at worst the fringe of poverty.  But what of the real poor?
What of the unemployed in Middlesbrough, seven in a room on twenty-
five bob a week?  When there are people living like that, how dare
one walk the world with pound notes and cheque-books in one's
pocket?

'It's bloody,' he murmured several times, impotently.  In his heart
he wondered--it was his invariable reaction--whether Gordon would
accept a tenner if you offered to lend it to him.

They had another drink, which Ravelston again paid for, and went
out into the street.  It was almost time to part.  Gordon never
spent more than an hour or two with Ravelston.  One's contacts with
rich people, like one's visits to high altitudes, must always be
brief.  It was a moonless, starless night, with a damp wind
blowing.  The night air, the beer, and the watery radiance of the
lamps induced in Gordon a sort of dismal clarity.  He perceived
that it is quite impossible to explain to any rich person, even to
anyone so decent as Ravelston, the essential bloodiness of poverty.
For this reason it became all the more important to explain it.  He
said suddenly:

'Have you read Chaucer's Man of Lawe's Tale?'

'The Man of Lawe's Tale?  Not that I remember.  What's it about?'

'I forget.  I was thinking of the first six stanzas.  Where he
talks about poverty.  The way it gives everyone the right to stamp
on you!  The way everyone WANTS to stamp on you!  It makes people
HATE you, to know that you've no money.  They insult you just for
the pleasure of insulting you and knowing that you can't hit back.'

Ravelston was pained.  'Oh, no, surely not!  People aren't so bad
as all that.'

'Ah, but you don't know the things that happen!'

Gordon did not want to be told that 'people aren't so bad'.  He
clung with a sort of painful joy to the notion that because he was
poor everyone must WANT to insult him.  It fitted in with his
philosophy of life.  And suddenly, with the feeling that he could
not stop himself, he was talking of the thing that had been
rankling in his mind for two days past--the snub he had had from
the Dorings on Thursday.  He poured the whole story out quite
shamelessly.  Ravelston was amazed.  He could not understand what
Gordon was making such a fuss about.  To be disappointed at missing
a beastly literary tea-party seemed to him absurd.  He would not
have gone to a literary tea-party if you had paid him.  Like all
rich people, he spent far more time in avoiding human society than
in seeking it.  He interrupted Gordon:

'Really, you know, you ought not to take offence so easily.  After
all, a thing like that doesn't really matter.'

'It isn't the thing itself that matters, it's the spirit behind it.
The way they snub you as a matter of course, just because you've
got no money.'

'But quite possibly it was all a mistake, or something.  Why should
anyone want to snub you?'

'"If thou be poure, thy brother hateth thee,"' quoted Gordon
perversely.

Ravelston, deferential even to the opinions of the dead, rubbed his
nose.  'Does Chaucer say that?  Then I'm afraid I disagree with
Chaucer.  People don't hate you, exactly.'

'They do.  And they're quite right to hate you.  You ARE hateful.
It's like those ads for Listerine.  "Why is he always alone?
Halitosis is ruining his career."  Poverty is spiritual halitosis.'

Ravelston sighed.  Undoubtedly Gordon was perverse.  They walked
on, arguing, Gordon vehemently, Ravelston deprecatingly.  Ravelston
was helpless against Gordon in an argument of this kind.  He felt
that Gordon exaggerated, and yet he never liked to contradict him.
How could he?  He was rich and Gordon was poor.  And how can you
argue about poverty with someone who is genuinely poor?

'And then the way women treat you when you've no money!' Gordon
went on.  'That's another thing about this accursed money business--
women!'

Ravelston nodded rather gloomily.  This sounded to him more
reasonable than what Gordon had been saying before.  He thought of
Hermione Slater, his own girl.  They had been lovers two years but
had never bothered to get married.  It was 'too much fag', Hermione
always said.  She was rich, of course, or rather her people were.
He thought of her shoulders, wide, smooth, and young, that seemed
to rise out of her clothes like a mermaid rising from the sea; and
her skin and hair, which were somehow warm and sleepy, like a
wheatfield in the sun.  Hermione always yawned at the mention of
Socialism, and refused even to read Antichrist.  'Don't talk to me
about the lower classes,' she used to say.  'I hate them.  They
SMELL.'  And Ravelston adored her.

'Of course women ARE a difficulty,' he admitted.

'They're more than a difficulty, they're a bloody curse.  That is,
if you've got no money.  A woman hates the sight of you if you've
got no money.'

'I think that's putting it a little too strongly.  Things aren't so
crude as all that.'

Gordon did not listen.  'What rot it is to talk about Socialism or
any other ism when women are what they are!  The only thing a woman
ever wants is money; money for a house of her own and two babies
and Drage furniture and an aspidistra.  The only sin they can
imagine is not wanting to grab money.  No woman ever judges a man
by anything except his income.  Of course she doesn't put it to
herself like that.  She says he's SUCH A NICE man--meaning that
he's got plenty of money.  And if you haven't got money you aren't
NICE.  You're dishonoured, somehow.  You've sinned.  Sinned against
the aspidistra.'

'You talk a great deal about aspidistras,' said Ravelston.

'They're a dashed important subject,' said Gordon.

Ravelston rubbed his nose and looked away uncomfortably.

'Look here, Gordon, you don't mind my asking--have you got a girl
of your own?'

'Oh, Christ! don't speak of her!'

He began, nevertheless, to talk about Rosemary.  Ravelston had
never met Rosemary.  At this moment Gordon could not even remember
what Rosemary was like.  He could not remember how fond he was of
her and she of him, how happy they always were together on the rare
occasions when they could meet, how patiently she put up with his
almost intolerable ways.  He remembered nothing save that she would
not sleep with him and that it was now a week since she had even
written.  In the dank night air, with beer inside him, he felt
himself a forlorn, neglected creature.  Rosemary was 'cruel' to
him--that was how he saw it.  Perversely, for the mere pleasure of
tormenting himself and making Ravelston uncomfortable, be began to
invent an imaginary character for Rosemary.  He built up a picture
of her as a callous creature who was amused by him and yet half
despised him, who played with him and kept him at arm's length, and
who would nevertheless fall into his arms if only he had a little
more money.  And Ravelston, who had never met Rosemary, did not
altogether disbelieve him.  He broke in:

'But I say, Gordon, look here.  This girl, Miss--Miss Waterlow, did
you say her name was?--Rosemary; doesn't she care for you at all,
really?'

Gordon's conscience pricked him, though not very deeply.  He could
not say that Rosemary did not care for him.

'Oh, yes, she does care for me.  In her own way, I dare say she
cares for me quite a lot.  But not enough, don't you see.  She
can't, while I've got no money.  It's all money.'

'But surely money isn't so important as all that?  After all, there
ARE other things.'

'What other things?  Don't you see that a man's whole personality
is bound up with his income?  His personality IS his income.  How
can you be attractive to a girl when you've got no money?  You
can't wear decent clothes, you can't take her out to dinner or to
the theatre or away for week-ends, you can't carry a cheery,
interesting atmosphere about with you.  And it's rot to say that
kind of thing doesn't matter.  It does.  If you haven't got money
there isn't even anywhere where you can meet.  Rosemary and I never
meet except in the streets or in picture galleries.  She lives in
some foul women's hostel, and my bitch of a landlady won't allow
women in the house.  Wandering up and down beastly wet streets--
that's what Rosemary associates me with.  Don't you see how it
takes the gilt off everything?'

Ravelston was distressed.  It must be pretty bloody when you
haven't even the money to take your girl out.  He tried to nerve
himself to say something, and failed.  With guilt, and also with
desire, he thought of Hermione's body, naked like a ripe warm
fruit.  With any luck she would have dropped in at the flat this
evening.  Probably she was waiting for him now.  He thought of the
unemployed in Middlesbrough.  Sexual starvation is awful among the
unemployed.  They were nearing the flat.  He glanced up at the
windows.  Yes, they were lighted up.  Hermione must be there.  She
had her own latchkey.

As they approached the flat Gordon edged closer to Ravelston.  Now
the evening was ending, and he must part from Ravelston, whom he
adored, and go back to his foul lonely bedroom.  And all evenings
ended in this way; the return through the dark streets to the
lonely room, the womanless bed.  And Ravelston would say 'Come up,
won't you?' and Gordon, in duty bound, would say, 'No.'  Never stay
too long with those you love--another commandment of the moneyless.

They halted at the foot of the steps.  Ravelston laid his gloved
hand on one of the iron spearheads of the railing.

'Come up, won't you?' he said without conviction.

'No, thanks.  It's time I was getting back.'

Ravelston's fingers tightened round the spearhead.  He pulled as
though to go up, but did not go.  Uncomfortably, looking over
Gordon's head into the distance, he said:

'I say, Gordon, look here.  You won't be offended if I say
something?'

'What?'

'I say, you know, I hate that business about you and your girl.
Not being able to take her out, and all that.  It's bloody, that
kind of thing.'

'Oh, it's nothing really.'

As soon as he heard Ravelston say that it was 'bloody', he knew
that he had been exaggerating.  He wished that he had not talked in
that silly self-pitiful way.  One says these things, with the
feeling that one cannot help saying them, and afterwards one is
sorry.

'I dare say I exaggerate,' he said.

'I say, Gordon, look here.  Let me lend you ten quid.  Take the
girl out to dinner a few times.  Or away for the week-end, or
something.  It might make all the difference.  I hate to think--'

Gordon frowned bitterly, almost fiercely.  He had stepped a pace
back, as though from a threat or an insult.  The terrible thing was
that the temptation to say 'Yes' had almost overwhelmed him.  There
was so much that ten quid would do!  He had a fleeting vision of
Rosemary and himself at a restaurant table--a bowl of grapes and
peaches, a bowing hovering waiter, a wine bottle dark and dusty in
its wicker cradle.

'No fear!' he said.

'I do wish you would.  I tell you I'd LIKE to lend it you.'

'Thanks.  But I prefer to keep my friends.'

'Isn't that rather--well, rather a bourgeois kind of thing to say?'

'Do you think it would be BORROWING if I took ten quid off you?  I
couldn't pay it back in ten years.'

'Oh, well!  It wouldn't matter so very much.'  Ravelston looked
away.  Out it had got to come--the disgraceful, hateful admission
that he found himself forced so curiously often to make!  'You
know, I've got quite a lot of money.'

'I know you have.  That's exactly why I won't borrow off you.'

'You know, Gordon, sometimes you're just a little bit--well,
pigheaded.'

'I dare say.  I can't help it.'

'Oh, well!  Good night, then.'

'Good night.'

Ten minutes later Ravelston rode southwards in a taxi, with
Hermione.  She had been waiting for him, asleep or half asleep in
one of the monstrous armchairs in front of the sitting-room fire.
Whenever there was nothing particular to do, Hermione always fell
asleep as promptly as an animal, and the more she slept the
healthier she became.  As he came across to her she woke and
stretched herself with voluptuous, sleepy writhings, half smiling,
half yawning up at him, one cheek and bare arm rosy in the
firelight.  Presently she mastered her yawns to greet him:

'Hullo, Philip!  Where have you been all this time?  I've been
waiting ages.'

'Oh, I've been out with a fellow.  Gordon Comstock.  I don't expect
you know him.  The poet.'

'Poet!  How much did he borrow off you?'

'Nothing.  He's not that kind of person.  He's rather a fool about
money, as a matter of fact.  But he's very gifted in his way.'

'You and your poets!  You look tired, Philip.  What time did you
have dinner?'

'Well--as a matter of fact I didn't have any dinner.'

'Didn't have any dinner!  Why?'

'Oh, well, you see--I don't know if you'll understand.  It was a
kind of accident.  It was like this.'

He explained.  Hermione burst out laughing and dragged herself into
a more upright position.

'Philip!  You ARE a silly old ass!  Going without your dinner, just
so as not to hurt that little beast's feelings!  You must have some
food at once.  And of course your char's gone home.  Why don't you
keep some proper servants, Philip?  I hate this hole-and-corner way
you live.  We'll go out and have supper at Modigliani's.'

'But it's after ten.  They'll be shut.'

'Nonsense!  They're open till two.  I'll ring up for a taxi.  I'm
not going to have you starving yourself.'

In the taxi she lay against him, still half asleep, her head
pillowed on his breast.  He thought of the unemployed in
Middlesbrough, seven in a room on twenty-five bob a week.  But the
girl's body was heavy against him, and Middlesbrough was very far
away.  Also he was damnably hungry.  He thought of his favourite
corner table at Modigliani's, and of that vile pub with its hard
benches, stale beer-stink, and brass spittoons.  Hermione was
sleepily lecturing him.

'Philip, why do you have to live in such a dreadful way?'

'But I don't live in a dreadful way.'

'Yes, you do.  Pretending you're poor when you're not, and living
in that poky flat with no servants, and going about with all these
beastly people.'

'What beastly people?'

'Oh, people like this poet friend of yours.  All those people who
write for your paper.  They only do it to cadge from you.  Of
course I know you're a Socialist.  So am I.  I mean we're all
Socialists nowadays.  But I don't see why you have to give all your
money away and make friends with the lower classes.  You can be a
Socialist AND have a good time, that's what I say.'

'Hermione, dear, please don't call them the lower classes!'

'Why not?  They ARE the lower classes, aren't they?'

'It's such a hateful expression.  Call them the working class,
can't you?'

'The working class, if you like, then.  But they smell just the
same.'

'You oughtn't to say that kind of thing,' he protested weakly.

'Do you know, Philip, sometimes I think you LIKE the lower
classes.'

'Of course I like them.'

'How disgusting.  How absolutely disgusting.'

She lay quiet, content to argue no longer, her arms round him, like
a sleepy siren.  The woman-scent breathed out of her, a powerful
wordless propaganda against all altruism and all justice.  Outside
Modigliani's they had paid off the taxi and were moving for the
door when a big, lank wreck of a man seemed to spring up from the
paving-stones in front of them.  He stood across their path like
some fawning beast, with dreadful eagerness and yet timorously, as
though afraid that Ravelston would strike him.  His face came close
up to Ravelston's--a dreadful face, fish-white and scrubby-bearded
to the eyes.  The words 'A cup of tea, guv'nor!' were breathed
through carious teeth.  Ravelston shrank from him in disgust.  He
could not help it.  His hand moved automatically to his pocket.
But in the same instant Hermione caught him by the arm and hauled
him inside the restaurant.

'You'd give away every penny you've got if I let you,' she said.

They went to their favourite table in the corner.  Hermione played
with some grapes, but Ravelston was very hungry.  He ordered the
grilled rumpsteak he had been thinking of, and half a bottle of
Beaujolais.  The fat, white-haired Italian waiter, an old friend of
Ravelston's, brought the smoking steak.  Ravelston cut it open.
Lovely, its red-blue heart!  In Middlesbrough the unemployed huddle
in frowzy beds, bread and marg and milkless tea in their bellies.
He settled down to his steak with all the shameful joy of a dog
with a stolen leg of mutton.

Gordon walked rapidly homewards.  It was cold.  The fifth of
December--real winter now.  Circumcise ye your foreskins, saith the
Lord.  The damp wind blew spitefully through the naked trees.
Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over.  The poem he had begun on
Wednesday, of which six stanzas were now finished, came back to his
mind.  He did not dislike it at this moment.  It was queer how
talking with Ravelston always bucked him up.  The mere contact with
Ravelston seemed to reassure him somehow.  Even when their talk had
been unsatisfactory, he came away with the feeling that, after all,
he wasn't quite a failure.  Half aloud he repeated the six finished
stanzas.  They were not bad, not bad at all.

But intermittently he was going over in his mind the things he had
said to Ravelston.  He stuck to everything he had said.  The
humiliation of poverty!  That's what they can't understand and
won't understand.  Not hardship--you don't suffer hardship on two
quid a week, and if you did it wouldn't matter--but just
humiliation, the awful, bloody humiliation.  The way it gives
everyone the right to stamp on you.  The way everyone WANTS to
stamp on you.  Ravelston wouldn't believe it.  He had too much
decency, that was why.  He thought you could be poor and still be
treated like a human being.  But Gordon knew better.  He went into
the house repeating to himself that he knew better.

There was a letter waiting for him on the hall tray.  His heart
jumped.  All letters excited him nowadays.  He went up the stairs
three at a time, shut himself in and lit the gas.  The letter was
from Doring.


DEAR COMSTOCK,--What a pity you didn't turn up on Saturday.  There
were some people I wanted you to meet.  We did tell you it was
Saturday and not Thursday this time, didn't we?  My wife says she's
certain she told you.  Anyway, we're having another party on the
twenty-third, a sort of before-Christmas party, about the same
time.  Won't you come then?  Don't forget the date this time.

Yours

PAUL DORING


A painful convulsion happened below Gordon's ribs.  So Doring was
pretending that it was all a mistake--was pretending not to have
insulted him!  True, he could not actually have gone there on
Saturday, because on Saturday he had to be at the shop; still, it
was the intention that counted.

His heart sickened as he re-read the words 'some people I wanted
you to meet'.  Just like his bloody luck!  He thought of the people
he might have met--editors of highbrow magazines, for instance.
They might have given him books to review or asked to see his poems
or Lord knew what.  For a moment he was dreadfully tempted to
believe that Doring had spoken the truth.  Perhaps after all they
HAD told him it was Saturday and not Thursday.  Perhaps if he
searched his memory he might remember about it--might even find the
letter itself lying among his muddle of papers.  But no!  He
wouldn't think of it.  He fought down the temptation.  The Dorings
HAD insulted him on purpose.  He was poor, therefore they had
insulted him.  If you are poor, people will insult you.  It was his
creed.  Stick to it!

He went across to the table, tearing Doring's letter into small
bits.  The aspidistra stood in its pot, dull green, ailing,
pathetic in its sickly ugliness.  As he sat down, he pulled it
towards him and looked at it meditatively.  There was the intimacy
of hatred between the aspidistra and him.  'I'll beat you yet, you
b--,' he whispered to the dusty leaves.

Then he rummaged among his papers until he found a clean sheet,
took his pen and wrote in his small, neat hand, right in the middle
of the sheet:


DEAR DORING,--With reference to your letter:  Go and ---- yourself.

Yours truly

GORDON COMSTOCK


He stuck it into an envelope, addressed it, and at once went out to
get stamps from the slot machine.  Post it tonight: these things
look different in the morning.  He dropped it into the pillar-box.
So there was another friend gone west.



6


This woman business!  What a bore it is!  What a pity we can't cut
it right out, or at least be like the animals--minutes of ferocious
lust and months of icy chastity.  Take a cock pheasant, for
example.  He jumps up on the hens' backs without so much as a with
your leave or by your leave.  And no sooner it is over than the
whole subject is out of his mind.  He hardly even notices his hens
any longer; he ignores them, or simply pecks them if they come too
near his food.  He is not called upon to support his offspring,
either.  Lucky pheasant!  How different from the lord of creation,
always on the hop between his memory and his conscience!

Tonight Gordon wasn't even pretending to do any work.  He had gone
out again immediately after supper.  He walked southward, rather
slowly, thinking about women.  It was a mild, misty night, more
like autumn than winter.  This was Tuesday and he had four and
fourpence left.  He could go down to the Crichton if he chose.
Doubtless Flaxman and his pals were already boozing there.  But the
Crichton, which had seemed like paradise when he had no money,
bored and disgusted him when it was in his power to go there.  He
hated the stale, beery place, and the sights, sounds, smells, all
so blatantly and offensively male.  There were no women there; only
the barmaid with her lewd smile which seemed to promise everything
and promised nothing.

Women, women!  The mist that hung motionless in the air turned the
passers-by into ghosts at twenty yards' distance; but in the little
pools of light about the lamp-posts there were glimpses of girls'
faces.  He thought of Rosemary, of women in general, and of
Rosemary again.  All afternoon he had been thinking of her.  It was
with a kind of resentment that he thought of her small, strong
body, which he had never yet seen naked.  How damned unfair it is
that we are filled to the brim with these tormenting desires and
then forbidden to satisfy them!  Why should one, merely because
one has no money, be deprived of THAT?  It seems so natural, so
necessary, so much a part of the inalienable rights of a human
being.  As he walked down the dark street, through the cold yet
languorous air, there was a strangely hopeful feeling in his
breast.  He half believed that somewhere ahead in the darkness a
woman's body was waiting for him.  But also he knew that no woman
was waiting, not even Rosemary.  It was eight days now since she
had even written to him.  The little beast!  Eight whole days
without writing!  When she knew how much her letters meant to him!
How manifest it was that she didn't care for him any longer, that
he was merely a nuisance to her with his poverty and his shabbiness
and his everlasting pestering of her to say she loved him!  Very
likely she would never write again.  She was sick of him--sick of
him because he had no money.  What else could you expect?  He had
no hold over her.  No money, therefore no hold.  In the last
resort, what holds a woman to any man, except money?

A girl came down the pavement alone.  He passed her in the light of
the lamp-post.  A working-class girl, eighteen years old it might
be, hatless, with wildrose face.  She turned her head quickly when
she saw him looking at her.  She dreaded to meet his eyes.  Beneath
the thin silky raincoat she was wearing, belted at the waist, her
youthful flanks showed supple and trim.  He could have turned and
followed her, almost.  But what was the use?  She'd run away or
call a policeman.  My golden locks time hath to silver turned, he
thought.  He was thirty and moth-eaten.  What woman worth having
would ever look at him again?

This woman business!  Perhaps you'd feel differently about it if
you were married?  But he had taken an oath against marriage long
ago.  Marriage is only a trap set for you by the money-god.  You
grab the bait; snap goes the trap; and there you are, chained by
the leg to some 'good' job till they cart you to Kensal Green.
And what a life!  Licit sexual intercourse in the shade of the
aspidistra.  Pram-pushing and sneaky adulteries.  And the wife
finding you out and breaking the cut-glass whisky decanter over
your head.

Nevertheless he perceived that in a way it is necessary to marry.
If marriage is bad, the alternative is worse.  For a moment he
wished that he were married; he pined for the difficulty of it, the
reality, the pain.  And marriage must be indissoluble, for better
for worse, for richer for poorer, till death do you part.  The old
Christian ideal--marriage tempered by adultery.  Commit adultery if
you must, but at any rate have the decency to CALL it adultery.
None of that American soul-mate slop.  Have your fun and then sneak
home, juice of the forbidden fruit dripping from your whiskers, and
take the consequences.  Cut-glass whisky decanters broken over your
head, nagging, burnt meals, children crying, clash and thunder of
embattled mothers-in-law.  Better that, perhaps, than horrible
freedom?  You'd know, at least, that it was real life that you were
living.

But anyway, how can you marry on two quid a week?  Money, money,
always money!  The devil of it is, that outside marriage, no decent
relationship with a woman is possible.  His mind moved backwards,
over his ten years of adult life.  The faces of women flowed
through his memory.  Ten or a dozen of them there had been.  Tarts,
also.  Comme au long d'un cadavre un cadavre etendu.  And even when
they were not tarts it had been squalid, always squalid.  Always it
had started in a sort of cold-blooded wilfulness and ended in some
mean, callous desertion.  That, too, was money.  Without money, you
can't be straightforward in your dealings with women.  For without
money, you can't pick and choose, you've got to take what women you
can get; and then, necessarily, you've got to break free of them.
Constancy, like all other virtues, has got to be paid for in money.
And the mere fact that he had rebelled against the money code and
wouldn't settle down in the prison of a 'good' job--a thing no
woman will ever understand--had brought a quality of impermanence,
of deception, into all his affairs with women.  Abjuring money, he
ought to have abjured women to.  Serve the money-god, or do without
women--those are the only alternatives.  And both were equally
impossible.

From the side-street just ahead, a shade of white light cut through
the mist, and there was a bellowing of street hawkers.  It was
Luton Road, where they have the open-air market two evenings a
week.  Gordon turned to his left, into the market.  He often came
this way.  The street was so crowded that you could only with
difficulty thread your way down the cabbage-littered alley between
the stalls.  In the glare of hanging electric bulbs, the stuff on
the stalls glowed with fine lurid colours--hacked, crimson chunks
of meat, piles of oranges and green and white broccoli, stiff,
glassy-eyed rabbits, live eels looping in enamel troughs, plucked
fowls hanging in rows, sticking out their naked breasts like
guardsmen naked on parade.  Gordon's spirits revived a little.  He
liked the noise, the bustle, the vitality.  Whenever you see a
street-market you know there's hope for England yet.  But even here
he felt his solitude.  Girls were thronging everywhere, in knots of
four or five, prowling desirously about the stalls of cheap
underwear and swapping backchat and screams of laughter with the
youths who followed them.  None had eyes for Gordon.  He walked
among them as though invisible, save that their bodies avoided him
when he passed them.  Ah, look there!  Involuntarily he paused.
Over a pile of art-silk undies on a stall, three girls were
bending, intent, their faces close together--three youthful faces,
flower-like in the harsh light, clustering side by side like a
truss of blossom on a Sweet William or phlox.  His heart stirred.
No eyes for him, of course!  One girl looked up.  Ah!  Hurriedly,
with an offended air, she looked away again.  A delicate flush like
a wash of aquarelle flooded her face.  The hard, sexual stare in
his eyes had frightened her.  They flee from me that sometime did
me seek!  He walked on.  If only Rosemary were here!  He forgave
her now for not writing to him.  He could forgive her anything, if
only she were here.  He knew how much she meant to him, because she
alone of all women was willing to save him from the humiliation of
his loneliness.

At this moment he looked up, and saw something that made his heart
jump.  He changed the focus of his eyes abruptly.  For a moment he
thought he was imagining it.  But no!  It WAS Rosemary!

She was coming down the alley between the stalls, twenty or thirty
yards away.  It was as though his desire had called her into being.
She had not seen him yet.  She came towards him, a small debonair
figure, picking her way nimbly through the crowd and the muck
underfoot, her face scarcely visible because of a flat black hat
which she wore cocked down over her eyes like a Harrow boy's straw
hat.  He started towards her and called her name.

'Rosemary!  Hi, Rosemary!'

A blue-aproned man thumbing codfish on a stall turned to stare at
him.  Rosemary did not hear him because of the din.  He called
again.

'Rosemary!  I say, Rosemary!'

They were only a few yards apart now.  She started and looked up.

'Gordon!  What are you doing here?'

'What are YOU doing here?'

'I was coming to see you.'

'But how did you know I was here?'

'I didn't.  I always come this way.  I get out of the tube at
Camden Town.'

Rosemary sometimes came to see Gordon at Willowbed Road.  Mrs
Wisbeach would inform him sourly that 'there was a young woman to
see him', and he would come downstairs and they would go out for a
walk in the streets.  Rosemary was never allowed indoors, not even
into the hall.  That was a rule of the house.  You would have
thought 'young women' were plague-rats by the way Mrs Wisbeach
spoke of them.  Gordon took Rosemary by the upper arm and made to
pull her against him.

'Rosemary!  Oh, what a joy to see you again!  I was so vilely
lonely.  Why didn't you come before?'

She shook off his hand and stepped back out of his reach.  Under
her slanting hat-brim she gave him a glance that was intended to be
angry.

'Let me go, now!  I'm very angry with you.  I very nearly didn't
come after that beastly letter you sent me.'

'What beastly letter?'

'You know very well.'

'No, I don't.  Oh, well, let's get out of this.  Somewhere where we
can talk.  This way.'

He took her arm, but she shook him off again, continuing however,
to walk at his side.  Her steps were quicker and shorter than his.
And walking beside him she had the appearance of something
extremely small, nimble, and young, as though he had had some
lively little animal, a squirrel for instance, frisking at his
side.  In reality she was not very much smaller than Gordon, and
only a few months younger.  But no one would ever have described
Rosemary as a spinster of nearly thirty, which in fact she was.
She was a strong, agile girl, with stiff black hair, a small
triangular face, and very pronounced eyebrows.  It was one of those
small, peaky faces, full of character, which one sees in sixteenth-
century portraits.  The first time you saw her take her hat off you
got a surprise, for on her crown three white hairs glittered among
the black ones like silver wires.  It was typical of Rosemary that
she never bothered to pull the white hairs out.  She still thought
of herself as a very young girl, and so did everybody else.  Yet if
you looked closely the marks of time were plain enough on her face.

Gordon walked more boldly with Rosemary at his side.  He was proud
of her.  People were looking at her, and therefore at him as well.
He was no longer invisible to women.  As always, Rosemary was
rather nicely dressed.  It was a mystery how she did it on four
pounds a week.  He liked particularly the hat she was wearing--one
of those flat felt hats which were then coming into fashion and
which caricatured a clergyman's shovel hat.  There was something
essentially frivolous about it.  In some way difficult to be
described, the angle at which it was cocked forward harmonized
appealingly with the curve of Rosemary's behind.

'I like your hat,' he said.

In spite of herself, a small smile flickered at the corner of her
mouth.

'It IS rather nice,' she said, giving the hat a little pat with her
hand.

She was still pretending to be angry, however.  She took care that
their bodies should not touch.  As soon as they had reached the end
of the stalls and were in the main street she stopped and faced him
sombrely.

'What do you mean by writing me letters like that?' she said.

'Letters like what?'

'Saying I'd broken your heart.'

'So you have.'

'It looks like it, doesn't it!'

'I don't know.  It certainly feels like it.'

The words were spoken half jokingly, and yet they made her look
more closely at him--at his pale, wasted face, his uncut hair, his
general down-at-heel, neglected appearance.  Her heart softened
instantly, and yet she frowned.  Why WON'T he take care of himself?
was the thought in her mind.  They had moved closer together.  He
took her by the shoulders.  She let him do it, and, putting her
small arms round him, squeezed him very hard, partly in affection,
partly in exasperation.

'Gordon, you ARE a miserable creature!' she said.

'Why am I a miserable creature?'

'Why can't you look after yourself properly?  You're a perfect
scarecrow.  Look at these awful old clothes you're wearing!'

'They're suited to my station.  One can't dress decently on two
quid a week, you know.'

'But surely there's no need to go about looking like a rag-bag?
Look at this button on your coat, broken in half!'

She fingered the broken button, then suddenly lifted his
discoloured Woolworth's tie aside.  In some feminine way she had
divined that he had no buttons on his shirt.

'Yes, AGAIN!  Not a single button.  You are awful, Gordon!'

'I tell you I can't be bothered with things like that.  I've got a
soul above buttons.'

'But why not give them to ME and let me sew them on for you?  And,
oh, Gordon!  You haven't even shaved today.  How absolutely beastly
of you.  You might at least take the trouble to shave every
morning.'

'I can't afford to shave every morning,' he said perversely.

'What DO you mean, Gordon?  It doesn't cost money to shave, does
it?'

'Yes, it does.  Everything costs money.  Cleanness, decency,
energy, self-respect--everything.  It's all money.  Haven't I told
you that a million times?'

She squeezed his ribs again--she was surprisingly strong--and
frowned up at him, studying his face as a mother looks at some
peevish child of which she is unreasonably fond.

'WHAT a fool I am!' she said.

'In what way a fool?'

'Because I'm so fond of you.'

'Are you fond of me?'

'Of course I am.  You know I am.  I adore you.  It's idiotic of
me.'

'Then come somewhere where it's dark.  I want to kiss you.'

'Fancy being kissed by a man who hasn't even shaved!'

'Well, that'll be a new experience for you.'

'No, it won't, Gordon.  Not after knowing YOU for two years.'

'Oh, well, come on, anyway.'

They found an almost dark alley between the backs of houses.  All
their lovemaking was done in such places.  The only place where
they could ever be private was the streets.  He pressed her
shoulders against the rough damp bricks of the wall.  She turned
her face readily up to his and clung to him with a sort of eager
violent affection, like a child.  And yet all the while, though
they were body to body, it was as though there were a shield
between them.  She kissed him as a child might have done, because
she knew that he expected to be kissed.  It was always like this.
Only at very rare moments could he awake in her the beginnings of
physical desire; and these she seemed afterwards to forget, so that
he always had to begin at the beginning over again.  There was
something defensive in the feeling of her small, shapely body.  She
longed to know the meaning of physical love, but also she dreaded
it.  It would destroy her youth, the youthful, sexless world in
which she chose to live.

He parted his mouth from hers in order to speak to her.

'Do you love me?' he said.

'Of course, silly.  Why do you always ask me that?'

'I like to hear you say it.  Somehow I never feel sure of you till
I've heard you say it.'

'But why?'

'Oh, well, you might have changed your mind.  After all, I'm not
exactly the answer to a maiden's prayer.  I'm thirty, and moth-
eaten at that.'

'Don't be so absurd, Gordon!  Anyone would think you were a
hundred, to hear you talk.  You know I'm the same age as you are.'

'Yes, but not moth-eaten.'

She rubbed her cheek against his, feeling the roughness of his day-
old beard.  Their bellies were close together.  He thought of the
two years he had wanted her and never had her.  With his lips
almost against her ear he murmured:

'Are you EVER going to sleep with me?'

'Yes, some day I will.  Not now.  Some day.'

'It's always "some day".  It's been "some day" for two years now.'

'I know.  But I can't help it.'

He pressed her back against the wall, pulled off the absurd flat
hat, and buried his face in her hair.  It was tormenting to be so
close to her and all for nothing.  He put a hand under her chin and
lifted her small face up to his, trying to distinguish her features
in the almost complete darkness.

'Say you will, Rosemary.  There's a dear!  Do!'

'You know I'm going to SOME time.'

'Yes, but not SOME time--now.  I don't mean this moment, but soon.
When we get an opportunity.  Say you will!'

'I can't.  I can't promise.'

'Say "yes," Rosemary.  PLEASE do!'

'No.'

Still stroking her invisible face, he quoted:


'Veuillez le dire donc selon
Que vous estes benigne et doulche,
Car ce doulx mot n'est pas si long
Qu'il vous face mal en la bouche.'


'What does that mean?'

He translated it.

'I can't, Gordon.  I just can't.'

'Say "yes," Rosemary, there's a dear.  Surely it's as easy to say
"yes" as "no"?'

'No, it isn't, it's easy enough for you.  You're a man.  It's
different for a woman.'

'Say "yes," Rosemary!  "Yes"--it's such an easy word.  Go on, now;
say it.  "Yes!"'

'Anyone would think you were teaching a parrot to talk, Gordon.'

'Oh, damn!  Don't make jokes about it.'

It was not much use arguing.  Presently they came out into the
street and walked on, southward.  Somehow, from Rosemary's swift,
neat movements, from her general air of a girl who knows how to
look after herself and who yet treats life mainly as a joke, you
could make a good guess at her upbringing and her mental background.
She was the youngest child of one of those huge hungry families
which still exist here and there in the middle classes.  There had
been fourteen children all told--the father was a country solicitor.
Some of Rosemary's sisters were married, some of them were
schoolmistresses or running typing bureaux; the brothers were
farming in Canada, on tea-plantations in Ceylon, in obscure
regiments of the Indian Army.  Like all women who have had an
eventful girlhood, Rosemary wanted to remain a girl.  That was why,
sexually, she was so immature.  She had kept late into life the
high-spirited sexless atmosphere of a big family.  Also she had
absorbed into her very bones the code of fair play and live-and-
let-live.  She was profoundly magnanimous, quite incapable of
spiritual bullying.  From Gordon, whom she adored, she put up with
almost anything.  It was the measure of her magnanimity that never
once, in the two years that she had known him, had she blamed him
for not attempting to earn a proper living.

Gordon was aware of all this.  But at the moment he was thinking of
other things.  In the pallid circles of light about the lamp-posts,
beside Rosemary's smaller, trimmer figure, he felt graceless,
shabby, and dirty.  He wished very much that he had shaved that
morning.  Furtively he put a hand into his pocket and felt his
money, half afraid--it was a recurrent fear with him--that he might
have dropped a coin.  However, he could feel the milled edge of a
form, his principal coin at the moment.  Four and fourpence left.
He couldn't possibly take her out to supper, he reflected.  They'd
have to trail dismally up and down the streets, as usual, or at
best go to a Lyons for a coffee.  Bloody!  How can you have any fun
when you've got no money?  He said broodingly:

'Of course it all comes back to money.'

This remark came out of the blue.  She looked up at him in surprise.

'What do you mean, it all comes back to money?'

'I mean the way nothing ever goes right in my life.  It's always
money, money, money that's at the bottom of everything.  And
especially between me and you.  That's why you don't really love
me.  There's a sort of film of money between us.  I can feel it
every time I kiss you.'

'Money!  What HAS money got to do with it, Gordon?'

'Money's got to do with everything.  If I had more money you'd love
me more.'

'Of course, I wouldn't!  Why should I?'

'You couldn't help it.  Don't you see that if I had more money I'd
be more worth loving?  Look at me now!  Look at my face, look at
these clothes I'm wearing, look at everything else about me.  Do
you suppose I'd be like that if I had two thousand a year?  If I
had more money I should be a different person.'

'If you were a different person I shouldn't love you.'

'That's nonsense, too.  But look at it like this.  If we were
married would you sleep with me?'

'What questions you do ask!  Of course I would.  Otherwise, where
would be the sense of being married?'

'Well then, suppose I was decently well off, WOULD you marry me?'

'What's the good of talking about it, Gordon?  You know we can't
afford to marry.'

'Yes, but IF we could.  Would you?'

'I don't know.  Yes, I would, I dare say.'

'There you are, then!  That's what I said--money!'

'No, Gordon, no!  That's not fair!  You're twisting my words
round.'

'No, I'm not.  You've got this money-business at the bottom of your
heart.  Every woman's got it.  You wish I was in a GOOD job now,
don't you?'

'Not in the way you mean it.  I'd like you to be earning more
money--yes.'

'And you think I ought to have stayed on at the New Albion, don't
you?  You'd like me to go back there now and write slogans for
Q. T. Sauce and Truweet Breakfast Crisps.  Wouldn't you?'

'No, I wouldn't.  I NEVER said that.'

'You thought it, though.  It's what any woman would think.'

He was being horribly unfair, and he knew it.  The one thing
Rosemary had never said, the thing she was probably quite incapable
of saying, was that he ought to go back to the New Albion.  But
for the moment he did not even want to be fair.  His sexual
disappointment still pricked him.  With a sort of melancholy triumph
he reflected that, after all, he was right.  It was money that stood
between them.  Money, money, all is money!  He broke into a
half-serious tirade:

'Women!  What nonsense they make of all our ideas!  Because one
can't keep free of women, and every woman makes one pay the same
price.  "Chuck away your decency and make more money"--that's what
women say.  "Chuck away your decency, suck the blacking off the
boss's boots, and buy me a better fur coat than the woman next
door."  Every man you can see has got some blasted woman hanging
round his neck like a mermaid, dragging him down and down--down to
some beastly little semi-detached villa in Putney, with hire-
purchase furniture and a portable radio and an aspidistra in the
window.  It's women who make all progress impossible.  Not that I
believe in progress,' he added rather unsatisfactorily.

'What absolute NONSENSE you do talk, Gordon!  As though women were
to blame for everything!'

'They are to blame, finally.  Because it's the women who really
believe in the money-code.  The men obey it; they have to, but they
don't believe in it.  It's the women who keep it going.  The women
and their Putney villas and their fur coats and their babies and
their aspidistras.'

'It is NOT the women, Gordon!  Women didn't invent money, did
they?'

'It doesn't matter who invented it, the point is that it's women
who worship it.  A woman's got a sort of mystical feeling towards
money.  Good and evil in a women's mind mean simply money and no
money.  Look at you and me.  You won't sleep with me, simply and
solely because I've got no money.  Yes, that IS the reason.  (He
squeezed her arm to silence her.)  You admitted it only a minute
ago.  And if I had a decent income you'd go to bed with me
tomorrow.  It's not because you're mercenary.  You don't want me
to PAY you for sleeping with me.  It's not so crude as that.  But
you've got that deep-down mystical feeling that somehow a man
without money isn't worthy of you.  He's a weakling, a sort of
half-man--that's how you feel.  Hercules, god of strength and god
of money--you'll find that in Lempriere.  It's women who keep all
mythologies going.  Women!'

'Women!' echoed Rosemary on a different note.  'I hate the way men
are always talking about WOMEN.  "Women do this," and "WOMEN do
that"--as though all women were exactly the same!'

'Of course all women are the same!  What does any woman want except
a safe income and two babies and a semi-detached villa in Putney
with an aspidistra in the window?'

'Oh, you and your aspidistras!'

'On the contrary, YOUR aspidistras.  You're the sex that cultivates
them.'

She squeezed his arm and burst out laughing.  She was really
extraordinarily good-natured.  Besides, what he was saying was such
palpable nonsense that it did not even exasperate her.  Gordon's
diatribes against women were in reality a kind of perverse joke;
indeed, the whole sex-war is at bottom only a joke.  For the same
reason it is great fun to pose as a feminist or an anti-feminist
according to your sex.  As they walked on they began a violent
argument upon the eternal and idiotic question of Man versus Woman.
The moves in this argument--for they had it as often as they met--
were always very much the same.  Men are brutes and women are
soulless, and women have always been kept in subjection and they
jolly well ought to be kept in subjection, and look at Patient
Griselda and look at Lady Astor, and what about polygamy and Hindu
widows, and what about Mother Pankhurst's piping days when every
decent woman wore mousetraps on her garters and couldn't look at a
man without feeling her right hand itch for a castrating knife?
Gordon and Rosemary never grew tired of this kind of thing.  Each
laughed with delight at the other's absurdities.  There was a merry
war between them.  Even as they disputed, arm in arm, they pressed
their bodies delightedly together.  They were very happy.  Indeed,
they adored one another.  Each was to the other a standing joke and
an object infinitely precious.  Presently a red and blue haze of
Neon lights appeared in the distance.  They had reached the
beginning of the Tottenham Court Road.  Gordon put his arm round
her waist and turned her to the right, down a darkish side-street.
They were so happy together that they had got to kiss.  They stood
clasped together under the lamp-post, still laughing, two enemies
breast to breast.  She rubbed her cheek against his.

'Gordon, you are such a dear old ass!  I can't help loving you,
scrubby jaw and all.'

'Do you really?'

'Really and truly.'

Her arms still round him, she leaned a little backwards, pressing
her belly against his with a sort of innocent voluptuousness.

'Life IS worth living, isn't it, Gordon?'

'Sometimes.'

'If only we could meet a bit oftener!  Sometimes I don't see you
for weeks.'

'I know.  It's bloody.  If you knew how I hate my evenings alone!'

'One never seems to have time for anything.  I don't even leave
that beastly office till nearly seven.  What do you do with
yourself on Sundays, Gordon?'

'Oh, God!  Moon about and look miserable, like everyone else.'

'Why not let's go out for a walk in the country sometimes.  Then we
would have all day together.  Next Sunday, for instance?'

The words chilled him.  They brought back the thought of money,
which he had succeeded in putting out of his mind for half an hour
past.  A trip into the country would cost money, far more than he
could possibly afford.  He said in a non-committal tone that
transferred the whole thing to the realm of abstraction:

'Of course, it's not too bad in Richmond Park on Sundays.  Or even
Hampstead Heath.  Especially if you go in the mornings before the
crowds get there.'

'Oh, but do let's go right out into the country!  Somewhere in
Surrey, for instance, or to Burnham Beeches.  It's so lovely at
this time of year, with all the dead leaves on the ground, and you
can walk all day and hardly meet a soul.  We'll walk for miles and
miles and have dinner at a pub.  It would be such fun.  Do let's!'

Blast!  The money-business was coming back.  A trip even as far as
Burnham Beeches would cost all of ten bob.  He did some hurried
arithmetic.  Five bob he might manage, and Julia would 'lend' him
five; GIVE him five, that was.  At the same moment he remembered
his oath, constantly renewed and always broken, not to 'borrow'
money off Julia.  He said in the same casual tone as before:

'It WOULD be rather fun.  I should think we might manage it.  I'll
let you know later in the week, anyway.'

They came out of the side-street, still arm in arm.  There was a
pub on the corner.  Rosemary stood on tiptoe, and, clinging to
Gordon's arm to support herself, managed to look over the frosted
lower half of the window.

'Look, Gordon, there's a clock in there.  It's nearly half past
nine.  Aren't you getting frightfully hungry?'

'No,' he said instantly and untruthfully.

'I am.  I'm simply starving.  Let's go and have something to eat
somewhere.'  Money again!  One moment more, and he must confess
that he had only four and fourpence in the world--four and
fourpence to last till Friday.

'I couldn't eat anything,' he said.  'I might manage a drink, I
dare say.  Let's go and have some coffee or something.  I expect
we'll find a Lyons open.'

'Oh, don't let's go to a Lyons!  I know such a nice little Italian
restaurant, only just down the road.  We'll have Spaghetti
Napolitaine and a bottle of red wine.  I adore spaghetti.  Do
let's!'

His heart sank.  It was no good.  He would have to own up.  Supper
at the Italian Restaurant could not possibly cost less than five
bob for the two of them.  He said almost sullenly:

'It's about time I was getting home, as a matter of fact.'

'Oh, Gordon!  Already?  Why?'

'Oh, well!  If you MUST know, I've only got four and fourpence in
the world.  And it's got to last till Friday.'

Rosemary stopped short.  She was so angry that she pinched his arm
with all her strength, meaning to hurt him and punish him.

'Gordon, you ARE an ass!  You're a perfect idiot!  You're the most
unspeakable idiot I've ever seen!'

'Why am I an idiot?'

'Because what does it matter whether you've got any money!  I'm
asking YOU to have supper with ME.'

He freed his arm from hers and stood away from her.  He did not
want to look her in the face.

'What!  Do you think I'd go to a restaurant and let you pay for my
food?'

'But why not?'

'Because one can't do that sort of thing.  It isn't done.'

'It "isn't done"!  You'll be saying it's "not cricket" in another
moment.  WHAT "isn't done"?'

'Letting you pay for my meals.  A man pays for a woman, a woman
doesn't pay for a man.'

'Oh, Gordon!  Are we living in the reign of Queen Victoria?'

'Yes, we are, as far as that kind of thing's concerned.  Ideas
don't change so quickly.'

'But MY ideas have changed.'

'No, they haven't.  You think they have, but they haven't.  You've
been brought up as a woman, and you can't help behaving like a
woman, however much you don't want to.'

'But what do you mean by BEHAVING LIKE A WOMAN, anyway?'

'I tell you every woman's the same when it comes to a thing like
this.  A woman despises a man who's dependent on her and sponges on
her.  She may say she doesn't, she may THINK she doesn't, but she
does.  She can't help it.  If I let you pay for my meals YOU'D
despise me.'

He had turned away.  He knew how abominably he was behaving.  But
somehow he had got to say these things.  The feeling that people--
even Rosemary--MUST despise him for his poverty was too strong to
be overcome.  Only by rigid, jealous independence could he keep his
self-respect.  Rosemary was really distressed this time.  She
caught his arm and pulled him round, making him face her.  With an
insistent gesture, angrily and yet demanding to be loved, she
pressed her breast against him.

'Gordon!  I won't let you say such things.  How can you say I'd
ever despise you?'

'I tell you you couldn't help it if I let myself sponge on you.'

'Sponge on me!  What expressions you do use!  How is it sponging on
me to let me pay for your supper just for once!'

He could feel the small breasts, firm and round, just beneath his
own.  She looked up at him, frowning and yet not far from tears.
She thought him perverse, unreasonable, cruel.  But her physical
nearness distracted him.  At this moment all he could remember was
that in two years she had never yielded to him.  She had starved
him of the one thing that mattered.  What was the good of pretending
that she loved him when in the last essential she recoiled?  He
added with a kind of deadly joy:

'In a way you do despise me.  Oh, yes, I know you're fond of me.
But after all, you can't take me quite seriously.  I'm a kind of
joke to you.  You're fond of me, and yet I'm not quite your equal--
that's how you feel.'

It was what he had said before, but with this difference, that now
he meant it, or said it as if he meant it.  She cried out with
tears in her voice:

'I don't, Gordon, I don't!  You KNOW I don't!'

'You do.  That's why you won't sleep with me.  Didn't I tell you
that before?'

She looked up at him an instant longer, and then buried her face in
his breast as suddenly as though ducking from a blow.  It was
because she had burst into tears.  She wept against his breast,
angry with him, hating him, and yet clinging to him like a child.
It was the childish way in which she clung to him, as a mere male
breast to weep on, that hurt him most.  With a sort of self-hatred
he remembered the other women who in just the same way had cried
against his breast.  It seemed the only thing he could do with
women, to make them cry.  With his arm round her shoulders he
caressed her clumsily, trying to console her.

'You've gone and made me cry!' she whimpered in self-contempt.

'I'm sorry!  Rosemary, dear one!  Don't cry, PLEASE don't cry.'

'Gordon, dearest!  WHY do you have to be so beastly to me?'

'I'm sorry, I'm sorry!  Sometimes I can't help it.'

'But why?  Why?'

She had got over her crying.  Rather more composed, she drew away
from him and felt for something to wipe her eyes.  Neither of them
had a handkerchief.  Impatiently, she wrung the tears out of her
eyes with her knuckles.

'How silly we always are!  Now, Gordon, BE nice for once.  Come
along to the restaurant and have some supper and let me pay for
it.'

'No.'

'Just this once.  Never mind about the old money-business.  Do it
just to please me.'

'I tell you I can't do that kind of thing.  I've got to keep my end
up.'

'But what do you mean, keep your end up?'

'I've made a war on money, and I've got to keep the rules.  The
first rule is never to take charity.'

'Charity!  Oh, Gordon, I DO think you're silly!'

She squeezed his ribs again.  It was a sign of peace.  She did not
understand him, probably never would understand him; yet she
accepted him as he was, hardly even protesting against his
unreasonableness.  As she put her face up to be kissed he noticed
that her lips were salt.  A tear had trickled here.  He strained
her against him.  The hard defensive feeling had gone out of her
body.  She shut her eyes and sank against him and into him as
though her bones had grown weak, and her lips parted and her small
tongue sought for his.  It was very seldom that she did that.  And
suddenly, as he felt her body yielding, he seemed to know with
certainty that their struggle was ended.  She was his now when he
chose to take her, and yet perhaps she did not fully understand
what it was that she was offering; it was simply an instinctive
movement of generosity, a desire to reassure him--to smooth away
that hateful feeling of being unloveable and unloved.  She said
nothing of this in words.  It was the feeling of her body that
seemed to say it.  But even if this had been the time and the place
he could not have taken her.  At this moment he loved her but did
not desire her.  His desire could only return at some future time
when there was no quarrel fresh in his mind and no consciousness of
four and fourpence in his pocket to daunt him.

Presently they separated their mouths, though still clinging
closely together.

'How stupid it is, the way we quarrel, isn't it Gordon?  When we
meet so seldom.'

'I know.  It's all my fault.  I can't help it.  Things rub me up.
It's money at the bottom of it, always money.'

'Oh, money!  You let it worry you too much, Gordon.'

'Impossible.  It's the only thing worth worrying about.'

'But, anyway, we WILL go out into the country next Sunday, won't
we?  To Burnham Beeches or somewhere.  It would be so nice if we
could.'

'Yes, I'd love to.  We'll go early and be out all day.  I'll raise
the train fares somehow.'

'But you'll let me pay my own fare, won't you?'

'No, I'd rather I paid them, but we'll go, anyway.'

'And you really won't let me pay for your supper--just this once,
just to show you trust me?'

'No, I can't.  I'm sorry.  I've told you why.'

'Oh, dear!  I suppose we shall have to say good night.  It's
getting late.'

They stayed talking a long time, however, so long that Rosemary got
no supper after all.  She had to be back at her lodgings by eleven,
or the she-dragons were angry.  Gordon went to the top of the
Tottenham Court Road and took the tram.  It was a penny cheaper
than taking the bus.  On the wooden seat upstairs he was wedged
against a small dirty Scotchman who read the football finals and
oozed beer.  Gordon was very happy.  Rosemary was going to be his
mistress.  Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over.  To the music of
the tram's booming he whispered the seven completed stanzas of his
poem.  Nine stanzas there would be in all.  It was GOOD.  He
believed in it and in himself.  He was a poet.  Gordon Comstock,
author of Mice.  Even in London Pleasures he once again believed.

He thought of Sunday.  They were to meet at nine o'clock at
Paddington Station.  Ten bob or so it would cost; he would raise
the money if he had to pawn his shirt.  And she was going to become
his mistress; this very Sunday, perhaps, if the right chance
offered itself.  Nothing had been said.  Only, somehow, it was
agreed between them.

Please God it kept fine on Sunday!  It was deep winter now.  What
luck if it turned out one of those splendid windless days--one of
those days that might almost be summer, when you can lie for hours
on the dead bracken and never feel cold!  But you don't get many
days like that; a dozen at most in every winter.  As likely as not
it would rain.  He wondered whether they would get a chance to do
it after all.  They had nowhere to go, except the open air.  There
are so many pairs of lovers in London with 'nowhere to go'; only
the streets and the parks, where there is no privacy and it is
always cold.  It is not easy to make love in a cold climate when
you have no money.  The 'never the time and the place' motif is not
made enough of in novels.



7


The plumes of the chimneys floated perpendicular against skies of
smoky rose.

Gordon caught the 27 bus at ten past eight.  The streets were still
locked in their Sunday sleep.  On the doorsteps the milk bottles
waited ungathered like little white sentinels.  Gordon had fourteen
shillings in his hand--thirteen and nine, rather, because the bus
fare was threepence.  Nine bob he had set aside from his wages--God
knew what that was going to mean, later in the week!--and five he
had borrowed from Julia.

He had gone round to Julia's place on Thursday night.  Julia's room
in Earl's Court, though only a second-floor back, was not just a
vulgar bedroom like Gordon's.  It was a bed-sitting with the accent
on the sitting.  Julia would have died of starvation sooner than
put up with such squalor as Gordon lived in.  Indeed every one of
her scraps of furniture, collected over intervals of years,
represented a period of semi-starvation.  There was a divan bed that
could very nearly be mistaken for a sofa, and a little round fumed
oak table, and two 'antique' hardwood chairs, and an ornamental
footstool and a chintz-covered armchair--Drage's: thirteen monthly
payments--in front of the tiny gas-fire; and there were various
brackets with framed photos of father and mother and Gordon and Aunt
Angela, and a birchwood calendar--somebody's Christmas present--with
'It's a long lane that has no turning' done on it in pokerwork.
Julia depressed Gordon horribly.  He was always telling himself that
he ought to go and see her oftener; but in practice he never went
near her except to 'borrow' money.

When Gordon had given three knocks--three knocks for second floor--
Julia took him up to her room and knelt down in front of the gas-
fire.

'I'll light the fire again,' she said.  'You'd like a cup of tea,
wouldn't you?'

He noted the 'again'.  The room was beastly cold--no fire had been
lighted in it this evening.  Julia always 'saved gas' when she was
alone.  He looked at her long narrow back as she knelt down.  How
grey her hair was getting!  Whole locks of it were quite grey.  A
little more, and it would be 'grey hair' tout court.

'You like your tea strong, don't you?' breathed Julia, hovering
over the tea-caddy with tender, goose-like movements.

Gordon drank his cup of tea standing up, his eye on the birchwood
calendar.  Out with it!  Get it over!  Yet his heart almost failed
him.  The meanness of this hateful cadging!  What would it all tot
up to, the money he had 'borrowed' from her in all these years?

'I say, Julia, I'm damned sorry--I hate asking you; but look here--'

'Yes, Gordon?' she said quietly.  She knew what was coming.

'Look here, Julia, I'm damned sorry, but could you lend me five
bob?'

'Yes, Gordon, I expect so.'

She sought out the small, worn black leather purse that was hidden
at the bottom of her linen drawer.  He knew what she was thinking.
It meant less for Christmas presents.  That was the great event of
her life nowadays--Christmas and the giving of presents: hunting
through the glittering streets, late at night after the teashop was
shut, from one bargain counter to another, picking out the trash
that women are so curiously fond of.  Handkerchief sachets, letter
racks, teapots, manicure sets, birchwood calendars with mottoes in
pokerwork.  All through the year she was scraping from her wretched
wages for 'So-and-so's Christmas present', or 'So-and-so's birthday
present'.  And had she not, last Christmas, because Gordon was
'fond of poetry', given him the Selected Poems of John Drinkwater
in green morocco, which he had sold for half a crown?  Poor Julia!
Gordon made off with his five bob as soon as he decently could.
Why is it that one can't borrow from a rich friend and can from a
half-starved relative?  But one's family, of course, 'don't count'.

On the top of the bus he did mental arithmetic.  Thirteen and nine
in hand.  Two day-returns to Slough, five bob.  Bus fares, say two
bob more, seven bob.  Bread and cheese and beer at a pub, say a bob
each, nine bob.  Tea, eightpence each, twelve bob.  A bob for
cigarettes, thirteen bob.  That left ninepence for emergencies.
They would manage all right.  And how about the rest of the week?
Not a penny for tobacco!  But he refused to let it worry him.
Today would be worth it, anyway.

Rosemary met him on time.  It was one of her virtues that she was
never late, and even at this hour of the morning she was bright and
debonair.  She was rather nicely dressed, as usual.  She was
wearing her mock-shovel hat again, because he had said he liked it.
They had the station practically to themselves.  The huge grey
place, littered and deserted, had a blowsy, unwashed air, as though
it were still sleeping off a Saturday night debauch.  A yawning
porter in need of a shave told them the best way to get to Burnham
Beeches, and presently they were in a third-class smoker, rolling
westward, and the mean wilderness of London was opening out and
giving way to narrow sooty fields dotted with ads for Carter's
Little Liver Pills.  The day was very still and warm.  Gordon's
prayer had come true.  It was one of those windless days which you
can hardly tell from summer.  You could feel the sun behind the
mist; it would break through presently, with any luck.  Gordon and
Rosemary were profoundly and rather absurdly happy.  There was a
sense of wild adventure in getting out of London, with the long day
in 'the country' stretching out ahead of them.  It was months since
Rosemary and a year since Gordon had set foot in 'the country'.
They sat close together with the Sunday Times open across their
knees; they did not read it, however, but watched the fields and
cows and houses and the empty goods trucks and great sleeping
factories rolling past.  Both of them enjoyed the railway journey
so much that they wished it had been longer.

At Slough they got out and travelled to Farnham Common in an absurd
chocolate-coloured bus with no top.  Slough was still half asleep.
Rosemary remembered the way now that they had got to Farnham
Common.  You walked down a rutted road and came out on to stretches
of fine, wet, tussocky grass dotted with little naked birches.  The
beech woods were beyond.  Not a bough or a blade was stirring.  The
trees stood like ghosts in the still, misty air.  Both Rosemary and
Gordon exclaimed at the loveliness of everything.  The dew, the
stillness, the satiny stems of the birches, the softness of the
turf under your feet!  Nevertheless, at first they felt shrunken
and out of place, as Londoners do when they get outside London.
Gordon felt as though he had been living underground for a long
time past.  He felt etiolated and unkempt.  He slipped behind
Rosemary as they walked, so that she should not see his lined,
colourless face.  Also, they were out of breath before they had
walked far, because they were only used to London walking, and for
the first half hour they scarcely talked.  They plunged into the
woods and started westward, with not much idea of where they were
making for--anywhere, so long as it was away from London.  All
round them the beech-trees soared, curiously phallic with their
smooth skin-like bark and their flutings at the base.  Nothing grew
at their roots, but the dried leaves were strewn so thickly that in
the distance the slopes looked like folds of copper-coloured silk.
Not a soul seemed to be awake.  Presently Gordon came level with
Rosemary.  They walked on hand in hand, swishing through the dry
coppery leaves that had drifted into the ruts.  Sometimes they came
out on to stretches of road where they passed huge desolate houses--
opulent country houses, once, in the carriage days, but now
deserted and unsaleable.  Down the road the mist-dimmed hedges wore
that strange purplish brown, the colour of brown madder, that naked
brushwood takes on in winter.  There were a few birds about--jays,
sometimes, passing between the trees with dipping flight, and
pheasants that loitered across the road with long tails trailing,
almost as tame as hens, as though knowing they were safe on Sunday.
But in half an hour Gordon and Rosemary had not passed a human
being.  Sleep lay upon the countryside.  It was hard to believe
that they were only twenty miles out of London.

Presently they had walked themselves into trim.  They had got their
second wind and the blood glowed in their veins.  It was one of
those days when you feel you could walk a hundred miles if
necessary.  Suddenly, as they came out on to the road again, the
dew all down the hedge glittered with a diamond flash.  The sun had
pierced the clouds.  The light came slanting and yellow across the
fields, and delicate unexpected colours sprang out in everything,
as though some giant's child had been let loose with a new
paintbox.  Rosemary caught Gordon's arm and pulled him against her.

'Oh, Gordon, what a LOVELY day!'

'Lovely.'

'And, oh, look, look!  Look at all the rabbits in that field!'

Sure enough, at the other end of the field, innumerable rabbits
were browsing, almost like a flock of sheep.  Suddenly there was a
flurry under the hedge.  A rabbit had been lying there.  It leapt
from its nest in the grass with a flirt of dew and dashed away down
the field, its white tail lifted.  Rosemary threw herself into
Gordon's arms.  It was astonishingly warm, as warm as summer.  They
pressed their bodies together in a sort of sexless rapture, like
children.  Here in the open air he could see the marks of time
quite clearly upon her face.  She was nearly thirty, and looked it,
and he was nearly thirty, and looked more; and it mattered nothing.
He pulled off the absurd flat hat.  The three white hairs gleamed
on her crown.  At the moment he did not wish them away.  They were
part of her and therefore lovable.

'What fun to be here alone with you!  I'm so glad we came!'

'And, oh, Gordon, to think we've got all day together!  And it
might so easily have rained.  How lucky we are!'

'Yes.  We'll burn a sacrifice to the immortal gods, presently.'

They were extravagantly happy.  As they walked on they fell into
absurd enthusiasms over everything they saw: over a jay's feather
that they picked up, blue as lapis lazuli; over a stagnant pool
like a jet mirror, with boughs reflected deep down in it; over the
fungi that sprouted from the trees like monstrous horizontal ears.
They discussed for a long time what would be the best epithet to
describe a beech-tree.  Both agreed that beeches look more like
sentient creatures than other trees.  It is because of the
smoothness of their bark, probably, and the curious limb-like way
in which the boughs sprout from the trunk.  Gordon said that the
little knobs on the bark were like the nipples of breasts and that
the sinuous upper boughs, with their smooth sooty skin, were like
the writhing trunks of elephants.  They argued about similes and
metaphors.  From time to time they quarrelled vigorously, according
to their custom.  Gordon began to tease her by finding ugly similes
for everything they passed.  He said that the russet foliage of the
hornbeams was like the hair of Burne-Jones maidens, and that the
smooth tentacles of the ivy that wound about the trees were like
the clinging arms of Dickens heroines.  Once he insisted upon
destroying some mauve toadstools because he said they reminded him
of a Rackham illustration and he suspected fairies of dancing round
them.  Rosemary called him a soulless pig.  She waded through a bed
of drifted beech leaves that rustled about her, knee-deep, like a
weightless red-gold sea.

'Oh, Gordon, these leaves!  Look at them with the sun on them!
They're like gold.  They really are like gold.'

'Fairy gold.  You'll be going all Barrie in another moment.  As a
matter of fact, if you want an exact simile, they're just the
colour of tomato soup.'

'Don't be a pig, Gordon!  Listen how they rustle.  "Thick as
autumnal leaves that strow the brooks in Vallombrosa."'

'Or like one of those American breakfast cereals.  Truweet
Breakfast Crisps.  "Kiddies clamour for their Breakfast Crisps."'

'You are a beast!'

She laughed.  They walked on hand in hand, swishing ankle-deep
through the leaves and declaiming:


   'Thick as the Breakfast Crisps that strow the plates
   In Welwyn Garden City!'


It was great fun.  Presently they came out of the wooded area.
There were plenty of people abroad now, but not many cars if you
kept away from the main roads.  Sometimes they heard church bells
ringing and made detours to avoid the churchgoers.  They began to
pass through straggling villages on whose outskirts pseudo-Tudor
villas stood sniffishly apart, amid their garages, their laurel
shrubberies and their raw-looking lawns.  And Gordon had some fun
railing against the villas and the godless civilization of which
they were part--a civilization of stockbrokers and their lip-
sticked wives, of golf, whisky, ouija-boards, and Aberdeen terriers
called Jock.  So they walked another four miles or so, talking and
frequently quarrelling.  A few gauzy clouds were drifting across
the sky, but there was hardly a breath of wind.

They were growing rather footsore and more and more hungry.  Of its
own accord the conversation began to turn upon food.  Neither of
them had a watch, but when they passed through a village they saw
that the pubs were open, so that it must be after twelve o'clock.
They hesitated outside a rather low-looking pub called the Bird in
Hand.  Gordon was for going in; privately he reflected that in a
pub like that your bread and cheese and beer would cost you a bob
at the very most.  But Rosemary said that it was a nasty-looking
place, which indeed it was, and they went on, hoping to find a
pleasanter pub at the other end of the village.  They had visions
of a cosy bar-parlour, with an oak settle and perhaps a stuffed
pike in a glass case on the wall.

But there were no more pubs in the village, and presently they were
in open country again, with no houses in sight and not even any
signposts.  Gordon and Rosemary began to be alarmed.  At two the
pubs would shut, and then there would be no food to be had, except
perhaps a packet of biscuits from some village sweetshop.  At this
thought a ravening hunger took possession of them.  They toiled
exhaustedly up an enormous hill, hoping to find a village on the
other side.  There was no village, but far below a dark green river
wound, with what seemed quite like a large town scattered along its
edge and a grey bridge crossing it.  They did not even know what
river it was--it was the Thames, of course.

'Thank God!' said Gordon.  'There must be plenty of pubs down
there.  We'd better take the first one we can find.'

'Yes, do let's.  I'm starving.'

But when they neared the town it seemed strangely quiet.  Gordon
wondered whether the people were all at church or eating their
Sunday dinners, until he realized that the place was quite
deserted.  It was Crickham-on-Thames, one of those riverside towns
which live for the boating season and go into hibernation for the
rest of the year.  It straggled along the bank for a mile or more,
and it consisted entirely of boat-houses and bungalows, all of them
shut up and empty.  There were no signs of life anywhere.  At last,
however, they came upon a fat, aloof, red-nosed man, with a ragged
moustache, sitting on a camp-stool beside a jar of beer on the
towpath.  He was fishing with a twenty-foot roach pole, while on
the smooth green water two swans circled about his float, trying to
steal his bait as often as he pulled it up.

'Can you tell us where we can get something to eat?' said Gordon.

The fat man seemed to have been expecting this question and to
derive a sort of private pleasure from it.  He answered without
looking at Gordon.

'YOU won't get nothing to eat.  Not here you won't,' he said.

'But dash it!  Do you mean to say there isn't a pub in the whole
place?  We've walked all the way from Farnham Common.'

The fat man sniffed and seemed to reflect, still keeping his eye on
the float.  'I dessay you might try the Ravenscroft Hotel,' he
said.  'About half a mile along, that is.  I dessay they'd give you
something; that is, they would if they was open.'

'But ARE they open?'

'They might be and they might not,' said the fat man comfortably.

'And can you tell us what time it is?' said Rosemary.

'It's jest gone ten parse one.'

The two swans followed Gordon and Rosemary a little way along the
towpath, evidently expecting to be fed.  There did not seem much
hope that the Ravenscroft Hotel would be open.  The whole place had
that desolate flyblown air of pleasure resorts in the off-season.
The woodwork of the bungalows was cracking, the white paint was
peeling off, the dusty windows showed bare interiors.  Even the
slot machines that were dotted along the bank were out of order.
There seemed to be another bridge at the other end of the town.
Gordon swore heartily.

'What bloody fools we were not to go in that pub when we had the
chance!'

'Oh, dear!  I'm simply STARVING.  Had we better turn back, do you
think?'

'It's no use, there were no pubs the way we came.  We must keep on.
I suppose the Ravenscroft Hotel's on the other side of that bridge.
If that's a main road there's just a chance it'll be open.
Otherwise we're sunk.'

They dragged their way as far as the bridge.  They were thoroughly
footsore now.  But behold! here at last was what they wanted, for
just beyond the bridge, down a sort of private road, stood a
biggish, smartish hotel, its back lawns running down to the river.
It was obviously open.  Gordon and Rosemary started eagerly towards
it, and then paused, daunted.

'It looks frightfully expensive,' said Rosemary.

It did look expensive.  It was a vulgar pretentious place, all gilt
and white paint--one of those hotels which have overcharging and
bad service written on every brick.  Beside the drive, commanding
the road, a snobbish board announced in gilt lettering:


THE RAVENSCROFT HOTEL

OPEN TO NON-RESIDENTS

LUNCHEONS-TEAS-DINNERS

DANCE HALL AND TENNIS COURTS

PARTIES CATERED FOR


Two gleaming two-seater cars were parked in the drive.  Gordon
quailed.  The money in his pocket seemed to shrink to nothing, this
was the very opposite to the cosy pub they had been looking for.
But he was very hungry.  Rosemary tweaked at his arm.

'It looks a beastly place.  I vote we go on.'

'But we've got to get some food.  It's our last chance.  We shan't
find another pub.'

'The food's always so disgusting in these places.  Beastly cold
beef that tastes as if it had been saved up from last year.  And
they charge you the earth for it.'

'Oh, well, we'll just order bread and cheese and beer.  It always
costs about the same.'

'But they hate you doing that.  They'll try to bully us into having
a proper lunch, you'll see.  We must be firm and just say bread and
cheese.'

'All right, we'll be firm.  Come on.'

They went in, resolved to be firm.  But there was an expensive
smell in the draughty hallway--a smell of chintz, dead flowers,
Thames water, and the rinsings of wine bottles.  It was the
characteristic smell of a riverside hotel.  Gordon's heart sank
lower.  He knew the type of place this was.  It was one of those
desolate hotels which exist all along the motor roads and are
frequented by stockbrokers airing their whores on Sunday
afternoons.  In such places you are insulted and overcharged almost
as a matter of course.  Rosemary shrank nearer to him.  She too was
intimidated.  They saw a door marked 'Saloon' and pushed it open,
thinking it must be the bar.  It was not a bar, however, but a
large, smart, chilly room with corduroy-upholstered chairs and
settees.  You could have mistaken it for an ordinary drawing-room
except that all the ashtrays advertised White Horse whisky.  And
round one of the tables the people from the cars outside--two
blond, flat-headed, fattish men, over-youthfully dressed, and two
disagreeable elegant young women--were sitting, having evidently
just finished lunch.  A waiter, bending over their table, was
serving them with liqueurs.

Gordon and Rosemary had halted in the doorway.  The people at the
table were already eyeing them with offensive upper-middle-class
eyes.  Gordon and Rosemary looked tired and dirty, and they knew
it.  The notion of ordering bread and cheese and beer had almost
vanished from their minds.  In such a place as this you couldn't
possibly say 'Bread and cheese and beer'; 'Lunch' was the only
thing you could say.  There was nothing for it but 'Lunch' or
flight.  The waiter was almost openly contemptuous.  He had summed
them up at a glance as having no money; but also he had divined
that it was in their minds to fly and was determined to stop them
before they could escape.

'Sare?' he demanded, lifting his tray off the table.

Now for it!  Say 'Bread and cheese and beer', and damn the
consequences!  Alas! his courage was gone.  'Lunch' it would have
to be.  With a seeming-careless gesture he thrust his hand into his
pocket.  He was feeling his money to make sure that it was still
there.  Seven and elevenpence left, he knew.  The waiter's eye
followed the movement; Gordon had a hateful feeling that the man
could actually see through the cloth and count the money in his
pocket.  In a tone as lordly as he could make it, he remarked:

'Can we have some lunch, please?'

'Luncheon, sare?  Yes, sare.  Zees way.'

The waiter was a black-haired young man with a very smooth, well-
featured, sallow face.  His dress clothes were excellently cut and
yet unclean-looking, as though he seldom took them off.  He looked
like a Russian prince; probably he was an Englishman and had
assumed a foreign accent because this was proper in a waiter.
Defeated, Rosemary and Gordon followed him to the dining-room,
which was at the back, giving on to the lawn.  It was exactly like
an aquarium.  It was built entirely of greenish glass, and it was
so damp and chilly that you could almost have fancied yourself
under water.  You could both see and smell the river outside.  In
the middle of each of the small round tables there was a bowl of
paper flowers, but at one side, to complete the aquarium effect,
there was a whole florist's stand of evergreens, palms, and
aspidistras and so forth, like dreary water-plants.  In summer such
a room might be pleasant enough; at present, when the sun had gone
behind a cloud, it was merely dank and miserable.  Rosemary was
almost as much afraid of the waiter as Gordon was.  As they sat
down and he turned away for a moment she made a face at his back.

'I'm going to pay for my own lunch,' she whispered to Gordon,
across the table.

'No, you're not.'

'What a horrible place!  The food's sure to be filthy.  I do wish
we hadn't come.'

'Sh!'

The waiter had come back with a flyblown printed menu.  He handed
it to Gordon and stood over him with the menacing air of a waiter
who knows that you have not much money in your pocket.  Gordon's
heart pounded.  If it was a table d'hote lunch at three and
sixpence or even half a crown, they were sunk.  He set his teeth
and looked at the menu.  Thank God!  It was a la carte.  The
cheapest thing on the list was cold beef and salad for one and
sixpence.  He said, or rather mumbled:

'We'll have some cold beef, please.'

The waiter's delicate eyebrows lifted.  He feigned surprise.

'ONLY ze cold beef, sare?'

'Yes that'll do to go on with, anyway.'

'But you will not have ANYSING else, sare?'

'Oh, well.  Bring us some bread, of course.  And butter.'

'But no soup to start wiz, sare?'

'No.  No soup.'

'Nor any fish, sare?  Only ze cold beef?'

'Do we want any fish, Rosemary?  I don't think we do.  No.  No
fish.'

'Nor any sweet to follow, sare?  ONLY ze cold beef?'

Gordon had difficulty in controlling his features.  He thought he
had never hated anyone so much as he hated this waiter.

'We'll tell you afterwards if we want anything else,' he said.

'And you will drink sare?'

Gordon had meant to ask for beer, but he hadn't the courage now.
He had got to win back his prestige after this affair of the cold
beef.

'Bring me the wine list,' he said flatly.

Another flyblown list was produced.  All the wines looked
impossibly expensive.  However, at the very top of the list there
was some nameless table claret at two and nine a bottle.  Gordon
made hurried calculations.  He could just manage two and nine.  He
indicated the wine with his thumbnail.

'Bring us a bottle of this,' he said.

The waiter's eyebrows rose again.  He essayed a stroke of irony.

'You will have ze WHOLE bottle, sare?  You would not prefare ze
half bottle?'

'A whole bottle,' said Gordon coldly.

All in a single delicate movement of contempt the waiter inclined
his head, shrugged his left shoulder, and turned away.  Gordon
could not stand it.  He caught Rosemary's eye across the table.
Somehow or other they had got to put that waiter in his place!  In
a moment the waiter came back, carrying the bottle of cheap wine by
the neck, and half concealing it behind his coat tails, as though
it were something a little indecent or unclean.  Gordon had thought
of a way to avenge himself.  As the waiter displayed the bottle he
put out a hand, felt it, and frowned.

'That's not the way to serve red wine,' he said.

Just for a moment the waiter was taken aback.  'Sare?' he said.

'It's stone cold.  Take the bottle away and warm it.'

'Very good, sare.'

But it was not really a victory.  The waiter did not look abashed.
Was the wine worth warming? his raised eyebrow said.  He bore the
bottle away with easy disdain, making it quite clear to Rosemary
and Gordon that it was bad enough to order the cheapest wine on the
list without making this fuss about it afterwards.

The beef and salad were corpse-cold and did not seem like real food
at all.  They tasted like water.  The rolls, also, though stale,
were damp.  The reedy Thames water seemed to have got into
everything.  It was no surprise that when the wine was opened it
tasted like mud.  But it was alcoholic, that was the great thing.
It was quite a surprise to find how stimulating it was, once you
had got it past your gullet and into your stomach.  After drinking
a glass and a half Gordon felt very much better.  The waiter stood
by the door, ironically patient, his napkin over his arm, trying to
make Gordon and Rosemary uncomfortable by his presence.  At first
he succeeded, but Gordon's back was towards him, and he disregarded
him and presently almost forgot him.  By degrees their courage
returned.  They began to talk more easily and in louder voices.

'Look,' said Gordon.  'Those swans have followed us all the way up
here.'

Sure enough, there were the two swans sailing vaguely to and fro
over the dark green water.  And at this moment the sun burst out
again and the dreary aquarium of a dining-room was flooded with
pleasant greenish light.  Gordon and Rosemary felt suddenly warm
and happy.  They began chattering about nothing, almost as though
the waiter had not been there, and Gordon took up the bottle and
poured out two more glasses of wine.  Over their glasses their eyes
met.  She was looking at him with a sort of yielding irony.  'I'm
your mistress,' her eyes said; 'what a joke!'  Their knees were
touching under the small table; momentarily she squeezed his knee
between her own.  Something leapt inside him; a warm wave of
sensuality and tenderness crept up his body.  He had remembered!
She was his girl, his mistress.  Presently, when they were alone,
in some hidden place in the warm, windless air, he would have her
naked body all for his own at last.  True, all the morning he had
known this, but somehow the knowledge had been unreal.  It was only
now that he grasped it.  Without words said, with a sort of bodily
certainty, he knew that within an hour she would be in his arms,
naked.  As they sat there in the warm light, their knees touching,
their eyes meeting, they felt as though already everything had been
accomplished.  There was deep intimacy between them.  They could
have sat there for hours, just looking at one another and talking
of trivial things that had meanings for them and for nobody else.
They did sit there for twenty minutes or more.  Gordon had
forgotten the waiter--had even forgotten, momentarily, the disaster
of being let in for this wretched lunch that was going to strip him
of every penny he had.  But presently the sun went in, the room
grew grey again, and they realized that it was time to go.

'The bill,' said Gordon, turning half round.

The waiter made a final effort to be offensive.

'Ze bill, sare?  But you do not wish any coffee, sare?'

'No, no coffee.  The bill.'

The waiter retired and came back with a folded slip on a salver.
Gordon opened it.  Six and threepence--and he had exactly seven and
elevenpence in the world!  Of course he had known approximately
what the bill must be, and yet it was a shock now that it came.  He
stood up, felt in his pocket, and took out all his money.  The
sallow young waiter, his salver on his arm, eyed the handful of
money; plainly he divined that it was all Gordon had.  Rosemary
also had got up and come round the table.  She pinched Gordon's
elbow; this was a signal that she would like to pay her share.
Gordon pretended not to notice.  He paid the six and threepence,
and, as he turned away, dropped another shilling on to the salver.
The waiter balanced it for a moment on his hand, flicked it over,
and then slipped it into his waistcoat pocket with the air of
covering up something unmentionable.

As they went down the passage, Gordon felt dismayed, helpless--
dazed, almost.  All his money gone at a single swoop!  It was a
ghastly thing to happen.  If only they had not come to this
accursed place!  The whole day was ruined now--and all for the sake
of a couple of plates of cold beef and a bottle of muddy wine!
Presently there would be tea to think about, and he had only six
cigarettes left, and there were the bus fares back to Slough and
God knew what else; and he had just eightpence to pay for the lot!
They got outside the hotel feeling as if they had been kicked out
and the door slammed behind them.  All the warm intimacy of a
moment ago was gone.  Everything seemed different now that they
were outside.  Their blood seemed to grow suddenly cooler in the
open air.  Rosemary walked ahead of him, rather nervous, not
speaking.  She was half frightened now by the thing she had
resolved to do.  He watched her strong delicate limbs moving.
There was her body that he had wanted so long; but now when the
time had come it only daunted him.  He wanted her to be his, he
wanted to HAVE HAD her, but he wished it were over and done with.
It was an effort--a thing he had got to screw himself up to.  It
was strange that that beastly business of the hotel bill could have
upset him so completely.  The easy carefree mood of the morning was
shattered; in its place there had come back the hateful, harassing,
familiar thing--worry about money.  In a minute he would have to
own up that he had only eightpence left; he would have to borrow
money off her to get them home; it would be squalid and shameful.
Only the wine inside him kept up his courage.  The warmth of the
wine, and the hateful feeling of having only eightpence left,
warred together in his body, neither getting the better of the
other.

They walked rather slowly, but soon they were away from the river
and on higher ground again.  Each searched desperately for
something to say and could think of nothing.  He came level with
her, took her hand, and wound her fingers within his own.  Like
that they felt better.  But his heart beat painfully, his entrails
were constricted.  He wondered whether she felt the same.

'There doesn't seem to be a soul about,' she said at last.

'It's Sunday afternoon.  They're all asleep under the aspidistra,
after roast beef and Yorkshire.'

There was another silence.  They walked on fifty yards or so.  With
difficulty mastering his voice, he managed to say:

'It's extraordinarily warm.  We might sit down for a bit if we can
find a place.'

'Yes, all right.  If you like.'

Presently they came to a small copse on the left of the road.  It
looked dead and empty, nothing growing under the naked trees.  But
at the corner of the copse, on the far side, there was a great
tangled patch of sloe or blackthorn bushes.  He put his arm round
her without saying anything and turned her in that direction.
There was a gap in the hedge with some barbed wire strung across
it.  He held the wire up for her and she slipped nimbly under it.
His heart leapt again.  How supple and strong she was!  But as he
climbed over the wire to follow her, the eightpence--a sixpence and
two pennies--clinked in his pocket, daunting him anew.

When they got to the bushes they found a natural alcove.  On three
sides were beds of thorns, leafless but impenetrable, and on the
other side you looked downhill over a sweep of naked ploughed
fields.  At the bottom of the hill stood a low-roofed cottage, tiny
as a child's toy, its chimneys smokeless.  Not a creature was
stirring anywhere.  You could not have been more alone than in such
a place.  The grass was the fine mossy stuff that grows under
trees.

'We ought to have brought a mackintosh,' he said.  He had knelt
down.

'It doesn't matter.  The ground's fairly dry.'

He pulled her to the ground beside him, kissed her, pulled off the
flat felt hat, lay upon her breast to breast, kissed her face all
over.  She lay under him, yielding rather than responding.  She did
not resist when his hand sought her breasts.  But in her heart she
was still frightened.  She would do it--oh, yes! she would keep her
implied promise, she would not draw back; but all the same she was
frightened.  And at heart he too was half reluctant.  It dismayed
him to find how little, at this moment, he really wanted her.  The
money-business still unnerved him.  How can you make love when you
have only eightpence in your pocket and are thinking about it all
the time?  Yet in a way he wanted her.  Indeed, he could not do
without her.  His life would be a different thing when once they
were really lovers.  For a long time he lay on her breast, her head
turned sideways, his face against her neck and hair, attempting
nothing further.

Then the sun came out again.  It was getting low in the sky now.
The warm light poured over them as though a membrane across the sky
had broken.  It had been a little cold on the grass, really, with
the sun behind the clouds; but now once again it was almost as warm
as summer.  Both of them sat up to exclaim at it.

'Oh, Gordon, look!  Look how the sun's lighting everything up!'

As the clouds melted away a widening yellow beam slid swiftly
across the valley, gilding everything in its path.  Grass that had
been dull green shone suddenly emerald.  The empty cottage below
sprang out into warm colours, purply-blue of tiles, cherry-red of
brick.  Only the fact that no birds were singing reminded you that
it was winter.  Gordon put his arm round Rosemary and pulled her
hard against him.  They sat cheek to cheek, looking down the hill.
He turned her round and kissed her.

'You do like me, don't you?'

'Adore you, silly.'

'And you're going to be nice to me, aren't you?'

'Nice to you?'

'Let me do what I want with you?'

'Yes, I expect so.'

'Anything?'

'Yes, all right.  Anything.'

He pressed her back upon the grass.  It was quite different now.
The warmth of the sun seemed to have got into their bones.  'Take
your clothes off, there's a dear,' he whispered.  She did it
readily enough.  She had no shame before him.  Besides, it was so
warm and the place was so solitary that it did not matter how many
clothes you took off.  They spread her clothes out and made a sort
of bed for her to lie on.  Naked, she lay back, her hands behind
her head, her eyes shut, smiling slightly, as though she had
considered everything and were at peace in her mind.  For a long
time he knelt and gazed at her body.  Its beauty startled him.  She
looked much younger naked than with her clothes on.  Her face,
thrown back, with eyes shut, looked almost childish.  He moved
closer to her.  Once again the coins clinked in his pocket.  Only
eightpence left!  Trouble coming presently.  But he wouldn't think
of it now.  Get on with it, that's the great thing, get on with it
and damn the future!  He put an arm beneath her and laid his body
to hers.

'May I?--now?'

'Yes.  All right.'

'You're not frightened?'

'No.'

'I'll be as gentle as I can with you.'

'It doesn't matter.'

A moment later:

'Oh, Gordon, no!  No, no, no!'

'What?  What is it?'

'No, Gordon, no!  You mustn't!  NO!'

She put her hands against him and pushed him violently back.  Her
face looked remote, frightened, almost hostile.  It was terrible to
feel her push him away at such a moment.  It was as though cold
water had been dashed all over him.  He fell back from her,
dismayed, hurriedly rearranging his clothes.

'What is it?  What's the matter?'

'Oh, Gordon!  I thought you--oh, dear!'

She threw her arm over her face and rolled over on her side, away
from him, suddenly ashamed.

'What is it?' he repeated.

'How could you be so THOUGHTLESS?'

'What do you mean--thoughtless?'

'Oh! you know what I mean!'

His heart shrank.  He did know what she meant; but he had never
thought of it till this moment.  And of course--oh, yes!--he ought
to have thought of it.  He stood up and turned away from her.
Suddenly he knew that he could go no further with this business.
In a wet field on a Sunday afternoon--and in mid-winter at that!
Impossible!  It seemed so right, so natural only a minute ago; now
it seemed merely squalid and ugly.

'I didn't expect THIS,' he said bitterly.

'But I couldn't help it, Gordon!  You ought to have--you know.'

'You don't think I go in for that kind of thing, do you?'

'But what else can we do?  I can't have a baby, can I?'

'You must take your chance.'

'Oh, Gordon, how impossible you are!'

She lay looking up at him, her face full of distress, too overcome
for the moment even to remember that she was naked.  His
disappointment had turned to anger.  There you are, you see!  Money
again!  Even the most secret action of your life you don't escape
it; you've still got to spoil everything with filthy cold-blooded
precautions for money's sake.  Money, money, always money!  Even in
the bridal bed, the finger of the money-god intruding!  In the
heights or in the depths, he is there.  He walked a pace or two up
and down, his hands in his pockets.

'Money again, you see!' he said.  'Even at a moment like this it's
got the power to stand over us and bully us.  Even when we're alone
and miles from anywhere, with not a soul to see us.'

'What's MONEY got to do with it?'

'I tell you it'd never enter your head to worry about a baby if it
wasn't for the money.  You'd WANT the baby if it wasn't for that.
You say you "can't" have a baby.  What do you mean, you "can't"
have a baby?  You mean you daren't; because you'd lose your job and
I've got no money and all of us would starve.  This birth-control
business!  It's just another way they've found out of bullying us.
And you want to acquiesce in it, apparently.'

'But what am I to do, Gordon?  What am I to do?'

At this moment the sun disappeared behind the clouds.  It became
perceptibly colder.  After all, the scene was grotesque--the naked
woman lying in the grass, the dressed man standing moodily by with
his hands in his pockets.  She'd catch her death of cold in another
moment, lying there like that.  The whole thing was absurd and
indecent.

'But what else am I to do?' she repeated.

'I should think you might start by putting your clothes on,' he
said coldly.

He had only said it to avenge his irritation; but its result was to
make her so painfully and obviously embarrassed that he had to turn
his back on her.  She had dressed herself in a very few moments.
As she knelt lacing up her shoes he heard her sniff once or twice.
She was on the point of crying and was struggling to restrain
herself.  He felt horribly ashamed.  He would have liked to throw
himself on his knees beside her, put his arms round her, and ask
her pardon.  But he could do nothing of the kind; the scene had
left him lumpish and awkward.  It was with difficulty that he could
command his voice even for the most banal remark.

'Are you ready?' he said flatly.

'Yes.'

They went back to the road, climbed through the wire, and started
down the hill without another word.  Fresh clouds were rolling
across the sun.  It was getting much colder.  Another hour and the
early dusk would have fallen.  They reached the bottom of the hill
and came in sight of the Ravenscroft Hotel, scene of their
disaster.

'Where are we going?' said Rosemary in a small sulky voice.

'Back to Slough, I suppose.  We must cross the bridge and have a
look at the signposts.'

They scarcely spoke again till they had gone several miles.
Rosemary was embarrassed and miserable.  A number of times she
edged closer to him, meaning to take his arm, but he edged away
from her; and so they walked abreast with almost the width of the
road between them.  She imagined that she had offended him
mortally.  She supposed that it was because of his disappointment--
because she had pushed him away at the critical moment--that he was
angry with her; she would have apologized if he had given her a
quarter of a chance.  But as a matter of fact he was scarcely
thinking of this any longer.  His mind had turned away from that
side of things.  It was the money-business that was troubling him
now--the fact that he had only eightpence in his pocket.  In a very
little while he would have to confess it.  There would be the bus
fares from Farnham to Slough, and tea in Slough, and cigarettes,
and more bus fares and perhaps another meal when they got back to
London; and just eightpence to cover the lot!  He would have to
borrow from Rosemary after all.  And that was so damned humiliating.
It is hateful to have to borrow money off someone you have just been
quarrelling with.  What nonsense it made of all his fine attitudes!
There was he, lecturing her, putting on superior airs, pretending to
be shocked because she took contraception for granted; and the next
moment turning round and asking her for money!  But there you are,
you see, that's what money can do. There is no attitude that money
or the lack of it cannot puncture.

By half past four it was almost completely dark.  They tramped
along misty roads where there was no illumination save the cracks
of cottage windows and the yellow beam of an occasional car.  It
was getting beastly cold, too, but they had walked four miles and
the exercise had warmed them.  It was impossible to go on being
unsociable any longer.  They began to talk more easily and by
degrees they edged closer together.  Rosemary took Gordon's arm.
Presently she stopped him and swung him round to face her.

'Gordon, WHY are you so beastly to me?'

'How am I beastly to you?'

'Coming all this way without speaking a word!'

'Oh, well!'

'Are you still angry with me because of what happened just now?'

'No.  I was never angry with you.  YOU'RE not to blame.'

She looked up at him, trying to divine the expression of his face
in the almost pitch darkness.  He drew her against him, and, as she
seemed to expect it, tilted her face back and kissed her.  She
clung to him eagerly; her body melted against his.  She had been
waiting for this, it seemed.

'Gordon, you do love me, don't you?'

'Of course I do.'

'Things went wrong somehow.  I couldn't help it.  I got frightened
suddenly.'

'It doesn't matter.  Another time it'll be all right.'

She was lying limp against him, her head on his breast.  He could
feel her heart beating.  It seemed to flutter violently, as though
she were taking some decision.

'I don't care,' she said indistinctly, her face buried in his coat.

'Don't care about what?'

'The baby.  I'll risk it.  You can do what you like with me.'

At these surrendering words a weak desire raised itself in him and
died away at once.  He knew why she had said it.  It was not
because, at this moment, she really wanted to be made love to.  It
was from a mere generous impulse to let him know that she loved him
and would take a dreaded risk rather than disappoint him.

'Now?' he said.

'Yes, if you like.'

He considered.  He so wanted to be sure that she was his!  But the
cold night air flowed over them.  Behind the hedges the long grass
would be wet and chill.  This was not the time or the place.
Besides, that business of the eightpence had usurped his mind.  He
was not in the mood any longer.

'I can't,' he said finally.

'You can't!  But, Gordon!  I thought--'

'I know.  But it's all different now.'

'You're still upset?'

'Yes.  In a way.'

'Why?'

He pushed her a little away from him.  As well have the explanation
now as later.  Nevertheless he was so ashamed that he mumbled
rather than said:

'I've got a beastly thing to say to you.  It's been worrying me all
the way along.'

'What is it?'

'It's this.  Can you lend me some money?  I'm absolutely cleaned
out.  I had just enough money for today, but that beastly hotel
bill upset everything.  I've only eightpence left.'

Rosemary was amazed.  She broke right out of his arms in her
amazement.

'Only eightpence left!  What ARE you talking about?  What does it
matter if you've only eightpence left?'

'Don't I tell you I shall have to borrow money off you in another
minute?  You'll have to pay for your own bus fares, and my bus
fares, and your tea and Lord knows what.  And I asked you to come
out with me!  You're supposed to be my guest.  It's bloody.'

'Your GUEST!  Oh, Gordon.  Is THAT what's been worrying you all
this time?'

'Yes.'

'Gordon, you ARE a baby!  How can you let yourself be worried by a
thing like that?  As though I minded lending you money!  Aren't I
always telling you I want to pay my share when we go out together?'

'Yes, and you know how I hate your paying.  We had that out the
other night.'

'Oh, how absurd, how absurd you are!  Do you think there's anything
to be ashamed of in having no money?'

'Of course there is!  It's the only thing in the world there IS to
be ashamed of.'

'But what's it got to do with you and me making love, anyway?  I
don't understand you.  First you want to and then you don't want
to.  What's money got to do with it?'

'Everything.'

He wound her arm in his and started down the road.  She would never
understand.  Nevertheless he had got to explain.

'Don't you understand that one isn't a full human being--that one
doesn't FEEL a human being--unless one's got money in one's
pocket?'

'No.  I think that's just silly.'

'It isn't that I don't want to make love to you.  I do.  But I tell
you I can't make love to you when I've only eightpence in my
pocket.  At least when you know I've only eightpence.  I just can't
do it.  It's physically impossible.'

'But why?  Why?'

'You'll find it in Lempriere,' he said obscurely.

That settled it.  They talked no more about it.  For the second
time he had behaved grossly badly and yet he had made her feel as
if it were she who was in the wrong.  They walked on.  She did not
understand him; on the other hand, she forgave him everything.
Presently they reached Farnham Common, and, after a wait at the
cross road, got a bus to Slough.  In the darkness, as the bus
loomed near, Rosemary found Gordon's hand and slipped half a crown
into it, so that he might pay the fares and not be shamed in public
by letting a woman pay for him.

For his own part Gordon would sooner have walked to Slough and
saved the bus fares, but he knew Rosemary would refuse.  In Slough,
also, he was for taking the train straight back to London, but
Rosemary said indignantly that she wasn't going to go without her
tea, so they went to a large, dreary, draughty hotel near the
station.  Tea, with little wilting sandwiches and rock cakes like
balls of putty, was two shillings a head.  It was torment to Gordon
to let her pay for his food.  He sulked, ate nothing, and, after a
whispered argument, insisted on contributing his eightpence towards
the cost of the tea.

It was seven o'clock when they took the train back to London.  The
train was full of tired hikers in khaki shorts.  Rosemary and
Gordon did not talk much.  They sat close together, Rosemary with
her arm twined through his, playing with his hand, Gordon looking
out of the window.  People in the carriage eyed them, wondering
what they had quarrelled about.  Gordon watched the lamp-starred
darkness streaming past.  So the day to which he had looked forward
was ended.  And now back to Willowbed Road, with a penniless week
ahead.  For a whole week, unless some miracle happened, he wouldn't
even be able to buy himself a cigarette.  What a bloody fool he had
been!  Rosemary was not angry with him.  By the pressure of her
hand she tried to make it clear to him that she loved him.  His
pale discontented face, turned half away from her, his shabby coat,
and his unkempt mouse-coloured hair that wanted cutting more than
ever, filled her with profound pity.  She felt more tenderly
towards him than she would have done if everything had gone well,
because in her feminine way she grasped that he was unhappy and
that life was difficult for him.

'See me home, will you?' she said as they got out at Paddington.

'If you don't mind walking.  I haven't got the fare.'

'But let ME pay the fare.  Oh, dear!  I suppose you won't.  But how
are you going to get home yourself?'

'Oh, I'll walk.  I know the way.  It's not very far.'

'I hate to think of you walking all that way.  You look so tired.
Be a dear and let me pay your fare home.  DO!'

'No.  You've paid quite enough for me already.'

'Oh, dear!  You are so silly!'

They halted at the entrance to the Underground.  He took her hand.
'I suppose we must say good-bye for the present,' he said.

'Good-bye, Gordon dear.  Thanks ever so much for taking me out.  It
was such fun this morning.'

'Ah, this morning!  It was different then.'  His mind went back to
the morning hours, when they had been alone on the road together
and there was still money in his pocket.  Compunction seized him.
On the whole he had behaved badly.  He pressed her hand a little
tighter.  'You're not angry with me, are you?'

'No, silly, of course not.'

'I didn't mean to be beastly to you.  It was the money.  It's
always the money.'

'Never mind, it'll be better next time.  We'll go to some better
place.  We'll go down to Brighton for the week-end, or something.'

'Perhaps, when I've got the money.  You will write soon, won't
you?'

'Yes.'

'Your letters are the only things that keep me going.  Tell me when
you'll write, so that I can have your letter to look forward to.'

'I'll write tomorrow night and post it on Tuesday.  Then you'll get
it last post on Tuesday night.'

'Then good-bye, Rosemary dear.'

'Good-bye, Gordon darling.'

He left her at the booking-office.  When he had gone twenty yards
he felt a hand laid on his arm.  He turned sharply.  It was
Rosemary.  She thrust a packet of twenty Gold Flake, which she had
bought at the tobacco kiosk, into his coat pocket and ran back to
the Underground before he could protest.

He trailed homeward through the wastes of Marylebone and Regent's
Park.  It was the fag-end of the day.  The streets were dark and
desolate, with that strange listless feeling of Sunday night when
people are more tired after a day of idleness than after a day of
work.  It was vilely cold, too.  The wind had risen when the night
fell.  Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over.  Gordon was footsore,
having walked a dozen or fifteen miles, and also hungry.  He had
had little food all day.  In the morning he had hurried off without
a proper breakfast, and the lunch at the Ravenscroft Hotel wasn't
the kind of meal that did you much good; since then he had had no
solid food.  However, there was no hope of getting anything when he
got home.  He had told Mother Wisbeach that he would be away all
day.

When he reached the Hampstead Road he had to wait on the kerb to
let a stream of cars go past.  Even here everything seemed dark and
gloomy, in spite of the glaring lamps and the cold glitter of the
jewellers' windows.  The raw wind pierced his thin clothes, making
him shiver.  Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over The bending
poplars, newly bare.  He had finished that poem, all except the
last two lines.  He thought again of those hours this morning--the
empty misty roads, the feeling of freedom and adventure, of having
the whole day and the whole country before you in which to wander
at will.  It was having money that did it, of course.  Seven and
elevenpence he had had in his pocket this morning.  It had been a
brief victory over the money-god; a morning's apostasy, a holiday
in the groves of Ashtaroth.  But such things never last.  Your
money goes and your freedom with it.  Circumcise ye your foreskins,
saith the Lord.  And back we creep, duly snivelling.

Another shoal of cars swam past.  One in particular caught his eye,
a long slender thing, elegant as a swallow, all gleaming blue and
silver; a thousand guineas it would have cost, he thought.  A blue-
clad chauffeur sat at the wheel, upright, immobile, like some
scornful statue.  At the back, in the pink-lit interior, four
elegant young people, two youths, and two girls, were smoking
cigarettes and laughing.  He had a glimpse of sleek bunny-faces;
faces of ravishing pinkness and smoothness, lit by that peculiar
inner glow that can never be counterfeited, the soft warm radiance
of money.

He crossed the road.  No food tonight.  However, there was still
oil in the lamp, thank God; he would have a secret cup of tea when
he got back.  At this moment he saw himself and his life without
saving disguises.  Every night the same--back to the cold lonely
bedroom and the grimy littered sheets of the poem that never got
any further.  It was a blind alley.  He would never finish London
Pleasures, he would never marry Rosemary, he would never set his
life in order.  He would only drift and sink, drift and sink, like
the others of his family; but worse than them--down, down into some
dreadful sub-world that as yet he could only dimly imagine.  It was
what he had chosen when he declared war on money.  Serve the money-
god or go under; there is no other rule.

Something deep below made the stone street shiver.  The tube-train,
sliding through middle earth.  He had a vision of London, of the
western world; he saw a thousand million slaves toiling and
grovelling about the throne of money.  The earth is ploughed, ships
sail, miners sweat in dripping tunnels underground, clerks hurry
for the eight-fifteen with the fear of the boss eating at their
vitals.  And even in bed with their wives they tremble and obey.
Obey whom?  The money-priesthood, the pink-faced masters of the
world.  The Upper Crust.  A welter of sleek young rabbits in
thousand guinea motor cars, of golfing stockbrokers and
cosmopolitan financiers, of Chancery lawyers and fashionable Nancy
boys, of bankers, newspaper peers, novelists of all four sexes,
American pugilists, lady aviators, film stars, bishops, titled
poets, and Chicago gorillas.

When he had gone another fifty yards the rhyme for the final stanza
of his poem occurred to him.  He walked homeward, repeating the
poem to himself:


Sharply the menacing wind sweeps over
The bending poplars, newly bare,
And the dark ribbons of the chimneys
Veer downward; flicked by whips of air,

Torn posters flutter; coldly sound
The boom of trains and the rattle of hooves,
And the clerks who hurry to the station
Look, shuddering, over the eastern rooves,

Thinking, each one, 'Here comes the winter!
Please God I keep my job this year!'
And bleakly, as the cold strikes through
Their entrails like an icy spear,

They think of rent, rates, season tickets,
Insurance, coal, the skivvy's wages,
Boots, school-bills, and the next instalment
Upon the two twin beds from Drage's.

For if in careless summer days
In groves of Ashtaroth we whored,
Repentant now, when winds blow cold,
We kneel before our rightful lord;

The lord of all, the money-god,
Who rules us blood and hand and brain,
Who gives the roof that stops the wind,
And, giving, takes away again;

Who spies with jealous, watchful care,
Our thoughts, our dreams, our secret ways,
Who picks our words and cuts our clothes,
And maps the pattern of our days;

Who chills our anger, curbs our hope,
And buys our lives and pays with toys,
Who claims as tribute broken faith,
Accepted insults, muted joys;

Who binds with chains the poet's wit,
The navvy's strength, the soldier's pride,
And lays the sleek, estranging shield
Between the lover and his bride.



8


As the clock struck one Gordon slammed the shop door to and
hurried, almost ran, to the branch of the Westminster Bank down the
street.

With a half-conscious gesture of caution he was clutching the lapel
of his coat, holding it tight against him.  In there, stowed away
in his right-hand inner pocket, was an object whose very existence
he partly doubted.  It was a stout blue envelope with an American
stamp; in the envelope was a cheque for fifty dollars; and the
cheque was made out to 'Gordon Comstock'!

He could feel the square shape of the envelope outlined against his
body as clearly as though it had been red hot.  All the morning he
had felt it there, whether he touched it or whether he did not; he
seemed to have developed a special patch of sensitiveness in the
skin below his right breast.  As often as once in ten minutes he
had taken the cheque out of its envelope and anxiously examined it.
After all, cheques are tricky things.  It would be frightful if
there turned out to be some hitch about the date or the signature.
Besides, he might lose it--it might even vanish of its own accord
like fairy gold.

The cheque had come from the Californian Review, that American
magazine to which, weeks or months ago, he had despairingly sent a
poem.  He had almost forgotten about the poem, it had been so long
away, until this morning their letter had come sailing out of the
blue.  And what a letter!  No English editor ever writes letters
like that.  They were 'very favorably impressed' by his poem.  They
would 'endeavor' to include it in their next number.  Would he
'favor' them by showing them some more of his work?  (Would he?
Oh, boy!--as Flaxman would say.)  And the cheque had come with it.
It seemed the most monstrous folly, in this year of blight 1934,
that anyone should pay fifty dollars for a poem.  However, there
it was; and there was the cheque, which looked perfectly genuine
however often he inspected it.

He would have no peace of mind till the cheque was cashed--for
quite possibly the bank would refuse it--but already a stream of
visions was flowing through his mind.  Visions of girls' faces,
visions of cobwebby claret bottles and quart pots of beer, visions
of a new suit and his overcoat out of pawn, visions of a week-end
at Brighton with Rosemary, visions of the crisp, crackling five
pound note which he was going to give to Julia.  Above all, of
course, that fiver for Julia.  It was almost the first thing he had
thought of when the cheque came.  Whatever else he did with the
money, he must give Julia half of it.  It was only the barest
justice, considering how much he had 'borrowed' from her in all
these years.  All the morning the thought of Julia and the money he
owed her had been cropping up in his mind at odd moments.  It was a
vaguely distasteful thought, however.  He would forget about it for
half an hour at a time, would plan a dozen ways of spending his ten
pounds to the uttermost farthing, and then suddenly he would
remember about Julia.  Good old Julia!  Julia should have her
share.  A fiver at the very least.  Even that was not a tenth of
what he owed her.  For the twentieth time, with a faint malaise, he
registered the thought: five quid for Julia.

The bank made no trouble about the cheque.  Gordon had no banking
account, but they knew him well, for Mr McKechnie banked there.
They had cashed editors' cheques for Gordon before.  There was only
a minute's consultation, and then the cashier came back.

'Notes, Mr Comstock?'

'One five pound, and the rest pounds, please.'

The flimsy luscious fiver and the five clean pound notes slid
rustling under the brass rail.  And after them the cashier pushed a
little pile of half-crowns and pennies.  In lordly style Gordon
shot the coins into his pocket without even counting them.  That
was a bit of backsheesh.  He had only expected ten pounds for fifty
dollars.  The dollar must be above par.  The five pound note,
however, he carefully folded up and stowed away in the American
envelope.  That was Julia's fiver.  It was sacrosanct.  He would
post it to her presently.

He did not go home for dinner.  Why chew leathery beef in the
aspidistral dining-room when he had ten quid in pocket--five quid,
rather?  (He kept forgetting that half the money was already
mortgaged to Julia.)  For the moment he did not bother to post
Julia's five pounds.  This evening would be soon enough.  Besides,
he rather enjoyed the feeling of it in his pocket.  It was queer
how different you felt with all that money in your pocket.  Not
opulent, merely, but reassured, revivified, reborn.  He felt a
different person from what he had been yesterday.  He WAS a
different person.  He was no longer the downtrodden wretch who made
secret cups of tea over the oil stove at 31 Willowbed Road.  He was
Gordon Comstock, the poet, famous on both sides of the Atlantic.
Publications:  Mice (1932), London Pleasures (1935).  He thought
with perfect confidence of London Pleasures now.  In three months
it should see the light.  Demy octavo, white buckram covers.  There
was nothing that he did not feel equal to now that his luck had
turned.

He strolled into the Prince of Wales for a bite of food.  A cut
off the joint and two veg., one and twopence, a pint of pale ale
ninepence, twenty Gold Flakes a shilling.  Even after that
extravagance he still had well over ten pounds in hand--or rather,
well over five pounds.  Beer-warmed, he sat and meditated on the
things you can do with five pounds.  A new suit, a week-end in the
country, a day-trip to Paris, five rousing drunks, ten dinners in
Soho restaurants.  At this point it occurred to him that he and
Rosemary and Ravelston must certainly have dinner together tonight.
Just to celebrate his stroke of luck; after all, it isn't every day
that ten pounds--five pounds--drops out of the sky into your lap.
The thought of the three of them together, with good food and wine
and money no object took hold of him as something not to be
resisted.  He had just a tiny twinge of caution.  Mustn't spend ALL
his money, of course.  Still, he could afford a quid--two quid.  In
a couple of minutes he had got Ravelston on the pub phone.

'Is that you, Ravelston?  I say, Ravelston!  Look here, you've got
to have dinner with me tonight.'

From the other end of the line Ravelston faintly demurred.  'No,
dash it!  You have dinner with ME.'  But Gordon overbore him.
Nonsense!  Ravelston had got to have dinner with HIM tonight.
Unwillingly, Ravelston assented.  All right, yes, thanks; he'd like
it very much.  There was a sort of apologetic misery in his voice.
He guessed what had happened.  Gordon had got hold of money from
somewhere and was squandering it immediately; as usual, Ravelston
felt he hadn't the right to interfere.  Where should they go?
Gordon was demanding.  Ravelston began to speak in praise of those
jolly little Soho restaurants where you get such a wonderful dinner
for half a crown.  But the Soho restaurants sounded beastly as soon
as Ravelston mentioned them.  Gordon wouldn't hear of it.  Nonsense!
They must go somewhere decent.  Let's do it all regardless, was his
private thought; might as well spend two quid--three quid, even.
Where did Ravelston generally go?  Modigliani's, admitted Ravelston.
But Modigliani's was very--but no! not even over the phone could
Ravelston frame that hateful word 'expensive'.  How remind Gordon
of his poverty?  Gordon mightn't care for Modigliani's, he
euphemistically said.  But Gordon was satisfied.  Modigliani's?
Right you are--half past eight.  Good!  After all, if he spent even
three quid on the dinner he'd still have two quid to buy himself a
new pair of shoes and a vest and a pair of pants.

He had fixed it up with Rosemary in another five minutes.  The New
Albion did not like their employees being rung up on the phone, but
it did not matter once in a way.  Since that disastrous Sunday
journey, five days ago, he had heard from her once but had not seen
her.  She answered eagerly when she heard whose voice it was.
Would she have dinner with him tonight?  Of course!  What fun!
And so in ten minutes the whole thing was settled.  He had always
wanted Rosemary and Ravelston to meet, but somehow had never been
able to contrive it.  These things are so much easier when you've
got a little money to spend.

The taxi bore him westward through the darkling streets.  A three-
mile journey--still, he could afford it.  Why spoil the ship for a
ha'porth of tar?  He had dropped that notion of spending only two
pounds tonight.  He would spend three pounds, three pounds ten--
four pounds if he felt like it.  Slap up and regardless--that was
the idea.  And, oh! by the way! Julia's fiver.  He hadn't sent it
yet.  No matter.  Send it first thing in the morning.  Good old
Julia!  She should have her fiver.

How voluptuous were the taxi cushions under his bum!  He lolled
this way and that.  He had been drinking, of course--had had two
quick ones, or possibly three, before coming away.  The taxi-driver
was a stout philosophic man with a weather-beaten face and a
knowing eye.  He and Gordon understood one another.  They had
palled up in the bar where Gordon was having his quick ones.  As
they neared the West End the taximan drew up, unbidden, at a
discreet pub on a corner.  He knew what was in Gordon's mind.
Gordon could do with a quick one.  So could the taximan.  But the
drinks were on Gordon--that too was understood.

'You anticipated my thoughts,' said Gordon, climbing out.

'Yes, sir.'

'I could just about do with a quick one.'

'Thought you might, sir.'

'And could you manage one yourself, do you think?'

'Where there's a will there's a way,' said the taximan.

'Come inside,' said Gordon.

They leaned matily on the brass-edged bar, elbow to elbow, lighting
two of the taximan's cigarettes.  Gordon felt witty and expansive.
He would have liked to tell the taximan the history of his life.
The white-aproned barman hastened towards them.

'Yes sir?' said the barman.

'Gin,' said Gordon.

'Make it two,' said the taximan.

More matily than ever, they clinked glasses.

'Many happy returns,' said Gordon.

'Your birthday today, sir?'

'Only metaphorically.  My re-birthday, so to speak.'

'I never had much education,' said the taximan.

'I was speaking in parables,' said Gordon.

'English is good enough for me,' said the taximan.

'It was the tongue of Shakespeare,' said Gordon.

'Literary gentleman, are you, sir, by any chance?'

'Do I look as moth-eaten as all that?'

'Not moth-eaten, sir.  Only intellectual-like.'

'You're quite right.  A poet.'

'Poet!  It takes all sorts to make a world, don't it now?' said the
taximan.

'And a bloody good world it is,' said Gordon.

His thoughts moved lyrically tonight.  They had another gin and
presently went back to the taxi all but arm in arm, after yet
another gin.  That made five gins Gordon had had this evening.
There was an ethereal feeling in his veins; the gin seemed to be
flowing there, mingled with his blood.  He lay back in the corner
of the seat, watching the great blazing skysigns swim across the
bluish dark.  The evil red and blue of the Neon lights pleased him
at this moment.  How smoothly the taxi glided!  More like a gondola
than a car.  It was having money that did that.  Money greased the
wheels.  He thought of the evening ahead of him; good food, good
wine, good talk--above all, no worrying about money.  No damned
niggling with sixpences and 'We can't afford this' and 'We can't
afford that!'  Rosemary and Ravelston would try to stop him being
extravagant.  But he would shut them up.  He'd spend every penny he
had if he felt like it.  Ten whole quid to bust!  At least, five
quid.  The thought of Julia passed flickeringly through his mind
and disappeared again.

He was quite sober when they got to Modigliani's.  The monstrous
commissionaire, like a great glittering waxwork with the minimum of
joints, stepped stiffly forward to open the taxi door.  His grim
eye looked askance at Gordon's clothes.  Not that you were expected
to 'dress' at Modigliani's.  They were tremendously Bohemian at
Modigliani's, of course; but there are ways and ways of being
Bohemian, and Gordon's way was the wrong way.  Gordon did not care.
He bade the taximan an affectionate farewell, and tipped him half a
crown over his fare, whereat the commissionaire's eye looked a
little less grim.  At this moment Ravelston emerged from the
doorway.  The commissionaire knew Ravelston, of course.  He lounged
out on to the pavement, a tall distinguished figure, aristocratically
shabby, his eye rather moody.  He was worrying already about the
money this dinner was going to cost Gordon.

'Ah, there you are, Gordon!'

'Hullo, Ravelston!  Where's Rosemary?'

'Perhaps she's waiting inside.  I don't know her by sight, you
know.  But I say, Gordon, look here!  Before we go in, I wanted--'

'Ah, look, there she is!'

She was coming towards them, swift and debonair.  She threaded her
way through the crowd with the air of some neat little destroyer
gliding between large clumsy cargo-boats.  And she was nicely
dressed, as usual.  The sub-shovel hat was cocked at its most
provocative angle.  Gordon's heart stirred.  There was a girl for
you!  He was proud that Ravelston should see her.  She was very gay
tonight.  It was written all over her that she was not going to
remind herself or Gordon of their last disastrous encounter.
Perhaps she laughed and talked just a little too vivaciously as
Gordon introduced them and they went inside.  But Ravelston had
taken a liking to her immediately.  Indeed, everyone who met her
did take a liking to Rosemary.  The inside of the restaurant
overawed Gordon for a moment.  It was so horribly, artistically
smart.  Dark gate-leg tables, pewter candlesticks, pictures by
modern French painters on the walls.  One, a street scene, looked
like a Utrillo.  Gordon stiffened his shoulders.  Damn it, what was
there to be afraid of?  The five pound note was tucked away in its
envelope in his pocket.  It was Julia's five pounds, of course;
he wasn't going to spend it.  Still, its presence gave him moral
support.  It was a kind of talisman.  They were making for the
corner table--Ravelston's favourite table--at the far end.
Ravelston took Gordon by the arm and drew him a little back,
out of Rosemary's hearing.

'Gordon, look here!'

'What?'

'Look here, you're going to have dinner with ME tonight.'

'Bosh!  This is on me.'

'I do wish you would.  I hate to see you spending all that money.'

'We won't talk about money tonight,' said Gordon.

'Fifty-fifty, then,' pleaded Ravelston.

'It's on me,' said Gordon firmly.

Ravelston subsided.  The fat, white-haired Italian waiter was
bowing and smiling beside the corner table.  But it was at
Ravelston, not at Gordon, that he smiled.  Gordon sat down with the
feeling that he must assert himself quickly.  He waved away the
menu which the waiter had produced.

'We must settle what we're going to drink first,' he said.

'Beer for me,' said Ravelston, with a sort of gloomy haste.
'Beer's the only drink I care about.'

'Me too,' echoed Rosemary.

'Oh, rot!  We've got to have some wine.  What do you like, red or
white?  Give me the wine list,' he said to the waiter.

'Then let's have a plain Bordeaux.  Medoc or St Julien or
something,' said Ravelston.

'I adore St Julien,' said Rosemary, who thought she remembered that
St Julien was always the cheapest wine on the list.

Inwardly, Gordon damned their eyes.  There you are, you see!  They
were in league against him already.  They were trying to prevent
him from spending his money.  There was going to be that deadly,
hateful atmosphere of 'You can't afford it' hanging over everything.
It made him all the more anxious to be extravagant.  A moment ago he
would have compromised on Burgundy.  Now he decided that they must
have something really expensive--something fizzy, something with a
kick in it.  Champagne?  No, they'd never let him have champagne.
Ah!

'Have you got any Asti?' he said to the waiter.

The waiter suddenly beamed, thinking of his corkage.  He had
grasped now that Gordon and not Ravelston was the host.  He
answered in the peculiar mixture of French and English which he
affected.

'Asti, sir?  Yes, sir.  Very nice Asti!  Asti Spumanti.  Tres fin!
Tres vif!'

Ravelston's worried eye sought Gordon's across the table.  You
can't afford it! his eye pleaded.

'Is that one of those fizzy wines?' said Rosemary.

'Very fizzy, madame.  Very lively wine.  Tres vif!  Pop!'  His fat
hands made a gesture, picturing cascades of foam.

'Asti,' said Gordon, before Rosemary could stop him

Ravelston looked miserable.  He knew that Asti would cost Gordon
ten or fifteen shillings a bottle.  Gordon pretended not to notice.
He began talking about Stendhal--association with Duchesse de
Sanseverina and her 'force vin d'Asti'.  Along came the Asti in a
pail of ice--a mistake, that, as Ravelston could have told Gordon.
Out came the cork.  Pop!  The wild wine foamed into the wide flat
glasses.  Mysteriously the atmosphere of the table changed.
Something had happened to all three of them.  Even before it was
drunk the wine had worked its magic.  Rosemary had lost her
nervousness, Ravelston his worried preoccupation with the expense,
Gordon his defiant resolve to be extravagant.  They were eating
anchovies and bread and butter, fried sole, roast pheasant with
bread sauce and chipped potatoes; but principally they were
drinking and talking.  And how brilliantly they were talking--or so
it seemed to them, anyway!  They talked about the bloodiness of
modern life and the bloodiness of modern books.  What else is there
to talk about nowadays?  As usual (but, oh! how differently, now
that there was money in his pocket and he didn't really believe
what he was saying) Gordon descanted on the deadness, the
dreadfulness of the age we live in.  French letters and machine-
guns!  The movies and the Daily Mail!  It was a bone-deep truth
when he walked the streets with a couple of coppers in his pocket;
but it was a joke at this moment.  It was great fun--it IS fun when
you have good food and good wine inside you--to demonstrate that we
live in a dead and rotting world.  He was being witty at the
expense of the modern literature; they were all being witty.  With
the fine scorn of the unpublished Gordon knocked down reputation
after reputation.  Shaw, Yeats, Eliot, Joyce, Huxley, Lewis,
Hemingway--each with a careless phrase or two was shovelled into
the dustbin.  What fun it all was, if only it could last!  And of
course, at this particular moment, Gordon believed that it COULD
last.  Of the first bottle of Asti, Gordon drank three glasses,
Ravelston two, and Rosemary one.  Gordon became aware that a girl
at the table opposite was watching him.  A tall elegant girl with a
shell-pink skin and wonderful, almond-shaped eyes.  Rich, obviously;
one of the moneyed intelligentsia.  She thought him interesting--was
wondering who he was.  Gordon found himself manufacturing special
witticisms for her benefit.  And he WAS being witty, there was no
doubt about that.  That too was money.  Money greasing the wheels--
wheels of thought as well as wheels of taxis.

But somehow the second bottle of Asti was not such a success as
the first.  To begin with there was uncomfortableness over its
ordering.  Gordon beckoned to the waiter.

'Have you got another bottle of this?'

The waiter beamed fatly.  'Yes, sir!  Mais certainement, monsieur!'

Rosemary frowned and tapped Gordon's foot under the table.  'No,
Gordon, NO!  You're not to.'

'Not to what?'

'Order another bottle.  We don't want it.'

'Oh, bosh!  Get another bottle, waiter.'

'Yes, sir.'

Ravelston rubbed his nose.  With eyes too guilty to meet Gordon's
he looked at his wine glass.  'Look here, Gordon.  Let ME stand
this bottle.  I'd like to.'

'Bosh!' repeated Gordon.

'Get half a bottle, then,' said Rosemary.

'A whole bottle, waiter,' said Gordon.

After that nothing was the same.  They still talked, laughed,
argued, but things were not the same.  The elegant girl at the
table opposite had ceased watching Gordon.  Somehow, Gordon wasn't
being witty any longer.  It is almost always a mistake to order a
second bottle.  It is like bathing for a second time on a summer
day.  However warm the day is, however much you have enjoyed your
first bathe, you are always sorry for it if you go in a second
time.  The magic had departed from the wine.  It seemed to foam and
sparkle less, it was merely a clogging sourish liquid which you
gulped down half in disgust and half in hopes of getting drunk
quicker.  Gordon was now definitely though secretly drunk.  One
half of him was drunk and the other half sober.  He was beginning
to have that peculiar blurred feeling, as though your features had
swollen and your fingers grown thicker, which you have in the
second stage of drunkenness.  But the sober half of him was still
in command to outward appearance, anyway.  The conversation grew
more and more tedious.  Gordon and Ravelston talked in the detached
uncomfortable manner of people who have had a little scene and are
not going to admit it.  They talked about Shakespeare.  The
conversation tailed off into a long discussion about the meaning
of Hamlet.  It was very dull.  Rosemary stifled a yawn.  While
Gordon's sober half talked, his drunken half stood aside and
listened.  Drunken half was very angry.  They'd spoiled his
evening, damn them! with their arguing about that second bottle.
All he wanted now was to be properly drunk and have done with it.
Of the six glasses in the second bottle he drank four--for Rosemary
refused more wine.  But you couldn't do much on this weak stuff.
Drunken half clamoured for more drink, and more, and more.  Beer by
the quart and the bucket!  A real good rousing drink!  And by God!
he was going to have it later on.  He thought of the five pound
note stowed away in his inner pocket.  He still had that to blow,
anyway.

The musical clock that was concealed somewhere in Modigliani's
interior struck ten.

'Shall we shove off?' said Gordon.

Ravelston's eyes looked pleadingly, guiltily across the table.  Let
me share the bill! his eyes said.  Gordon ignored him.

'I vote we go to the Cafe Imperial,' he said.

The bill failed to sober him.  A little over two quid for the
dinner, thirty bob for the wine.  He did not let the others see the
bill, of course, but they saw him paying.  He threw four pound
notes on to the waiter's salver and said casually, 'Keep the
change.'  That left him with about ten bob besides the fiver.
Ravelston was helping Rosemary on with her coat; as she saw Gordon
throw notes to the waiter her lips parted in dismay.  She had had
no idea that the dinner was going to cost anything like four
pounds.  It horrified her to see him throwing money about like
that.  Ravelston looked gloomy and disapproving.  Gordon damned
their eyes again.  Why did they have to keep on worrying?  He could
afford it, couldn't he?  He still had that fiver.  But by God, it
wouldn't be his fault if he got home with a penny left!

But outwardly he was quite sober, and much more subdued than he
had been half an hour ago.  'We'd better have a taxi to the Cafe
Imperial,' he said.

'Oh, let's walk!' said Rosemary.  'It's only a step.'

'No, we'll have a taxi.'

They got into the taxi and were driven away, Gordon sitting next to
Rosemary.  He had half a mind to put his arm round her, in spite of
Ravelston's presence.  But at that moment a swirl of cold night air
came in at the window and blew against Gordon's forehead.  It gave
him a shock.  It was like one of those moments in the night when
suddenly from deep sleep you are broad awake and full of some
dreadful realization--as that you are doomed to die, for instance,
or that your life is a failure.  For perhaps a minute he was cold
sober.  He knew all about himself and the awful folly he was
committing--knew that he had squandered five pounds on utter
foolishness and was now going to squander the other five that
belonged to Julia.  He had a fleeting but terribly vivid vision of
Julia, with her thin face and her greying hair, in the cold of her
dismal bed-sitting room.  Poor, good Julia!  Julia who had been
sacrificed to him all her life, from whom he had borrowed pound
after pound after pound; and now he hadn't even the decency to keep
her five intact!  He recoiled from the thought; he fled back into
his drunkenness as into a refuge.  Quick, quick, we're getting
sober!  Booze, more booze!  Recapture that first fine careless
rapture!  Outside, the multi-coloured window of an Italian grocery,
still open, swam towards them.  He tapped sharply on the glass.
The taxi drew up.  Gordon began to climb out across Rosemary's
knees.

'Where are you going, Gordon?'

'To recapture that first fine careless rapture,' said Gordon, on
the pavement.

'What?'

'It's time we laid in some more booze.  The pubs'll be shutting in
half an hour.'

'No, Gordon, no!  You're not to get anything more to drink.  You've
had quite enough already.'

'Wait!'

He came out of the shop nursing a litre bottle of Chianti.  The
grocer had taken the cork out for him and put it in loosely again.
The others had grasped now that he was drunk--that he must have
been drinking before he met them.  It made them both embarrassed.
They went into the Cafe Imperial, but the chief thought in both
their minds was to get Gordon away and to bed as quickly as
possible.  Rosemary whispered behind Gordon's back, 'PLEASE don't
let him drink any more!'  Ravelston nodded gloomily.  Gordon was
marching ahead of them to a vacant table, not in the least troubled
by the stares everyone was casting at the wine-bottle which he
carried on his arm.  They sat down and ordered coffee, and with
some difficulty Ravelston restrained Gordon from ordering brandy as
well.  All of them were ill at ease.  It was horrible in the great
garish cafe, stuffily hot and deafeningly noisy with the jabber of
several hundred voices, the clatter of plates and glasses, and the
intermittent squalling of the band.  All three of them wanted to
get away.  Ravelston was still worrying about the expense, Rosemary
was worried because Gordon was drunk, Gordon was restless and
thirsty.  He had wanted to come here, but he was no sooner here
than he wanted to escape.  Drunken half was clamouring for a bit
of fun.  And drunken half wasn't going to be kept in check much
longer.  Beer, beer! cried drunken half.  Gordon hated this stuffy
place.  He had visions of a pub taproom with great oozy barrels and
quart pots topped with foam.  He kept an eye on the clock.  It was
nearly half past ten and the pubs even in Westminster would shut at
eleven.  Mustn't miss his beer!  The bottle of wine was for
afterwards, when the pubs were shut.  Rosemary was sitting opposite
him, talking to Ravelston, uncomfortably but with a sufficient
pretence that she was enjoying herself and there was nothing the
matter.  They were still talking in a rather futile way about
Shakespeare.  Gordon hated Shakespeare.  As he watched Rosemary
talking there came over him a violent, perverse desire for her.
She was leaning forward, her elbows on the table; he could see her
small breasts clearly through her dress.  It came to him with a
kind of shock, a catch of breath, which once again almost sobered
him, that he had seen her naked.  She was his girl!  He could have
her whenever he wanted her!  And by God, he was going to have her
tonight!  Why not?  It was a fitting end to the evening.  They
could find a place easily enough; there are plenty of hotels round
Shaftesbury Avenue where they don't ask questions if you can pay
the bill.  He still had his fiver.  He felt her foot under the
table, meaning to imprint a delicate caress upon it, and only
succeeded in treading on her toe.  She drew her foot away from him.

'Let's get out of this,' he said abruptly, and at once stood up.

'Oh, let's!' said Rosemary with relief.

They were in Regent Street again.  Down on the left Piccadilly
Circus blazed, a horrible pool of light.  Rosemary's eyes turned
towards the bus stop opposite.

'It's half past ten,' she said doubtfully.  'I've got to be back by
eleven.'

'Oh, rot!  Let's look for a decent pub.  I mustn't miss my beer.'

'Oh, no, Gordon!  No more pubs tonight.  I couldn't drink any more.
Nor ought you.'

'It doesn't matter.  Come this way.'

He took her by the arm and began to lead her down towards the
bottom of Regent Street, holding her rather tight as though afraid
she would escape.  For the moment he had forgotten about Ravelston.
Ravelston followed, wondering whether he ought to leave them to
themselves or whether he ought to stay and keep an eye on Gordon.
Rosemary hung back, not liking the way Gordon was pulling at her
arm.

'Where are you taking me, Gordon?'

'Round the corner, where it's dark.  I want to kiss you.'

'I don't think I want to be kissed.'

'Of course you do.'

'No!'

'Yes!'

She let him take her.  Ravelston waited on the corner by the Regent
Palace, uncertain what to do.  Gordon and Rosemary disappeared
round the corner and were almost immediately in darker, narrower
streets.  The appalling faces of tarts, like skulls coated with
pink powder, peered meaningly from several doorways.  Rosemary
shrank from them.  Gordon was rather amused.

'They think you're one of them,' he explained to her.

He stood his bottle on the pavement, carefully, against the wall,
then suddenly seized her and twisted her backwards.  He wanted her
badly, and he did not want to waste time over preliminaries.  He
began to kiss her face all over, clumsily but very hard.  She let
him do it for a moment, but it frightened her; his face, so close
to hers, looked pale, strange, and distracted.  He smelt very
strongly of wine.  She struggled, turning her face away so that he
was only kissing her hair and neck.

'Gordon, you mustn't!'

'Why mustn't I?'

'What are you doing?'

'What do you suppose I'm doing?'

He shoved her back against the wall, and with the careful,
preoccupied movements of a drunken man, tried to undo the front of
her dress.  It was of a kind that did not undo, as it happened.
This time she was angry.  She struggled violently, fending his hand
aside.

'Gordon, stop that at once!'

'Why?'

'If you do it again I'll smack your face.'

'Smack my face!  Don't you come the Girl Guide with me.'

'Let me go, will you!'

'Think of last Sunday,' he said lewdly.

'Gordon, if you go on I'll hit you, honestly I will.'

'Not you.'

He thrust his hand right into the front of her dress.  The movement
was curiously brutal, as though she had been a stranger to him.
She grasped that from the expression of his face.  She was not
Rosemary to him any longer, she was just a girl, a girl's body.
That was the thing that upset her.  She struggled and managed to
free herself from him.  He came after her again and clutched her
arm.  She smacked his face as hard as she could and dodged neatly
out of his reach.

'What did you do that for?' he said, feeling his cheek but not hurt
by the blow.

'I'm not going to stand that sort of thing.  I'm going home.
You'll be different tomorrow.'

'Rot!  You come along with me.  You're going to bed with me.'

'Good night!' she said, and fled up the dark side street.

For a moment he thought of following her, but found his legs too
heavy.  It did not seem worth while, anyway.  He wandered back to
where Ravelston was still waiting, looking moody and alone, partly
because he was worried about Gordon and partly because he was
trying not to notice two hopeful tarts who were on patrol just
behind him.  Gordon looked properly drunk, Ravelston thought.  His
hair was tumbling down over his forehead, one side of his face was
very pale and on the other there was a red smudge where Rosemary
had slapped him.  Ravelston thought this must be the flush of
drunkenness.

'What have you done with Rosemary?' he said.

'She's gone,' said Gordon, with a wave of his hand which was meant
to explain everything.  'But the night's still young.'

'Look here, Gordon, it's time you were in bed.'

'In bed, yes.  But not alone.'

He stood on the kerb gazing out into the hideous midnight-noon.
For a moment he felt quite deathly.  His face was burning.  His
whole body had a dreadful, swollen, fiery feeling.  His head in
particular seemed on the point of bursting.  Somehow the baleful
light was bound up with his sensations.  He watched the skysigns
flicking on and off, glaring red and blue, arrowing up and down--
the awful, sinister glitter of a doomed civilization, like the
still blazing lights of a sinking ship.  He caught Ravelston's arm
and made a gesture that comprehended the whole of Piccadilly
Circus.

'The lights down in hell will look just like that.'

'I shouldn't wonder.'

Ravelston was looking out for a disengaged taxi.  He must get
Gordon home to bed without further delay.  Gordon wondered whether
he was in joy or in agony.  That burning, bursting feeling was
dreadful.  The sober half of him was not dead yet.  Sober half
still knew with ice-cold clarity what he had done and what he was
doing.  He had committed follies for which tomorrow he would feel
like killing himself.  He had squandered five pounds in senseless
extravagance, he had robbed Julia, he had insulted Rosemary.  And
tomorrow--oh, tomorrow, we'll be sober!  Go home, go home! cried
sober half.  ---- to you! said drunken half contemptuously.  Drunken
half was still clamouring for a bit of fun.  And drunken half was
the stronger.  A fiery clock somewhere opposite caught his eye.
Twenty to eleven.  Quick, before the pubs are shut!  Haro! la gorge
m'ard!  Once again his thoughts moved lyrically.  He felt a hard
round shape under his arm, discovered that it was the Chianti
bottle, and tweaked out the cork.  Ravelston was waving to a taxi-
driver without managing to catch his eye.  He heard a shocked
squeal from the tarts behind.  Turning, he saw with horror that
Gordon had up-ended the bottle and was drinking from it.

'Hi!  Gordon!'

He sprang towards him and forced his arm down.  A gout of wine went
down Gordon's collar.

'For God's sake be careful!  You don't want the police to get hold
of you, do you?'

'I want a drink,' complained Gordon.

'But dash it!  You can't start drinking here.'

'Take me to a pub,' said Gordon.

Ravelston rubbed his nose helplessly.  'Oh, God!  I suppose that's
better than drinking on the pavement.  Come on, we'll go to a pub.
You shall have your drink there.'

Gordon recorked his bottle carefully.  Ravelston shepherded him
across the circus, Gordon clinging to his arm, but not for support,
for his legs were still quite steady.  They halted on the island,
then managed to find a gap in the traffic and went down the
Haymarket.

In the pub the air seemed wet with beer.  It was all a mist of beer
shot through with the sickly tang of whisky.  Along the bar a press
of men seethed, downing with Faustlike eagerness their last drinks
before eleven should sound its knell.  Gordon slid easily through
the crowd.  He was not in a mood to worry about a few jostlings and
elbowings.  In a moment he had fetched up at the bar between a
stout commercial traveller drinking Guinness and a tall, lean,
decayed major type of man with droopy moustaches, whose entire
conversation seemed to consist of 'What ho!' and 'What, what!'
Gordon threw half a crown on to the beer-wet bar.

'A quart of bitter, please!'

'No quart pots here!' cried the harassed barmaid, measuring pegs of
whisky with one eye on the clock.

'Quart pots on the top shelf, Effie!' shouted the landlord over his
shoulder, from the other side of the bar.

The barmaid hauled the beer-handle three times hurriedly.  The
monstrous glass pot was set before him.  He lifted it.  What a
weight!  A pint of pure water weighs a pound and a quarter.
Down with it!  Swish--gurgle!  A long, long sup of beer flowed
gratefully down his gullet.  He paused for breath, and felt a
little sickish.  Come on, now for another.  Swish--gurgle!  It
almost choked him this time.  But stick it out, stick it out!
Through the cascade of beer that poured down his throat and seemed
to drown his ears he heard the landlord's shout:  'Last orders,
gentlemen, please!'  For a moment he removed his face from the pot,
gasped, and got his breath back.  Now for the last.  Swish--gurgle!
A-a-ah!  Gordon set down the pot.  Emptied in three gulps--not bad.
He clattered it on the bar.

'Hi!  Give me the other half of that--quick!'

'What ho!' said the major.

'Coming it a bit, aren't you?' said the commercial traveller.

Ravelston, farther down the bar and hemmed in by several men, saw
what Gordon was doing.  He called to him, 'Hi, Gordon!', frowned
and shook his head, too shy to say in front of everybody, 'Don't
drink any more.'  Gordon settled himself on his legs.  He was still
steady, but consciously steady.  His head seemed to have swollen to
an immense size, his whole body had the same horrible, swollen,
fiery feeling as before.  Languidly he lifted the refilled beerpot.
He did not want it now.  Its smell nauseated him.  It was just a
hateful, pale yellow, sickly-tasting liquid.  Like urine, almost!
That bucketful of stuff to be forced down into his bursting guts--
horrible!  But come on, no flinching!  What else are we here for?
Down with it!  Here she is so near my nose.  So tip her up and down
she goes.  Swish--gurgle!

In the same moment something dreadful happened.  His gullet had
shut up of its own accord, or the beer had missed his mouth.  It
was pouring all over him, a tidal wave of beer.  He was drowning in
beer like lay-brother Peter in the Ingoldsby Legends.  Help!  He
tried to shout, choked, and let fall the beer-pot.  There was a
flurry all round him.  People were leaping aside to avoid the jet
of beer.  Crash! went the pot.  Gordon stood rocking.  Men,
bottles, mirrors were going round and round.  He was falling,
losing consciousness.  But dimly visible before him was a black
upright shape, sole point of stability in a reeling world--the
beer-handle.  He clutched it, swung, held tight.  Ravelston started
towards him.

The barmaid leaned indignantly over the bar.  The roundabout world
slowed down and stopped.  Gordon's brain was quite clear.

'Here!  What are you hanging on to the beer-handle for?'

'All over my bloody trousers!' cried the commercial traveller.

'What am I hanging on to the beer-handle for?'

'YES!  What are you hanging on to the beer-handle for?'

Gordon swung himself sideways.  The elongated face of the major
peered down at him, with wet moustaches drooping.

'She says, "What am I hanging on to the beer-handle for?"'

'What ho!  What?'

Ravelston had forced his way between several men and reached him.
He put a strong arm round Gordon's waist and hoisted him to his
feet.

'Stand up, for God's sake!  You're drunk.'

'Drunk?' said Gordon.

Everyone was laughing at them.  Ravelston's pale face flushed.

'Two and three those mugs cost,' said the barmaid bitterly.

'And what about my bloody trousers?' said the commercial traveller.

'I'll pay for the mug,' said Ravelston.  He did so.  'Now come on
out of it.  You're drunk.'

He began to shepherd Gordon towards the door, one arm round his
shoulder, the other holding the Chianti bottle, which he had taken
from him earlier.  Gordon freed himself.  He could walk with
perfect steadiness.  He said in a dignified manner:

'Drunk did you say I was?'

Ravelston took his arm again.  'Yes, I'm afraid you are.  Decidedly.'

'Swan swam across the sea, well swam swan,' said Gordon.

'Gordon, you ARE drunk.  The sooner you're in bed the better.'

'First cast out the beam that is in thine own eye before thou
castest out the mote that is in thy brother's,' said Gordon.

Ravelston had got him out on to the pavement by this time.  'We'd
better get hold of a taxi,' he said, looking up and down the
street.

There seemed to be no taxis about, however.  The people were
streaming noisily out of the pub, which was on the point of
closing.  Gordon felt better in the open air.  His brain had never
been clearer.  The red satanic gleam of a Neon light, somewhere in
the distance, put a new and brilliant idea into his head.  He
plucked at Ravelston's arm.

'Ravelston!  I say, Ravelston!'

'What?'

'Let's pick up a couple of tarts.'

In spite of Gordon's drunken state, Ravelston was scandalized.  'My
dear old chap!  You can't do that kind of thing.'

'Don't be so damned upper-class.  Why not?'

'But how could you, dash it!  After you've just said good night to
Rosemary--a really charming girl like that!'

'At night all cats are grey,' said Gordon, with the feeling that he
voiced a profound and cynical wisdom.

Ravelston decided to ignore this remark.  'We'd better walk up to
Piccadilly Circus,' he said.  'There'll be plenty of taxis there.'

The theatres were emptying.  Crowds of people and streams of cars
flowed to and fro in the frightful corpse-light.  Gordon's brain
was marvellously clear.  He knew what folly and evil he had
committed and was about to commit.  And yet after all it hardly
seemed to matter.  He saw as something far, far away, like
something seen through the wrong end of the telescope, his thirty
years, his wasted life, the blank future, Julia's five pounds,
Rosemary.  He said with a sort of philosophic interest:

'Look at the Neon lights!  Look at those awful blue ones over the
rubber shop.  When I see those lights I know that I'm a damned
soul.'

'Quite,' said Ravelston, who was not listening.  'Ah, there's a
taxi!'  He signalled.  'Damn!  He didn't see me.  Wait here a
second.'

He left Gordon by the Tube station and hurried across the street.
For a little while Gordon's mind receded into blankness.  Then he
was aware of two hard yet youthful faces, like the faces of young
predatory animals, that had come close up to his own.  They had
blackened eye-brows and hats that were like vulgarer versions of
Rosemary's.  He was exchanging badinage with them.  This seemed to
him to have been going on for several minutes.

'Hullo, Dora!  Hullo, Barbara!  (He knew their names, it seemed.)
And how are you?  And how's old England's winding-sheet?'

'Oo--haven't you got a cheek, just!'

'And what are you up to at this time of night?'

'Oo--jes' strolling around.'

'Like a lion, seeking whom he may devour?'

'Oo--you haven't half got a cheek!  Hasn't he got a cheek, Barbara?
You HAVE got a cheek!'

Ravelston had caught the taxi and brought it round to where Gordon
was standing.  He stepped out, saw Gordon between the two girls,
and stood aghast.

'Gordon!  Oh, my God!  What the devil have you been doing?'

'Let me introduce you.  Dora and Barbara,' said Gordon.

For a moment Ravelston looked almost angry.  As a matter of fact,
Ravelston was incapable of being properly angry.  Upset, pained,
embarrassed--yes; but not angry.  He stepped forward with a
miserable effort not to notice the two girls' existence.  Once he
noticed them the game was up.  He took Gordon by the arm and would
have bundled him into the taxi.

'Come on, Gordon, for God's sake!  Here's the taxi.  We'll go
straight home and put you to bed.'

Dora caught Gordon's other arm and hauled him out of reach as
though he had been a stolen handbag.

'What bloody business is it of yours?' she cried ferociously.

'You don't want to insult these two ladies, I hope?' said Gordon.

Ravelston faltered, stepped back, rubbed his nose.  It was a moment
to be firm; but Ravelston had never in his life been firm.  He
looked from Dora to Gordon, from Gordon to Barbara.  That was
fatal.  Once he had looked them in the face he was lost.  Oh, God!
What could he do?  They were human beings--he couldn't insult them.
The same instinct that sent his hand into his pocket at the very
sight of a beggar made him helpless at this moment.  The poor,
wretched girls!  He hadn't the heart to send them packing into the
night.  Suddenly he realized that he would have to go through with
this abominable adventure into which Gordon had led him.  For the
first time in his life he was let in for going home with a tart.

'But dash it all!' he said feebly.

'Allons-y,' said Gordon.

The taximan had taken his direction at a nod from Dora.  Gordon
slumped into the corner seat and seemed immediately to sink into
some immense abyss from which he rose again more gradually and with
only partial consciousness of what he had been doing.  He was
gliding smoothly through darkness starred with lights.  Or were the
lights moving and he stationary?  It was like being on the ocean
bottom, among the luminous, gliding fishes.  The fancy returned to
him that he was a damned soul in hell.  The landscape in hell would
be just like this.  Ravines of cold evil-coloured fire, with
darkness all above.  But in hell there would be torment.  Was this
torment?  He strove to classify his sensations.  The momentary lapse
into unconsciousness had left him weak, sick, shaken; his forehead
seemed to be splitting.  He put out a hand.  It encountered a knee,
a garter, and a small soft hand which sought mechanically for his.
He became aware that Ravelston, sitting opposite, was tapping his
toe urgently and nervously.

'Gordon!  Gordon!  Wake up!'

'What?'

'Gordon!  Oh, damn!  Causons en francais.  Qu'est-ce que tu as
fait?  Crois-tu que je veux coucher avec une sale--oh, damnation!'

'Oo-parley-voo francey!' squealed the girls.

Gordon was mildly amused.  Do Ravelston good, he thought.  A
parlour Socialist going home with a tart!  The first genuinely
proletarian action of his life.  As though aware of this thought,
Ravelston subsided into his corner in silent misery, sitting as far
away from Barbara as possible.  The taxi drew up at a hotel in a
side-street; a dreadful, shoddy, low place it was.  The 'hotel'
sign over the door looked skew-eyed.  The windows were almost dark,
but the sound of singing, boozy and dreary, trickled from within.
Gordon staggered out of the taxi and felt for Dora's arm.  Give us
a hand, Dora.  Mind the step.  What ho!

A smallish, darkish, smelly hallway, lino-carpeted, mean, uncared-
for, and somehow impermanent.  From a room somewhere on the left
the singing swelled, mournful as a church organ.  A cross-eyed,
evil-looking chambermaid appeared from nowhere.  She and Dora
seemed to know one another.  What a mug!  No competition there.
From the room on the left a single voice took up the song with
would-be facetious emphasis:


'The man that kisses a pretty girl
And goes and tells his mother,
Ought to have his lips cut off,
Ought to--'


It tailed away, full of the ineffable, undisguisable sadness of
debauchery.  A very young voice it sounded.  The voice of some poor
boy who in his heart only wanted to be at home with his mother and
sisters, playing hunt-the-slipper.  There was a party of young
fools in there, on the razzle with whisky and girls.  The tune
reminded Gordon.  He turned to Ravelston as he came in, Barbara
following.

'Where's my Chianti?' he said.

Ravelston gave him the bottle.  His face looked pale, harassed,
hunted, almost.  With guilty restless movements he kept himself
apart from Barbara.  He could not touch her or even look at her,
and yet to escape was beyond him.  His eyes sought Gordon's.  'For
the love of God can't we get out of it somehow?' they signalled.
Gordon frowned at him.  Stick it out!  No flinching!  He took
Dora's arm again.  Come on, Dora!  Now for those stairs.  Ah!
Wait a moment.

Her arm round his waist, supporting him, Dora drew him aside.  Down
the darkish, smelly stairs a young woman came mincingly, buttoning
on a glove; after her a bald, middle-aged man in evening clothes,
black overcoat, and white silk muffler, his opera hat in his hand.
He walked past them with small mean mouth tightened, pretending not
to see them.  A family man, by the guilty look in his eye.  Gordon
watched the gaslight gleam on the back of his bald head.  His
predecessor.  In the same bed, probably.  The mantle of Elisha.
Now then, Dora, up we go!  Ah, these stairs!  Difficilis ascensus
Averni.  That's right, here we are!  'Mind the step,' said Dora.
They were on the landing.  Black and white lino like a chessboard.
White-painted doors.  A smell of slops and a fainter smell of stale
linen.

We this way, you that.  At the other door Ravelston halted, his
fingers on the handle.  He could not--no, he COULD not do it.  He
could not enter that dreadful room.  For the last time his eyes,
like those of a dog about to be whipped, turned upon Gordon.  'Must
I, must I?' his eyes said.  Gordon eyed him sternly.  Stick it out,
Regulus!  March to your doom!  Atqui sciebat quae sibi Barbara.  It
is a far, far more proletarian thing that you do.  And then with
startling suddenness Ravelston's face cleared.  An expression of
relief, almost of joy, stole over it.  A wonderful thought had
occurred to him.  After all, you could always pay the girl without
actually doing anything!  Thank God!  He set his shoulders, plucked
up courage, went in.  The door shut.

So here we are.  A mean, dreadful room.  Lino on the floor, gas-
fire, huge double bed with sheets vaguely dingy.  Over the bed a
framed coloured picture from La Vie Parisienne.  A mistake, that.
Sometimes the originals don't compare so well.  And, by Jove! on
the bamboo table by the window, positively an aspidistra!  Hast
thou found me, O mine enemy?  But come here, Dora.  Let's have a
look at you.

He seemed to be lying on the bed.  He could not see very well.  Her
youthful, rapacious face, with blackened eyebrows, leaned over him
as he sprawled there.

'How about my present?' she demanded, half wheedling, half
menacing.

Never mind that now.  To work!  Come here.  Not a bad mouth.  Come
here.  Come closer.  Ah!

No.  No use.  Impossible.  The will but not the way.  The spirit is
willing but the flesh is weak.  Try again.  No.  The booze, it must
be.  See Macbeth.  One last try.  No, no use.  Not this evening,
I'm afraid.

All right, Dora, don't you worry.  You'll get your two quid all
right.  We aren't paying by results.

He made a clumsy gesture.  'Here, give us that bottle.  That bottle
off the dressing-table.'

Dora brought it.  Ah, that's better.  That at least doesn't fail.
With hands that had swollen to monstrous size he up-ended the
Chianti bottle.  The wine flowed down his throat, bitter and
choking, and some of it went up his nose.  It overwhelmed him.  He
was slipping, sliding, falling off the bed.  His head met the
floor.  His legs were still on the bed.  For a while he lay in this
position.  Is this the way to live?  Down below the youthful voices
were still mournfully singing:


'For tonight we'll merry be,
For tonight we'll merry be,
For tonight we'll merry be-e-e--
Tomorrow we'll be so-ober!'



9


And, by Jove, tomorrow we WERE sober!

Gordon emerged from some long, sickly dream to the consciousness
that the books in the lending library were the wrong way up.  They
were all lying on their sides.  Moreover, for some reason their
backs had turned white--white and shiny, like porcelain.

He opened his eyes a little wider and moved an arm.  Small rivulets
of pain, seemingly touched off by the movement, shot through his
body at unexpected places--down the calves of his legs, for
instance, and up both sides of his head.  He perceived that he was
lying on his side, with a hard smooth pillow under his cheek and a
coarse blanket scratching his chin and pushing its hairs into his
mouth.  Apart from the minor pains that stabbed him every time he
moved, there was a large, dull sort of pain which was not localized
but which seemed to hover all over him.

Suddenly he flung off the blanket and sat up.  He was in a police
cell.  At this moment a frightful spasm of nausea overcame him.
Dimly perceiving a W.C. in the corner, he crept towards it and was
violently sick, three or four times.

After that, for several minutes, he was in agonizing pain.  He
could scarcely stand on his feet, his head throbbed as though it
were going to burst, and the light seemed like some scalding white
liquid pouring into his brain through the sockets of his eyes.  He
sat on the bed holding his head between his hands.  Presently, when
some of the throbbing had died down, he had another look about him.
The cell measured about twelve feet long by six wide and was very
high.  The walls were all of white porcelain bricks, horribly white
and clean.  He wondered dully how they cleaned as high up as the
ceiling.  Perhaps with a hose, he reflected.  At one end there was
a little barred window, very high up, and at the other end, over
the door, an electric bulb let into the wall and protected by a
stout grating.  The thing he was sitting on was not actually a bed,
but a shelf with one blanket and a canvas pillow.  The door was of
steel, painted green.  In the door there was a little round hole
with a flap on the outside.

Having seen this much he lay down and pulled the blanket over him
again.  He had no further curiosity about his surroundings.  As to
what had happened last night, he remembered everything--at least,
he remembered everything up to the time when he had gone with Dora
into the room with the aspidistra.  God knew what had happened
after that.  There had been some kind of bust-up and he had landed
in the clink.  He had no notion of what he had done; it might be
murder for all he knew.  In any case he did not care.  He turned
his face to the wall and pulled the blanket over his head to shut
out the light.

After a long time the spyhole in the door was pushed aside.  Gordon
managed to turn his head round.  His neck-muscles seemed to creak.
Through the spyhole he could see a blue eye and a semi-circle of
pink chubby cheek.

''Ja do with a cup of tea?' a voice said.

Gordon sat up and instantly felt very sick again.  He took his head
between his hands and groaned.  The thought of a cup of hot tea
appealed to him, but he knew it would make him sick if it had sugar
in it.

'Please,' he said.

The police constable opened a partition in the top half of the door
and passed in a thick white mug of tea.  It had sugar in it.  The
constable was a solid rosy young man of about twenty-five, with a
kind face, white eyelashes, and a tremendous chest.  It reminded
Gordon of the chest of a carthorse.  He spoke with a good accent
but with vulgar turns of speech.  For a minute or so he stood
regarding Gordon.

'You weren't half bad last night,' he said finally.

'I'm bad now.'

'You was worse last night, though.  What you go and hit the
sergeant for?'

'Did I hit the sergeant?'

'Did you?  Coo!  He wasn't half wild.  He turns to me and he says--
holding his ear he was, like this--he says, "Now, if that man
wasn't too drunk to stand, I'd knock his block off."  It's all gone
down on your charge sheet.  Drunk and disorderly.  You'd only ha'
bin drunk and incapable if you hadn't of hit the sergeant.'

'Do you know what I shall get for this?'

'Five quid or fourteen days.  You'll go up before Mr Groom.  Lucky
for you it wasn't Mr Walker.  He'd give you a month without the
option, Mr Walker would.  Very severe on the drunks he is.
Teetotaller.'

Gordon had drunk some of the tea.  It was nauseatingly sweet but
its warmth made him feel stronger.  He gulped it down.  At this
moment a nasty, snarling sort of voice--the sergeant whom Gordon
had hit, no doubt--yelped from somewhere outside:

'Take that man out and get him washed.  Black Maria leaves at half
past nine.'

The constable hastened to open the cell door.  As soon as Gordon
stepped outside he felt worse then ever.  This was partly because
it was much colder in the passage than in the cell.  He walked a
step or two, and then suddenly his head was going round and round.
'I'm going to be sick!' he cried.  He was falling--he flung out a
hand and stopped himself against the wall.  The constable's strong
arm went round him.  Across the arm, as over a rail, Gordon sagged,
doubled up and limp.  A jet of vomit burst from him.  It was the
tea, of course.  There was a gutter running along the stone floor.
At the end of the passage the moustachio'd sergeant, in tunic
without a belt, stood with his hand on his hip, looking on
disgustedly.

'Dirty little tyke,' he muttered, and turned away.

'Come on, old chap,' said the constable.  'You'll be better in half
a mo'.'

He half led, half dragged Gordon to a big stone sink at the end of
the passage and helped him to strip to the waist.  His gentleness
was astonishing.  He handled Gordon almost like a nurse handling a
child.  Gordon had recovered enough strength to sluice himself with
the ice-cold water and rinse his mouth out.  The constable gave him
a torn towel to dry himself with and then led him back to the cell.

'Now you sit quiet till the Black Maria comes.  And take my tip--
when you go up to the court, you plead guilty and say you won't do
it again.  Mr Groom won't be hard on you.'

'Where are my collar and tie?' said Gordon.

'We took 'em away last night.  You'll get 'em back before you go up
to court.  We had a bloke hung himself with his tie, once.'

Gordon sat down on the bed.  For a little while he occupied himself
by calculating the number of porcelain bricks in the walls, then
sat with his elbows on his knees, his head between his hands.  He
was still aching all over; he felt weak, cold, jaded, and, above
all, bored.  He wished that boring business of going up to the
court could be avoided somehow.  The thought of being put into some
jolting vehicle and taken across London to hang about in chilly
cells and passages, and of having to answer questions and be
lectured by magistrates, bored him indescribably.  All he wanted
was to be left alone.  But presently there was the sound of several
voices farther down the passage, and then of feet approaching.  The
partition in the door was opened.

'Couple of visitors for you,' the constable said.

Gordon was bored by the very thought of visitors.  Unwillingly he
looked up, and saw Flaxman and Ravelston looking in upon him.  How
they had got there together was a mystery, but Gordon felt not the
faintest curiosity about it.  They bored him.  He wished they would
go away.

'Hullo, chappie!' said Flaxman.

'YOU here?' said Gordon with a sort of weary offensiveness.

Ravelston looked miserable.  He had been up since the very early
morning, looking for Gordon.  This was the first time he had seen
the interior of a police cell.  His face shrank with disgust as he
looked at the chilly white-tiled place with its shameless W.C. in
the corner.  But Flaxman was more accustomed to this kind of thing.
He cocked a practised eye at Gordon.

'I've seen 'em worse,' he said cheerfully.  'Give him a prairie
oyster and he'd buck up something wonderful.  D'you know what your
eyes look like, chappie?' he added to Gordon.  'They look as if
they'd been taken out and poached.'

'I was drunk last night,' said Gordon, his head between his hands.

'I gathered something of the kind, old chappie.'

'Look here, Gordon,' said Ravelston, 'we came to bail you out, but
it seems we're too late.  They're taking you up to court in a few
minutes' time.  This is a bloody show.  It's a pity you didn't give
them a false name when they brought you here last night.'

'Did I tell them my name?'

'You told them everything.  I wish to God I hadn't let you out of
my sight.  You slipped out of that house somehow and into the
street.'

'Wandering up and down Shaftesbury Avenue, drinking out of a
bottle,' said Flaxman appreciatively.  'But you oughtn't to have
hit the sergeant, old chappie!  That was a bit of bloody
foolishness.  And I don't mind telling you Mother Wisbeach is on
your track.  When your pal here came round this morning and told
her you'd been for a night on the tiles, she took on as if you'd
done a bloody murder.'

'And look here, Gordon,' said Ravelston.

There was the familiar note of discomfort in his face.  It was
something about money, as usual.  Gordon looked up.  Ravelston was
gazing into the distance.

'Look here.'

'What?'

'About your fine.  You'd better leave that to me.  I'll pay it.'

'No, you won't.'

'My dear old chap!  They'll send you to jail if I don't.'

'Oh, hell!  I don't care.'

He did not care.  At this moment he did not care if they sent him
to prison for a year.  Of course he couldn't pay his fine himself.
He knew without even needing to look that he had no money left.  He
would have given it all to Dora, or more probably she would have
pinched it.  He lay down on the bed again and turned his back on
the others.  In the sulky, sluggish state that he was in, his sole
desire was to get rid of them.  They made a few more attempts to
talk to him, but he would not answer, and presently they went away.
Flaxman's voice boomed cheerfully down the passage.  He was giving
Ravelston minute instructions as to how to make a prairie oyster.

The rest of that day was very beastly.  Beastly was the ride in the
Black Maria, which, inside, was like nothing so much as a miniature
public lavatory, with tiny cubicles down each side, into which you
were locked and in which you had barely room to sit down.
Beastlier yet was the long wait in one of the cells adjoining the
magistrate's court.  This cell was an exact replica of the cell at
the police station, even to having precisely the same number of
porcelain bricks.  But it differed from the police station cell in
being repulsively dirty.  It was cold, but the air was so fetid as
to be almost unbreathable.  Prisoners were coming and going all the
time.  They would be thrust into the cell, taken out after an hour
or two to go up to the court, and then perhaps brought back again
to wait while the magistrate decided upon their sentence or fresh
witnesses were sent for.  There were always five or six men in the
cell, and there was nothing to sit on except the plank bed.  And
the worst was that nearly all of them used the W.C.--there,
publicly, in the tiny cell.  They could not help it.  There was
nowhere else to go.  And the plug of the beastly thing did not even
pull properly.

Until the afternoon Gordon felt sick and weak.  He had had no
chance to shave, and his face was hatefully scrubby.  At first he
merely sat on the corner of the plank bed, at the end nearest the
door, as far away from the W.C. as he could get, and took no notice
of the other prisoners.  They bored and disgusted him; later, as
his headache wore off, he observed them with a faint interest.
There was a professional burglar, a lean worried-looking man with
grey hair, who was in a terrible stew about what would happen to
his wife and kids if he were sent to jail.  He had been arrested
for 'loitering with intent to enter'--a vague offence for which you
generally get convicted if there are previous convictions against
you.  He kept walking up and down, flicking the fingers of his
right hand with a curious nervous gesture, and exclaiming against
the unfairness of it.  There was also a deaf mute who stank like a
ferret, and a small middle-aged Jew with a fur-collared overcoat,
who had been buyer to a large firm of kosher butchers.  He had
bolted with twenty-seven pounds, gone to Aberdeen, of all places,
and spent the money on tarts.  He too had a grievance, for he said
his case ought to have been tried in the rabbi's court instead of
being turned over to the police.  There was also a publican who
had embezzled his Christmas club money.  He was a big, hearty,
prosperous-looking man of about thirty-five, with a loud red face
and a loud blue overcoat--the sort of man who, if he were not a
publican, would be a bookie.  His relatives had paid back the
embezzled money, all except twelve pounds, but the club members had
decided to prosecute.  There was something in this man's eyes that
troubled Gordon.  He carried everything off with a swagger, but all
the while there was that blank, staring look in his eyes; he would
fall into a kind of reverie at every gap in the conversation.  It
was somehow rather dreadful to see him.  There he was, still in his
smart clothes, with the splendour of a publican's life only a month
or two behind him; and now he was ruined, probably for ever.  Like
all London publicans he was in the claw of the brewer, he would be
sold up and his furniture and fittings seized, and when he came out
of jail he would never have a pub or a job again.

The morning wore on with dismal slowness.  You were allowed to
smoke--matches were forbidden, but the constable on duty outside
would give you a light through the trap in the door.  Nobody had
any cigarettes except the publican, who had his pockets full of
them and distributed them freely.  Prisoners came and went.  A
ragged dirty man who claimed to be a coster 'up' for obstruction
was put into the cell for half an hour.  He talked a great deal,
but the others were deeply suspicious of him; when he was taken out
again they all declared he was a 'split'.  The police, it was said,
often put a 'split' into the cells, disguised as a prisoner, to
pick up information.  Once there was great excitement when the
constable whispered through the trap that a murderer, or would-be
murderer, was being put into the cell next door.  He was a youth of
eighteen who had stabbed his 'tart' in the belly, and she was not
expected to live.  Once the trap opened and the tired, pale face of
a clergyman looked in.  He saw the burglar, said wearily, 'YOU here
again, Jones?' and went away again.  Dinner, so-called, was served
out at about twelve o'clock.  All you got was a cup of tea and two
slices of bread and marg.  You could have food sent in, though, if
you could pay for it.  The publican had a good dinner sent in in
covered dishes; but he had no appetite for it, and gave most of it
away.  Ravelston was still hanging about the court, waiting for
Gordon's case to come on, but he did not know the ropes well enough
to have food sent in to Gordon.  Presently the burglar and the
publican were taken away, sentenced, and brought back to wait till
the Black Maria should take them off to jail.  They each got nine
months.  The publican questioned the burglar about what prison was
like.  There was a conversation of unspeakable obscenity about the
lack of women there.

Gordon's case came on at half past two, and it was over so quickly
that it seemed preposterous to have waited all that time for it.
Afterwards he could remember nothing about the court except the
coat of arms over the magistrate's chair.  The magistrate was
dealing with the drunks at the rate of two a minute.  To the tune
of 'John-Smith-drunk six-shillings-move-on-NEXT!' they filed past
the railings of the dock, precisely like a crowd taking tickets at
a booking-office.  Gordon's case, however, took two minutes instead
of thirty seconds, because he had been disorderly and the sergeant
had to testify that Gordon had struck him on the ear and called him
a ---- bastard.  There was also a mild sensation in the court
because Gordon, when questioned at the police station, had
described himself as a poet.  He must have been very drunk to say a
thing like that.  The magistrate looked at him suspiciously.

'I see you call yourself a POET.  ARE you a poet?'

'I write poetry,' said Gordon sulkily.

'Hm!  Well, it doesn't seem to teach you to behave yourself, does
it?  You will pay five pounds or go to prison for fourteen days.
NEXT!'

And that was all.  Nevertheless, somewhere at the back of the court
a bored reporter had pricked up his ears.

On the other side of the court there was a room where a police
sergeant sat with a large ledger, entering up the drunks' fines and
taking payment.  Those who could not pay were taken back to the
cells.  Gordon had expected this to happen to himself.  He was
quite resigned to going to prison.  But when he emerged from the
court it was to find that Ravelston was waiting there and had
already paid his fine for him.  Gordon did not protest.  He allowed
Ravelston to pack him into a taxi and take him back to the flat in
Regent's Park.  As soon as they got there Gordon had a hot bath; he
needed one, after the beastly contaminating grime of the last
twelve hours.  Ravelston lent him a razor, lent him a clean shirt
and pyjamas and socks and underclothes, even went out of doors and
bought him a toothbrush.  He was strangely solicitous about Gordon.
He could not rid himself of a guilty feeling that what had happened
last night was mainly his own fault; he ought to have put his foot
down and taken Gordon home as soon as he showed signs of being
drunk.  Gordon scarcely noticed what was being done for him.  Even
the fact the Ravelston had paid his fine failed to trouble him.
For the rest of that afternoon he lay in one of the armchairs in
front of the fire, reading a detective story.  About the future he
refused to think.  He grew sleepy very early.  At eight o'clock he
went to bed in the spare bedroom and slept like a log for nine
hours.

It was not till next morning that he began to think seriously about
his situation.  He woke in the wide caressing bed, softer and
warmer than any bed he had ever slept in, and began to grope about
for his matches.  Then he remembered that in places like this you
didn't need matches to get a light, and felt for the electric
switch that hung on a cord at the bedhead.  Soft light flooded the
room.  There was a syphon of soda water on the bed-table.  Gordon
discovered that even after thirty-six hours there was still a vile
taste in his mouth.  He had a drink and looked about him.

It was a queer feeling, lying there in somebody else's pyjamas in
somebody else's bed.  He felt that he had no business there--that
this wasn't the sort of place where he belonged.  There was a sense
of guilt in lying here in luxury when he was ruined and hadn't a
penny in the world.  For he was ruined right enough, there was no
doubt about that.  He seemed to know with perfect certainty that
his job was lost.  God knew what was going to happen next.  The
memory of that stupid dull debauch rolled back upon him with
beastly vividness.  He could recall everything, from his first pink
gin before he started out to Dora's peach-coloured garters.  He
squirmed when he thought of Dora.  WHY does one do these things?
Money again, always money!  The rich don't behave like that.  The
rich are graceful even in their vices.  But if you have no money
you don't even know how to spend it when you get it.  You just
splurge it frantically away, like a sailor in a bawdy-house his
first night ashore.

He had been in the clink, twelve hours.  He thought of the cold
faecal stench of that cell at the police court.  A foretaste of
future days.  And everyone would know that he had been in the
clink.  With luck it might be kept from Aunt Angela and Uncle
Walter, but Julia and Rosemary probably knew already.  With
Rosemary it didn't matter so much, but Julia would be ashamed and
miserable.  He thought of Julia.  Her long thin back as she bent
over the tea-caddy; her good, goose-like, defeated face.  She had
never lived.  From childhood she had been sacrificed to him--to
Gordon, to 'the boy'.  It might be a hundred quid he had 'borrowed'
from her in all these years; and then even five quid he couldn't
spare her.  Five quid he had set aside for her, and then spent it
on a tart!

He turned out the light and lay on his back, wide awake.  At this
moment he saw himself with frightful clarity.  He took a sort of
inventory of himself and his possessions.  Gordon Comstock, last of
the Comstocks, thirty years old, with twenty-six teeth left; with
no money and no job; in borrowed pyjamas in a borrowed bed; with
nothing before him except cadging and destitution, and nothing
behind him except squalid fooleries.  His total wealth a puny body
and two cardboard suitcases full of worn-out clothes.

At seven Ravelston was awakened by a tap on his door.  He rolled
over and said sleepily, 'Hullo?'  Gordon came in, a dishevelled
figure almost lost in the borrowed silk pyjamas.  Ravelston roused
himself, yawning.  Theoretically he got up at the proletarian hour
of seven.  Actually he seldom stirred until Mrs Beaver, the
charwoman, arrived at eight.  Gordon pushed the hair out of his
eyes and sat down on the foot of Ravelston's bed.

'I say, Ravelston, this is bloody.  I've been thinking things over.
There's going to be hell to pay.'

'What?'

'I shall lose my job.  McKechnie can't keep me on after I've been
in the clink.  Besides, I ought to have been at work yesterday.
Probably the shop wasn't opened all day.'

Ravelston yawned.  'It'll be all right, I think.  That fat chap--
what's his name?  Flaxman--rang McKechnie up and told him you were
down with flu.  He made it pretty convincing.  He said your
temperature was a hundred and three.  Of course your landlady
knows.  But I don't suppose she'd tell McKechnie.'

'But suppose it's got into the papers!'

'Oh, lord!  I suppose that might happen.  The char brings the
papers up at eight.  But do they report drunk cases?  Surely not?'

Mrs Beaver brought the Telegraph and the Herald.  Ravelston sent
her out for the Mail and the Express.  They searched hurriedly
through the police-court news.  Thank God! it hadn't 'got into the
papers' after all.  There was no reason why it should, as a matter
of fact.  It was not as if Gordon had been a racing motorist or a
professional footballer.  Feeling better, Gordon managed to eat
some breakfast, and after breakfast Ravelston went out.  It was
agreed that he should go up to the shop, see Mr McKechnie, give him
further details of Gordon's illness, and find out how the land lay.
It seemed quite natural to Ravelston to waste several days in
getting Gordon out of his scrape.  All the morning Gordon hung
about the flat, restless and out of sorts, smoking cigarettes in an
endless chain.  Now that he was alone, hope had deserted him.  He
knew by profound instinct that Mr McKechnie would have heard about
his arrest.  It wasn't the kind of thing you could keep dark.  He
had lost his job, and that was all about it.

He lounged across to the window and looked out.  A desolate day;
the whitey-grey sky looked as if it could never be blue again; the
naked trees wept slowly into the gutters.  Down a neighbouring
street the cry of the coal-man echoed mournfully.  Only a fortnight
to Christmas now.  Jolly to be out of work at this time of year!
But the thought, instead of frightening him, merely bored him.  The
peculiar lethargic feeling, the stuffy heaviness behind the eyes,
that one has after a fit of drunkenness, seemed to have settled
upon him permanently.  The prospect of searching for another job
bored him even more than the prospect of poverty.  Besides, he
would never find another job.  There are no jobs to be had
nowadays.  He was going down, down into the sub-world of the
unemployed--down, down into God knew what workhouse depths of dirt
and hunger and futility.  And chiefly he was anxious to get it over
with as little fuss and effort as possible.

Ravelston came back at about one o'clock.  He pulled his gloves off
and threw them into a chair.  He looked tired and depressed.
Gordon saw at a glance that the game was up.

'He's heard, of course?' he said.

'Everything, I'm afraid.'

'How?  I suppose that cow of a Wisbeach woman went and sneaked to
him?'

'No.  It was in the paper after all.  The local paper.  He got it
out of that.'

'Oh, hell!  I'd forgotten that.'

Ravelston produced from his coat pocket a folded copy of a bi-
weekly paper.  It was one that they took in at the shop because Mr
McKechnie advertised in it--Gordon had forgotten that.  He opened
it.  Gosh!  What a splash!  It was all over the middle page.


BOOKSELLER'S ASSISTANT FINED

MAGISTRATE'S SEVERE STRICTURE

'DISGRACEFUL FRACAS'


There were nearly two columns of it.  Gordon had never been so
famous before and never would be again.  They must have been very
hard up for a bit of news.  But these local papers have a curious
notion of patriotism.  They are so avid for local news that a
bicycle-accident in the Harrow Road will occupy more space than a
European crisis, and such items of news as 'Hampstead Man on Murder
Charge' or 'Dismembered Baby in Cellar in Camberwell' are displayed
with positive pride.

Ravelston described his interview with Mr McKechnie.  Mr McKechnie,
it seemed, was torn between his rage against Gordon and his desire
not to offend such a good customer as Ravelston.  But of course,
after such a thing like that, you could hardly expect him to take
Gordon back.  These scandals were bad for trade, and besides, he
was justly angry at the lies Flaxman had told him over the phone.
But he was angriest of all at the thought of HIS assistant being
drunk and disorderly.  Ravelston said that the drunkenness seemed
to anger him in a way that was peculiar.  He gave the impression
that he would almost have preferred Gordon to pinch money out of
the till.  Of course, he was a teetotaller himself.  Gordon had
sometimes wondered whether he wasn't also a secret drinker, in the
traditional Scottish style.  His nose was certainly very red.  But
perhaps it was snuff that did it.  Anyway, that was that.  Gordon
was in the soup, full fathom five.

'I suppose the Wisbeach will stick to my clothes and things,' he
said.  'I'm not going round there to fetch them.  Besides, I owe
her a week's rent.'

'Oh, don't worry about that.  I'll see to your rent and everything.'

'My dear chap, I can't let you pay my rent!'

'Oh, dash it!'  Ravelston's face grew faintly pink.  He looked
miserably into the distance, and then said what he had to say all
in a sudden burst:  'Look here, Gordon, we must get this settled.
You've just got to stay here till this business has blown over.
I'll see you through about money and all that.  You needn't think
you're being a nuisance, because you're not.  And anyway, it's only
till you get another job.'

Gordon moved moodily away from him, his hands in his pockets.  He
had foreseen all this, of course.  He knew that he ought to refuse,
he WANTED to refuse, and yet he had not quite the courage.

'I'm not going to sponge on you like that,' he said sulkily.

'Don't use such expressions, for God's sake!  Besides, where could
you go if you didn't stay here?'

'I don't know--into the gutter, I suppose.  It's where I belong.
The sooner I get there the better.'

'Rot!  You're going to stay here till you've found another job.'

'But there isn't a job in the world.  It might be a year before I
found a job.  I don't WANT a job.'

'You mustn't talk like that.  You'll find a job right enough.
Something's bound to turn up.  And for God's sake don't talk about
SPONGING on me.  It's only an arrangement between friends.  If you
really want to, you can pay it all back when you've got the money.'

'Yes--WHEN!'

But in the end he let himself be persuaded.  He had known that he
would let himself be persuaded.  He stayed on at the flat, and
allowed Ravelston to go round to Willowbed Road and pay his rent
and recover his two cardboard suitcases; he even allowed Ravelston
to 'lend' him a further two pounds for current expenses.  His heart
sickened while he did it.  He was living on Ravelston--sponging on
Ravelston.  How could there ever be a real friendship between them
again?  Besides, in his heart he didn't want to be helped.  He only
wanted to be left alone.  He was headed for the gutter; better to
reach the gutter quickly and get it over.  Yet for the time being
he stayed, simply because he lacked the courage to do otherwise.

But as for this business of getting a job, it was hopeless from the
start.  Even Ravelston, though rich, could not manufacture jobs out
of nothing.  Gordon knew beforehand that there were no jobs going
begging in the book trade.  During the next three days he wore his
shoes out traipsing from bookseller to bookseller.  At shop after
shop he set his teeth, marched in, demanded to see the manager, and
three minutes later marched out again with his nose in the air.
The answer was always the same--no jobs vacant.  A few booksellers
were taking on an extra man for the Christmas rush, but Gordon was
not the type they were looking for.  He was neither smart nor
servile; he wore shabby clothes and spoke with the accent of a
gentleman.  Besides, a few questions always brought it out that he
had been sacked from his last job for drunkenness.  After only
three days he gave it up.  He knew it was no use.  It was only to
please Ravelston that he had even been pretending to look for work.

In the evening he trailed back to the flat, footsore and with his
nerves on edge from a series of snubs.  He was making all his
journeys on foot, to economize Ravelston's two pounds.  When he got
back Ravelston had just come up from the office and was sitting in
one of the armchairs in front of the fire, with some long galley-
proofs over his knee.  He looked up as Gordon came in.

'Any luck?' he said as usual.

Gordon did not answer.  If he had answered it would have been with
a stream of obscenities.  Without even looking at Ravelston he went
straight into his bedroom, kicked off his shoes, and flung himself
on the bed.  He hated himself at this moment.  Why had he come
back?  What right had he to come back and sponge on Ravelston when
he hadn't even the intention of looking for a job any longer?  He
ought to have stayed out in the streets, slept in Trafalgar Square,
begged--anything.  But he hadn't the guts to face the streets as
yet.  The prospect of warmth and shelter had tugged him back.  He
lay with his hands beneath his head, in a mixture of apathy and
self-hatred.  After about half an hour he heard the door-bell ring
and Ravelston get up to answer it.  It was that bitch Hermione
Slater, presumably.  Ravelston had introduced Gordon to Hermione a
couple of days ago, and she had treated him like dirt.  But a
moment later there was a knock at the bedroom door.

'What is it?' said Gordon.

'Somebody's come to see you,' said Ravelston.

'To see ME?'

'Yes.  Come on into the other room.'

Gordon swore and rolled sluggishly off the bed.  When he got to the
other room he found that the visitor was Rosemary.  He had been
half expecting her, of course, but it wearied him to see her.  He
knew why she had come; to sympathize with him, to pity him, to
reproach him--it was all the same.  In his despondent, bored mood
he did not want to make the effort of talking to her.  All he
wanted was to be left alone.  But Ravelston was glad to see her.
He had taken a liking to her in their single meeting and thought
she might cheer Gordon up.  He made a transparent pretext to go
downstairs to the office, leaving the two of them together.

They were alone, but Gordon made no move to embrace her.  He was
standing in front of the fire, round-shouldered, his hands in his
coat pockets, his feet thrust into a pair of Ravelston's slippers
which were much too big for him.  She came rather hesitantly
towards him, not yet taking off her hat or her coat with the lamb-
skin collar.  It hurt her to see him.  In less than a week his
appearance had deteriorated strangely.  Already he had that
unmistakable, seedy, lounging look of a man who is out of work.
His face seemed to have grown thinner, and there were rings round
his eyes.  Also it was obvious that he had not shaved that day.

She laid her hand on his arm, rather awkwardly, as a woman does
when it is she who has to make the first embrace.

'Gordon--'

'Well?'

He said it almost sulkily.  The next moment she was in his arms.
But it was she who had made the first movement, not he.  Her head
was on his breast, and behold! she was struggling with all her
might against the tears that almost overwhelmed her.  It bored
Gordon dreadfully.  He seemed so often to reduce her to tears!  And
he didn't want to be cried over; he only wanted to be left alone--
alone to sulk and despair.  As he held her there, one hand
mechanically caressing her shoulder, his main feeling was boredom.
She had made things more difficult for him by coming here.  Ahead
of him were dirt, cold, hunger, the streets, the workhouse, and the
jail.  It was against THAT that he had got to steel himself.  And
he could steel himself, if only she would leave him alone and not
come plaguing him with these irrelevant emotions.

He pushed her a little way from him.  She had recovered herself
quickly, as she always did.

'Gordon, my dear one!  Oh, I'm so sorry, so sorry!'

'Sorry about what?'

'You losing your job and everything.  You look so unhappy.'

'I'm not unhappy.  Don't pity me, for God's sake.'

He disengaged himself from her arms.  She pulled her hat off and
threw it into a chair.  She had come here with something definite
to say.  It was something she had refrained from saying all these
years--something that it had seemed to her a point of chivalry not
to say.  But now it had got to be said, and she would come straight
out with it.  It was not in her nature to beat about the bush.

'Gordon, will you do something to please me?'

'What?'

'Will you go back to the New Albion?'

So that was it!  Of course he had foreseen it.  She was going to
start nagging at him like all the others.  She was going to add
herself to the band of people who worried him and badgered him to
'get on'.  But what else could you expect?  It was what any woman
would say.  The marvel was that she had never said it before.  Go
back to the New Albion!  It had been the sole significant action of
his life, leaving the New Albion.  It was his religion, you might
say, to keep out of that filthy money-world.  Yet at this moment he
could not remember with any clarity the motives for which he had
left the New Albion.  All he knew was that he would never go back,
not if the skies fell, and that the argument he foresaw bored him
in advance.

He shrugged his shoulders and looked away.  'The New Albion
wouldn't take me back,' he said shortly.

'Yes, they would.  You remember what Mr Erskine said.  It's not so
long ago--only two years.  And they're always on the look-out for
good copywriters.  Everyone at the office says so.  I'm sure they'd
give you a job if you went and asked them.  And they'd pay you at
least four pounds a week.'

'Four pounds a week!  Splendid!  I could afford to keep an
aspidistra on that, couldn't I?'

'No, Gordon, don't joke about it now.'

'I'm not joking.  I'm serious.'

'You mean you won't go back to them--not even if they offered you a
job?'

'Not in a thousand years.  Not if they paid me fifty pounds a
week.'

'But why?  Why?'

'I've told you why,' he said wearily.

She looked at him helplessly.  After all, it was no use.  There was
this money-business standing in the way--these meaningless scruples
which she had never understood but which she had accepted merely
because they were his.  She felt all the impotence, the resentment
of a woman who sees an abstract idea triumphing over common sense.
How maddening it was, that he should let himself be pushed into the
gutter by a thing like that!  She said almost angrily:

'I don't understand you, Gordon, I really don't.  Here you are out
of work, you may be starving in a little while for all you know;
and yet when there's a good job which you can have almost for the
asking, you won't take it.'

'No, you're quite right.  I won't.'

'But you must have SOME kind of job, mustn't you?'

'A job, but not a GOOD job.  I've explained that God knows how
often.  I dare say I'll get a job of sorts sooner or later.  The
same kind of job as I had before.'

'But I don't believe you're even TRYING to get a job, are you?'

'Yes, I am.  I've been out all today seeing booksellers.'

'And you didn't even shave this morning!' she said, changing her
ground with feminine swiftness.

He felt his chin.  'I don't believe I did, as a matter of fact.'

'And then you expect people to give you a job!  Oh, Gordon!'

'Oh, well, what does it matter?  It's too much fag to shave every
day.'

'You're letting yourself go to pieces,' she said bitterly.  'You
don't seem to WANT to make any effort.  You want to sink--just
SINK!'

'I don't know--perhaps.  I'd sooner sink than rise.'

There were further arguments.  It was the first time she had ever
spoken to him like this.  Once again the tears came into her eyes,
and once again she fought them back.  She had come here swearing to
herself that she would not cry.  The dreadful thing was that her
tears, instead of distressing him, merely bored him.  It was as
though he COULD not care, and yet at his very centre there was an
inner heart that cared because he could not care.  If only she
would leave him alone!  Alone, alone!  Free from the nagging
consciousness of his failure; free to sink, as she had said, down,
down into quiet worlds where money and effort and moral obligation
did not exist.  Finally he got away from her and went back to the
spare bedroom, it was definitely a quarrel--the first really deadly
quarrel they had ever had.  Whether it was to be final he did not
know.  Nor did he care, at this moment.  He locked the door behind
him and lay on the bed smoking a cigarette.  He must get out of
this place, and quickly!  Tomorrow morning he would clear out.
No more sponging on Ravelston!  No more blackmail to the gods
of decency!  Down, down, into the mud--down to the streets, the
workhouse, and the jail.  It was only there that he could be at
peace.

Ravelston came upstairs to find Rosemary alone and on the point of
departure.  She said good-bye and then suddenly turned to him and
laid her hand on his arm.  She felt that she knew him well enough
now to take him into her confidence.

'Mr Ravelston, please--WILL you try and persuade Gordon to get a
job?'

'I'll do what I can.  Of course it's always difficult.  But I
expect we'll find him a job of sorts before long.'

'It's so dreadful to see him like this!  He goes absolutely to
pieces.  And all the time, you see, there's a job he could quite
easily get if he wanted it--a really GOOD job.  It's not that he
can't, it's simply that he won't.'

She explained about the New Albion.  Ravelston rubbed his nose.

'Yes.  As a matter of fact I've heard all about that.  We talked it
over when he left the New Albion.'

'But you don't think he was right to leave them?' she said,
promptly divining that Ravelston DID think Gordon right.

'Well--I grant you it wasn't very wise.  But there's a certain
amount of truth in what he says.  Capitalism's corrupt and we ought
to keep outside it--that's his idea.  It's not practicable, but in
a way it's sound.'

'Oh, I dare say it's all right as a theory!  But when he's out of
work and when he could get this job if he chose to ask for it--
SURELY you don't think he's right to refuse?'

'Not from a common-sense point of view.  But in principle--well,
yes.'

'Oh, in principle!  We can't afford principles, people like us.
THAT'S what Gordon doesn't seem to understand.'

Gordon did not leave the flat next morning.  One resolves to do
these things, one WANTS to do them; but when the time comes, in the
cold morning light, they somehow don't get done.  He would stay
just one day more he told himself; and then again it was 'just one
day more', until five whole days had passed since Rosemary's visit,
and he was still lurking there, living on Ravelston, with not even
a flicker of a job in sight.  He still made some pretence of
searching for work, but he only did it to save his face.  He would
go out and loaf for hours in public libraries, and then come home
to lie on the bed in the spare bedroom, dressed except for his
shoes, smoking endless cigarettes.  And for all that inertia and
the fear of the streets still held him there, those five days were
awful, damnable, unspeakable.  There is nothing more dreadful in
the world than to live in somebody else's house, eating his bread
and doing nothing in return for it.  And perhaps it is worst of all
when your benefactor won't for a moment admit that he is your
benefactor.  Nothing could have exceeded Ravelston's delicacy.  He
would have perished rather than admit that Gordon was sponging on
him.  He had paid Gordon's fine, he had paid his arrears of rent,
he had kept him for a week, and he had 'lent' him two pounds on top
of that; but it was nothing, it was a mere arrangement between
friends, Gordon would do the same for him another time.  From time
to time Gordon made feeble efforts to escape, which always ended in
the same way.

'Look here, Ravelston, I can't stay here any longer.  You've kept
me long enough.  I'm going to clear out tomorrow morning.'

'But my dear old chap!  Do be sensible.  You haven't--'  But no!
Not even now, when Gordon was openly on the rocks, could Ravelston
say, 'You haven't got any money.'  One can't say things like that.
He compromised:  'Where are you going to live, anyway?'

'God knows--I don't care.  There are common lodging-houses and
places.  I've got a few bob left.'

'Don't be such an ass.  You'd much better stay here till you've
found a job.'

'But it might be months, I tell you.  I can't live on you like
this.'

'Rot, my dear chap!  I like having you here.'

But of course, in his inmost heart, he didn't really like having
Gordon there.  How should he?  It was an impossible situation.
There was a tension between them all the time.  It is always so
when one person is living on another.  However delicately
disguised, charity is still horrible; there is a malaise, almost a
secret hatred, between the giver and the receiver.  Gordon knew
that his friendship with Ravelston would never be the same again.
Whatever happened afterwards, the memory of this evil time would be
between them.  The feeling of his dependent position, of being in
the way, unwanted, a nuisance, was with him night and day.  At
meals he would scarcely eat, he would not smoke Ravelston's
cigarettes, but bought himself cigarettes out of his few remaining
shillings.  He would not even light the gas-fire in his bedroom.
He would have made himself invisible if he could.  Every day, of
course, people were coming and going at the flat and at the office.
All of them saw Gordon and grasped his status.  Another of
Ravelston's pet scroungers, they all said.  He even detected a
gleam of professional jealousy in one or two of the hangers-on of
Antichrist.  Three times during that week Hermione Slater came.
After his first encounter with her he fled from the flat as soon as
she appeared; on one occasion, when she came at night, he had to
stay out of doors till after midnight.  Mrs Beaver, the charwoman,
had also 'seen through' Gordon.  She knew his type.  He was another
of those good-for-nothing young 'writing gentlemen' who sponged on
poor Mr Ravelston.  So in none too subtle ways she made things
uncomfortable for Gordon.  Her favourite trick was to rout him out
with broom and pan--'Now, Mr Comstock, I've got to do this room
out, IF you please'--from whichever room he had settled down in.

But in the end, unexpectedly and through no effort of his own,
Gordon did get a job.  One morning a letter came for Ravelston from
Mr McKechnie.  Mr McKechnie had relented--not to the extent of
taking Gordon back, of course, but to the extent of helping him
find another job.  He said that a Mr Cheeseman, a bookseller in
Lambeth, was looking for an assistant.  From what he said it was
evident that Gordon could get the job if he applied for it; it was
equally evident that there was some snag about the job.  Gordon had
vaguely heard of Mr Cheeseman--in the book trade everybody knows
everybody else.  In his heart the news bored him.  He didn't really
want this job.  He didn't want ever to work again; all he wanted
was to sink, sink, effortless, down into the mud.  But he couldn't
disappoint Ravelston after all Ravelston had done for him.  So the
same morning he went down to Lambeth to inquire about the job.

The shop was in the desolate stretch of road south of Waterloo
Bridge.  It was a poky, mean-looking shop, and the name over it,
in faded gilt, was not Cheeseman but Eldridge.  In the window,
however, there were some valuable calf folios, and some sixteenth-
century maps which Gordon thought must be worth money.  Evidently
Mr Cheeseman specialized in 'rare' books.  Gordon plucked up his
courage and went in.

As the door-bell ping'd, a tiny, evil-looking creature, with a
sharp nose and heavy black eyebrows, emerged from the office behind
the shop.  He looked up at Gordon with a kind of nosy malice.  When
he spoke it was in an extraordinary clipped manner, as though he
were biting each word in half before it escaped from him.  'Ot c'n
I do f'yer!'--that approximately was what it sounded like.  Gordon
explained why he had come.  Mr Cheeseman shot a meaning glance at
him and answered in the same clipped manner as before:

'Oh, eh?  Comstock, eh?  Come 'is way.  Got mi office back here.
Bin 'specting you.'

Gordon followed him.  Mr Cheeseman was a rather sinister little
man, almost small enough to be called a dwarf, with very black
hair, and slightly deformed.  As a rule a dwarf, when malformed,
has a full-sized torso and practically no legs.  With Mr Cheeseman
it was the other way about.  His legs were normal length, but the
top half of his body was so short that his buttocks seemed to
sprout almost immediately below his shoulder blades.  This gave
him, in walking, a resemblance to a pair of scissors.  He had the
powerful bony shoulders of the dwarf, the large ugly hands, and the
sharp nosing movements of the head.  His clothes had that peculiar
hardened, shiny texture of clothes that are very old and very
dirty.  They were just going into the office when the door-bell
ping'd again, and a customer came in, holding out a book from the
sixpenny box outside and half a crown.  Mr Cheeseman did not take
the change out of the till--apparently there was no till--but
produced a very greasy wash-leather purse from some secret place
under his waistcoat.  He handled the purse, which was almost lost
in his big hands, in a peculiarly secretive way, as though to hide
it from sight.

'I like keep mi money i' mi pocket,' he explained, with an upward
glance, as they went into the office.

It was apparent that Mr Cheeseman clipped his words from a notion
that words cost money and ought not to be wasted.  In the office
they had a talk, and Mr Cheeseman extorted from Gordon the
confession that he had been sacked for drunkenness.  As a matter of
fact he knew all about this already.  He had heard about Gordon
from Mr McKechnie, whom he had met at an auction a few days
earlier.  He had pricked up his ears when he heard the story, for
he was on the look-out for an assistant, and clearly an assistant
who had been sacked for drunkenness would come at reduced wages.
Gordon saw that his drunkenness was going to be used as a weapon
against him.  Yet Mr Cheeseman did not seem absolutely unfriendly.
He seemed to be the kind of person who will cheat you if he can,
and bully you if you give him the chance, but who will also regard
you with a contemptuous good-humour.  He took Gordon into his
confidence, talked of conditions in the trade, and boasted with
much chuckling of his own astuteness.  He had a peculiar chuckle,
his mouth curving upwards at the corners and his large nose seeming
about to disappear into it.

Recently, he told Gordon, he had had an idea for a profitable side-
line.  He was going to start a twopenny library; but it would have
to be quite separate from the shop, because anything so low-class
would frighten away the book-lovers who came to the shop in search
of 'rare' books.  He had taken premises a little distance away, and
in the lunch-hour he took Gordon to see them.  They were farther
down the dreary street, between a flyblown ham-and-beef shop and a
smartish undertaker.  The ads in the undertaker's window caught
Gordon's eye.  It seems you can get underground for as little as
two pounds ten nowadays.  You can even get buried on the hire-
purchase.  There was also an ad for cremations--'Reverent,
Sanitary, and Inexpensive.'

The premises consisted of a single narrow room--a mere pipe of a
room with a window as wide as itself, furnished with a cheap desk,
one chair, and a card index.  The new-painted shelves were ready
and empty.  This was not, Gordon saw at a glance, going to be the
kind of library that he had presided over at McKechnie's.
McKechnie's library had been comparatively highbrow.  It had
dredged no deeper than Dell, and it even had books by Lawrence and
Huxley.  But this was one of those cheap arid evil little libraries
('mushroom libraries', they are called) which are springing up all
over London and are deliberately aimed at the uneducated.  In
libraries like these there is not a single book that is ever
mentioned in the reviews or that any civilized person has ever
heard of.  The books are published by special low-class firms and
turned out by wretched hacks at the rate of four a year, as
mechanically as sausages and with much less skill.  In effect they
are merely fourpenny novelettes disguised as novels, and they only
cost the library-proprietor one and eightpence a volume.  Mr
Cheeseman explained that he had not ordered the books yet.  He
spoke of 'ordering the books' as one might speak of ordering a ton
of coals.  He was going to start with five hundred assorted titles,
he said.  The shelves were already marked off into sections--'Sex',
'Crime', 'Wild West', and so forth.

He offered Gordon the job.  It was very simple.  All you had to do
was to remain there ten hours a day, hand out the book, take the
money, and choke off the more obvious book-pinchers.  The pay, he
added with a measuring, sidelong glance, was thirty shillings a
week.

Gordon accepted promptly.  Mr Cheeseman was perhaps faintly
disappointed.  He had expected an argument, and would have enjoyed
crushing Gordon by reminding him that beggars can't be choosers.
But Gordon was satisfied.  The job would do.  There was no TROUBLE
about a job like this; no room for ambition, no effort, no hope.
Ten bob less--ten bob nearer the mud.  It was what he wanted.

He 'borrowed' another two pounds from Ravelston and took a
furnished bed-sitting room, eight bob a week, in a filthy alley
parallel to Lambeth Cut.  Mr Cheeseman ordered the five hundred
assorted titles, and Gordon started work on the twentieth of
December.  This, as it happened, was his thirtieth birthday.



10


Under ground, under ground!  Down in the safe soft womb of earth,
where there is no getting of jobs or losing of jobs, no relatives
or friends to plague you, no hope, fear, ambition, honour, duty--
no DUNS of any kind.  That was where he wished to be.

Yet it was not death, actual physical death, that he wished for.
It was a queer feeling that he had.  It had been with him ever
since that morning when he had woken up in the police cell.  The
evil, mutinous mood that comes after drunkenness seemed to have set
into a habit.  That drunken night had marked a period in his life.
It had dragged him downward with strange suddenness.  Before, he
had fought against the money-code, and yet he had clung to his
wretched remnant of decency.  But now it was precisely from decency
that he wanted to escape.  He wanted to go down, deep down, into
some world where decency no longer mattered; to cut the strings of
his self-respect, to submerge himself--to SINK, as Rosemary had
said.  It was all bound up in his mind with the thought of being
UNDER GROUND.  He liked to think about the lost people, the under-
ground people: tramps, beggars, criminals, prostitutes.  It is a
good world that they inhabit, down there in their frowzy kips and
spikes.  He liked to think that beneath the world of money there is
that great sluttish underworld where failure and success have no
meaning; a sort of kingdom of ghosts where all are equal.  That was
where he wished to be, down in the ghost-kingdom, BELOW ambition.
It comforted him somehow to think of the smoke-dim slums of South
London sprawling on and on, a huge graceless wilderness where you
could lose yourself for ever.

And in a way this job was what he wanted; at any rate, it was
something near what he wanted.  Down there in Lambeth, in winter,
in the murky streets where the sepia-shadowed faces of tea-
drunkards drifted through the mist, you had a SUBMERGED feeling.
Down here you had no contact with money or with culture.  No
highbrow customers to whom you had to act the highbrow; no one who
was capable of asking you, in that prying way that prosperous
people have, 'What are you, with your brains and education, doing
in a job like this?'  You were just part of the slum, and, like all
slum-dwellers, taken for granted.  The youths and girls and
draggled middle-aged women who came to the library scarcely even
spotted the fact that Gordon was an educated man.  He was just 'the
bloke at the library', and practically one of themselves.

The job itself, of course, was of inconceivable futility.  You just
sat there, ten hours a day, six hours on Thursdays, handing out
books, registering them, and receiving twopences.  Between whiles
there was nothing to do except read.  There was nothing worth
watching in the desolate street outside.  The principal event
of the day was when the hearse drove up to the undertaker's
establishment next door.  This had a faint interest for Gordon,
because the dye was wearing off one of the horses and it was
assuming by degrees a curious purplish-brown shade.  Much of the
time, when no customers came, he spent reading the yellow-jacketed
trash that the library contained.  Books of that type you could
read at the rate of one an hour.  And they were the kind of books
that suited him nowadays.  It is real 'escape literature', that
stuff in the twopenny libraries.  Nothing has ever been devised
that puts less strain on the intelligence; even a film, by
comparison, demands a certain effort.  And so when a customer
demanded a book of this category or that, whether it was 'Sex' or
'Crime' or 'Wild West' or 'ROmance' (always with the accent on the
O).  Gordon was ready with expert advice.

Mr Cheeseman was not a bad person to work for, so long as you
understood that if you worked till the Day of Judgement you would
never get a rise of wages.  Needless to say, he suspected Gordon of
pinching the till-money.  After a week or two he devised a new
system of booking, by which he could tell how many books had been
taken out and check this with the day's takings.  But it was still
(he reflected) in Gordon's power to issue books and make no record
of them; and so the possibility that Gordon might be cheating him
of sixpence or even a shilling a day continued to trouble him, like
the pea under the princess's mattress.  Yet he was not absolutely
unlikeable, in his sinister, dwarfish way.  In the evenings, after
he had shut the shop, when he came along to the library to collect
the day's takings, he would stay talking to Gordon for a while and
recounting with nosy chuckles any particularly astute swindles that
he had worked lately.  From these conversations Gordon pieced
together Mr Cheeseman's history.  He had been brought up in the
old-clothes trade, which was his spiritual vocation, so to speak,
and had inherited the bookshop from an uncle three years ago.  At
that time it was one of those dreadful bookshops in which there are
not even any shelves, in which the books lie about in monstrous
dusty piles with no attempt at classification.  It was frequented
to some extent by book-collectors, because there was occasionally a
valuable book among the piles of rubbish, but mainly it kept going
by selling secondhand paper-covered thrillers at twopence each.
Over this dustheap Mr Cheeseman had presided, at first, with
intense disgust.  He loathed books and had not yet grasped that
there was money to be made out of them.  He was still keeping his
old-clothes shop going by means of a deputy, and intended to return
to it as soon as he could get a good offer for the bookshop.  But
presently it was borne in upon him that books, properly handled,
are worth money.  As soon as he had made this discovery he
developed as astonishing flair for bookdealing.  Within two years
he had worked his shop up till it was one of the best 'rare'
bookshops of its size in London.  To him a book was as purely an
article of merchandise as a pair of second-hand trousers.  He had
never in his life READ a book himself, nor could he conceive why
anyone should want to do so.  His attitude towards the collectors
who pored so lovingly over his rare editions was that of a sexually
cold prostitute towards her clientele.  Yet he seemed to know by
the mere feel of a book whether it was valuable or not.  His head
was a perfect mine of auction-records and first-edition dates, and
he had a marvellous nose for a bargain.  His favourite way of
acquiring stock was to buy up the libraries of people who had just
died, especially clergymen.  Whenever a clergyman died Mr Cheeseman
was on the spot with the promptness of a vulture.  Clergymen, he
explained to Gordon, so often have good libraries and ignorant
widows.  He lived over the shop, was unmarried, of course, and had
no amusements and seemingly no friends.  Gordon used sometimes to
wonder what Mr Cheeseman did with himself in the evenings, when he
was not out snooping after bargains.  He had a mental picture of Mr
Cheeseman sitting in a double-locked room with the shutters over
the windows, counting piles of half-crowns and bundles of pound
notes which he stowed carefully away in cigarette-tins.

Mr Cheeseman bullied Gordon and was on the look-out for an excuse
to dock his wages; yet he did not bear him any particular ill-will.
Sometimes in the evening when he came to the library he would
produce a greasy packet of Smith's Potato Crisps from his pocket,
and, holding it out, say in his clipped style:

'Hassome chips?'

The packet was always grasped so firmly in his large hand that it
was impossible to extract more than two or three chips.  But he
meant it as a friendly gesture.

As for the place where Gordon lived, in Brewer's Yard, parallel to
Lambeth Cut on the south side, it was a filthy kip.  His bed-
sitting room was eight shillings a week and was just under the
roof.  With its sloping ceiling--it was a room shaped like a wedge
of cheese--and its skylight window, it was the nearest thing to the
proverbial poet's garret that he had ever lived in.  There was a
large, low, broken-backed bed with a ragged patchwork quilt and
sheets that were changed once fortnightly; a deal table ringed by
dynasties of teapots; a rickety kitchen chair; a tin basin for
washing in; a gas-ring in the fender.  The bare floorboards had
never been stained but were dark with dirt.  In the cracks in the
pink wallpaper dwelt multitudes of bugs; however, this was winter
and they were torpid unless you over-warmed the room.  You were
expected to make your own bed.  Mrs Meakin, the landlady,
theoretically 'did out' the rooms daily, but four days out of five
she found the stairs too much for her.  Nearly all the lodgers
cooked their own squalid meals in their bedrooms.  There was no
gas-stove, of course; just the gas-ring in the fender, and, down
two flights of stairs, a large evil-smelling sink which was common
to the whole house.

In the garret adjoining Gordon's there lived a tall handsome old
woman who was not quite right in the head and whose face was often
as black as a Negro's from dirt.  Gordon could never make out where
the dirt came from.  It looked like coal dust.  The children of the
neighbourhood used to shout 'Blackie!' after her as she stalked
along the pavement like a tragedy queen, talking to herself.  On
the floor below there was a woman with a baby which cried, cried
everlastingly; also a young couple who used to have frightful
quarrels and frightful reconciliations which you could hear all
over the house.  On the ground floor a house-painter, his wife, and
five children existed on the dole and an occasional odd job.  Mrs
Meakin, the landlady, inhabited some burrow or other in the
basement.  Gordon liked this house.  It was all so different from
Mrs Wisbeach's.  There was no mingy lower-middle-class decency
here, no feeling of being spied upon and disapproved of.  So long
as you paid your rent you could do almost exactly as you liked;
come home drunk and crawl up the stairs, bring women in at all
hours, lie in bed all day if you wanted to.  Mother Meakin was not
the type to interfere.  She was a dishevelled, jelly-soft old
creature with a figure like a cottage loaf.  People said that in
her youth she had been no better than she ought, and probably it
was true.  She had a loving manner towards anything in trousers.
Yet it seemed that traces of respectability lingered in her breast.
On the day when Gordon installed himself he heard her puffing and
struggling up the stairs, evidently bearing some burden.  She
knocked softly on the door with her knee, or the place where her
knee ought to have been, and he let her in.

''Ere y'are, then,' she wheezed kindly as she came in with her arms
full.  'I knew as 'ow you'd like this.  I likes all my lodgers to
feel comfortable-like.  Lemme put it on the table for you.  There!
That makes the room like a bit more 'ome-like, don't it now?'

It was an aspidistra.  It gave him a bit of a twinge to see it.
Even here, in this final refuge!  Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?
But it was a poor weedy specimen--indeed, it was obviously dying.

In this place he could have been happy if only people would let him
alone.  It was a place where you COULD be happy, in a sluttish way.
To spend your days in meaningless mechanical work, work that could
be slovened through in a sort of coma; to come home and light the
fire when you had any coal (there were sixpenny bags at the
grocer's) and get the stuffy little attic warm; to sit over a
squalid meal of bacon, bread-and-marg and tea, cooked over the gas-
ring; to lie on the frowzy bed, reading a thriller or doing the
Brain Brighteners in Tit Bits until the small hours; it was the
kind of life he wanted.  All his habits had deteriorated rapidly.
He never shaved more than three times a week nowadays, and only
washed the parts that showed.  There were good public baths near
by, but he hardly went to them as often as once in a month.  He
never made his bed properly, but just turned back the sheets, and
never washed his few crocks till all of them had been used twice
over.  There was a film of dust on everything.  In the fender there
was always a greasy frying-pan and a couple of plates coated with
the remnants of fried eggs.  One night the bugs came out of one of
the cracks and marched across the ceiling two by two.  He lay on
his bed, his hands under his head, watching them with interest.
Without regret, almost intentionally, he was letting himself go to
pieces.  At the bottom of all his feelings there was sulkiness a je
m'en fous in the face of the world.  Life had beaten him; but you
can still beat life by turning your face away.  Better to sink than
rise.  Down, down into the ghost-kingdom, the shadowy world where
shame, effort, decency do not exist!

To sink!  How easy it ought to be, since there are so few
competitors!  But the strange thing is that often it is harder to
sink than to rise.  There is always something that drags one
upwards.  After all, one is never quite alone; there are always
friends, lovers, relatives.  Everyone Gordon knew seemed to be
writing him letters, pitying him or bullying him.  Aunt Angela had
written, Uncle Walter had written, Rosemary had written over and
over again, Ravelston had written, Julia had written.  Even Flaxman
had sent a line to wish him luck.  Flaxman's wife had forgiven him,
and he was back at Peckham, in aspidistral bliss.  Gordon hated
getting letters nowadays.  They were a link with that other world
from which he was trying to escape.

Even Ravelston had turned against him.  That was after he had been
to see Gordon in his new lodgings.  Until this visit he had not
realized what kind of neighbourhood Gordon was living in.  As his
taxi drew up at the corner, in the Waterloo Road, a horde of ragged
shock-haired boys came swooping from nowhere, to fight round the
taxi door like fish at a bait.  Three of them clung to the handle
and hauled the door open simultaneously.  Their servile, dirty
little faces, wild with hope, made him feel sick.  He flung some
pennies among them and fled up the alley without looking at them
again.  The narrow pavements were smeared with a quantity of dogs'
excrement that was surprising, seeing that there were no dogs in
sight.  Down in the basement Mother Meakin was boiling a haddock,
and you could smell it half-way up the stairs.  In the attic
Ravelston sat on the rickety chair, with the ceiling sloping just
behind his head.  The fire was out and there was no light in the
room except four candles guttering in a saucer beside the
aspidistra.  Gordon lay on the ragged bed, fully dressed but with
no shoes on.  He had scarcely stirred when Ravelston came in.  He
just lay there, flat on his back, sometimes smiling a little, as
though there were some private joke between himself and the
ceiling.  The room had already the stuffy sweetish smell of rooms
that have been lived in a long time and never cleaned.  There were
dirty crocks lying about in the fender.

'Would you like a cup of tea?' Gordon said, without stirring.

'No thanks awfully--no,' said Ravelston, a little too hastily.

He had seen the brown-stained cups in the fender and the repulsive
common sink downstairs.  Gordon knew quite well why Ravelston
refused the tea.  The whole atmosphere of this place had given
Ravelston a kind of shock.  That awful mixed smell of slops and
haddock on the stairs!  He looked at Gordon, supine on the ragged
bed.  And, dash it, Gordon was a gentleman!  At another time he
would have repudiated that thought; but in this atmosphere pious
humbug was impossible.  All the class-instincts which he believed
himself not to possess rose in revolt.  It was dreadful to think of
anyone with brains and refinement living in a place like this.  He
wanted to tell Gordon to get out of it, pull himself together, earn
a decent income, and live like a gentleman.  But of course he didn't
say so.  You can't say things like that.  Gordon was aware of what
was going on inside Ravelston's head.  It amused him, rather.  He
felt no gratitude towards Ravelston for coming here and seeing him;
on the other hand, he was not ashamed of his surroundings as he
would once have been.  There was a faint, amused malice in the way
he spoke.

'You think I'm a B.F., of course,' he remarked to the ceiling.

'No, I don't.  Why should I?'

'Yes, you do.  You think I'm a B.F. to stay in this filthy place
instead of getting a proper job.  You think I ought to try for that
job at the New Albion.'

'No, dash it!  I never thought that.  I see your point absolutely.
I told you that before.  I think you're perfectly right in
principle.'

'And you think principles are all right so long as one doesn't go
putting them into practice.'

'No.  But the question always is, when IS one putting them into
practice?'

'It's quite simple.  I've made war on money.  This is where it's
led me.'

Ravelston rubbed his nose, then shifted uneasily on his chair.

'The mistake you make, don't you see, is in thinking one can live
in a corrupt society without being corrupt oneself.  After all,
what do you achieve by refusing to make money?  You're trying to
behave as though one could stand right outside our economic system.
But one can't.  One's got to change the system, or one changes
nothing.  One can't put things right in a hole-and-corner way, if
you take my meaning.'

Gordon waved a foot at the buggy ceiling.

'Of course this IS a hole-and-corner, I admit.'

'I didn't mean that,' said Ravelston, pained.

'But let's face facts.  You think I ought to be looking about for a
GOOD job, don't you?'

'It depends on the job.  I think you're quite right not to sell
yourself to that advertising agency.  But it does seem rather a
pity that you should stay in that wretched job you're in at
present.  After all, you HAVE got talents.  You ought to be using
them somehow.'

'There are my poems,' said Gordon, smiling at his private joke.

Ravelston looked abashed.  This remark silenced him.  Of course,
there WERE Gordon's poems.  There was London Pleasures, for
instance.  Ravelston knew, and Gordon knew, and each knew that the
other knew, that London Pleasures would never be finished.  Never
again, probably, would Gordon write a line of poetry; never, at
least, while he remained in this vile place, this blind-alley job
and this defeated mood.  He had finished with all that.  But this
could not be said, as yet.  The pretence was still kept up that
Gordon was a struggling poet--the conventional poet-in-garret.

It was not long before Ravelston rose to go.  This smelly place
oppressed him, and it was increasingly obvious that Gordon did not
want him here.  He moved hesitantly towards the door, pulling on
his gloves, then came back again, pulling off his left glove and
flicking it against his leg.

'Look here, Gordon, you won't mind my saying it--this is a filthy
place, you know.  This house, this street--everything.'

'I know.  It's a pigsty.  It suits me.'

'But do you HAVE to live in a place like this?'

'My dear chap, you know what my wages are.  Thirty bob a week.'

'Yes, but--!  Surely there ARE better places?  What rent are you
paying?'

'Eight bob.'

'Eight bob?  You could get a fairly decent unfurnished room for
that.  Something a bit better than this, anyway.  Look here, why
don't you take an unfurnished place and let me lend you ten quid
for furniture?'

'"Lend" me ten quid!  After all you've "lent" me already?  GIVE me
ten quid, you mean.'

Ravelston gazed unhappily at the wall.  Dash it, what a thing to
say!  He said flatly:

'All right, if you like to put it like that.  GIVE you ten quid.'

'But as it happens, you see, I don't want it.'

'But dash it all!  You might as well have a decent place to live
in.'

'But I don't want a decent place.  I want an indecent place.  This
one, for instance.'

'But why?  Why?'

'It's suited to my station,' said Gordon, turning his face to the
wall.

A few days later Ravelston wrote him a long, diffident sort of
letter.  It reiterated most of what he had said in their
conversation.  Its general effect was that Ravelston saw Gordon's
point entirely, that there was a lot of truth in what Gordon said,
that Gordon was absolutely right in principle, but--!  It was the
obvious, the inevitable 'but'.  Gordon did not answer.  It was
several months before he saw Ravelston again.  Ravelston made
various attempts to get in touch with him.  It was a curious fact--
rather a shameful fact from a Socialist's point of view--that the
thought of Gordon, who had brains and was of gentle birth, lurking
in that vile place and that almost menial job, worried him more
than the thought of ten thousand unemployed in Middlesbrough.
Several times, in hope of cheering Gordon up, he wrote asking him
to send contributions to Antichrist.  Gordon never answered.  The
friendship was at an end, it seemed to him.  The evil time when he
had lived on Ravelston had spoiled everything.  Charity kills
friendship.

And then there were Julia and Rosemary.  They differed from
Ravelston in this, that they had no shyness about speaking their
minds.  They did not say euphemistically that Gordon was 'right in
principle'; they knew that to refuse a 'good' job can never be
right.  Over and over again they besought him to go back to the New
Albion.  The worst was that he had both of them in pursuit of him
together.  Before this business they had never met, but now
Rosemary had got to know Julia somehow.  They were in feminine
league against him.  They used to get together and talk about the
'maddening' way in which Gordon was behaving.  It was the only
thing they had in common, their feminine rage against his
'maddening' behaviour.  Simultaneously and one after the other, by
letter and by word of mouth, they harried him.  It was unbearable.

Thank God, neither of them had seen his room at Mother Meakin's
yet.  Rosemary might have endured it, but the sight of that filthy
attic would have been almost the death of Julia.  They had been
round to see him at the library, Rosemary a number of times, Julia
once, when she could make a pretext to get away from the teashop.
Even that was bad enough.  It dismayed them to see what a mean,
dreary little place the library was.  The job at McKechnie's,
though wretchedly paid, had not been the kind of job that you need
actually be ashamed of.  It brought Gordon into touch with
cultivated people; seeing that he was a 'writer' himself, it might
conceivably 'lead to something'.  But here, in a street that was
almost a slum, serving out yellow-jacketed trash at thirty bob a
week--what hope was there in a job like that?  It was just a
derelict's job, a blind-alley job.  Evening after evening, walking
up and down the dreary misty street after the library was shut,
Gordon and Rosemary argued about it.  She kept on and on at him.
WOULD he go back to the New Albion?  WHY wouldn't he go back to the
New Albion?  He always told her that the New Albion wouldn't take
him back.  After all, he hadn't applied for the job and there was
no knowing whether he could get it; he preferred to keep it
uncertain.  There was something about him now that dismayed and
frightened her.  He seemed to have changed and deteriorated so
suddenly.  She divined, though he did not speak to her about it,
that desire of his to escape from all effort and all decency, to
sink down, down into the ultimate mud.  It was not only from money
but from life itself that he was turning away.  They did not argue
now as they had argued in the old days before Gordon had lost his
job.  In those days she had not paid much attention to his
preposterous theories.  His tirades against the money-morality had
been a kind of joke between them.  And it had hardly seemed to
matter that time was passing and that Gordon's chance of earning a
decent living was infinitely remote.  She had still thought of
herself as a young girl and of the future as limitless.  She had
watched him fling away two years of his life--two years of HER
life, for that matter; and she would have felt it ungenerous to
protest.

But now she was growing frightened.  Time's winged chariot was
hurrying near.  When Gordon lost his job she had suddenly realized,
with the sense of making a startling discovery, that after all she
was no longer very young.  Gordon's thirtieth birthday was past;
her own was not far distant.  And what lay ahead of them?  Gordon
was sinking effortless into grey, deadly failure.  He seemed to
WANT to sink.  What hope was there that they could ever get married
now?  Gordon knew that she was right.  The situation was impossible.
And so the thought, unspoken as yet, grew gradually in both their
minds that they would have to part--for good.

One night they were to meet under the railway arches.  It was a
horrible January night; no mist, for once, only a vile wind that
screeched round corners and flung dust and torn paper into your
face.  He waited for her, a small slouching figure, shabby almost
to raggedness, his hair blown about by the wind.  She was punctual,
as usual.  She ran towards him, pulled his face down, and kissed
his cold cheek.

'Gordon, dear, how cold you are!  Why did you come out without an
overcoat?'

'My overcoat's up the spout.  I thought you knew.'

'Oh, dear!  Yes.'

She looked up at him, a small frown between her black brows.  He
looked so haggard, so despondent, there in the ill-lit archway, his
face full of shadows.  She wound her arm through his and pulled him
out into the light.

'Let's keep walking.  It's too cold to stand about.  I've got
something serious I want to say to you.'

'What?'

'I expect you'll be very angry with me.'

'What is it?'

'This afternoon I went and saw Mr Erskine.  I asked leave to speak
to him for a few minutes.'

He knew what was coming.  He tried to free his arm from hers, but
she held on to it.

'Well?' he said sulkily.

'I spoke to him about you.  I asked him if he'd take you back.  Of
course he said trade was bad and they couldn't afford to take on
new staff and all that.  But I reminded him of what he'd said to
you, and he said, Yes, he'd always thought you were very promising.
And in the end he said he'd be quite ready to find a job for you if
you'd come back.  So you see I WAS right.  They WILL give you the
job.'

He did not answer.  She squeezed his arm.  'So NOW what do you
think about it?' she said.

'You know what I think,' he said coldly.

Secretly he was alarmed and angry.  This was what he had been
fearing.  He had known all along that she would do it sooner or
later.  It made the issue more definite and his own blame clearer.
He slouched on, his hands still in his coat pockets, letting her
cling to his arm but not looking towards her.

'You're angry with me?' she said.

'No, I'm not.  But I don't see why you had to do it--behind my
back.'

That wounded her.  She had had to plead very hard before she had
managed to extort that promise from Mr Erskine.  And it had needed
all her courage to beard the managing director in his den.  She had
been in deadly fear that she might be sacked for doing it.  But she
wasn't going to tell Gordon anything of that.

'I don't think you ought to say BEHIND YOUR BACK.  After all, I was
only trying to help you.'

'How does it help me to get the offer of a job I wouldn't touch
with a stick?'

'You mean you won't go back, even now?'

'Never.'

'Why?'

'MUST we go into it again?' he said wearily.

She squeezed his arm with all her strength and pulled him round,
making him face her.  There was a kind of desperation in the way
she clung to him.  She had made her last effort and it had failed.
It was as though she could feel him receding, fading away from her
like a ghost.

'You'll break my heart if you go on like this,' she said.

'I wish you wouldn't trouble about me.  It would be so much simpler
if you didn't.'

'But why do you have to throw your life away?'

'I tell you I can't help it.  I've got to stick to my guns.'

'You know what this will mean?'

With a chill at his heart, and yet with a feeling of resignation,
even of relief, he said:  'You mean we shall have to part--not see
each other again?'

They had walked on, and now they emerged into the Westminster
Bridge Road.  The wind met them with a scream, whirling at them a
cloud of dust that made both of them duck their heads.  They halted
again.  Her small face was full of lines, and the cold wind and the
cold lamplight did not improve it.

'You want to get rid of me,' he said.

'No.  No.  It's not exactly that.'

'But you feel we ought to part.'

'How can we go on like this?' she said desolately.

'It's difficult, I admit.'

'It's all so miserable, so hopeless!  What can it ever lead to?'

'So you don't love me after all?' he said.

'I do, I do!  You know I do.'

'In a way, perhaps.  But not enough to go on loving me when it's
certain I'll never have the money to keep you.  You'll have me as a
husband, but not as a lover.  It's still a question of money, you
see.'

'It is NOT money, Gordon!  It's NOT that.'

'Yes, it's just money.  There's been money between us from the
start.  Money, always money!'

The scene continued, but not for very much longer.  Both of them
were shivering with cold.  There is no emotion that matters greatly
when one is standing at a street corner in a biting wind.  When
finally they parted it was with no irrevocable farewell.  She
simply said, 'I must get back,' kissed him, and ran across the road
to the tram-stop.  Mainly with relief he watched her go.  He could
not stop now to ask himself whether he loved her.  Simply he wanted
to get away--away from the windy street, away from scenes and
emotional demands, back in the frowzy solitude of his attic.  If
there were tears in his eyes it was only from the cold of the wind.

With Julia it was almost worse.  She asked him to go and see her
one evening.  This was after she had heard, from Rosemary, of Mr
Erksine's offer of a job.  The dreadful thing with Julia was that
she understood nothing, absolutely nothing, of his motives.  All
she understood was that a 'good' job had been offered him and that
he had refused it.  She implored him almost on her knees not to
throw this chance away.  And when he told her that his mind was
made up, she wept, actually wept.  That was dreadful.  The poor
goose-like girl, with streaks of grey in her hair, weeping without
grace or dignity in her little Drage-furnished bed-sitting room!
This was the death of all her hopes.  She had watched the family
go down and down, moneyless and childless, into grey obscurity.
Gordon alone had had it in him to succeed; and he, from mad
perverseness, would not.  He knew what she was thinking; he had to
induce in himself a kind of brutality to stand firm.  It was only
because of Rosemary and Julia that he cared.  Ravelston did not
matter, because Ravelston understood.  Aunt Angela and Uncle
Walter, of course, were bleating weakly at him in long, fatuous
letters.  But them he disregarded.

In desperation Julia asked him, what did he mean to DO now that he
had flung away his last chance of succeeding in life.  He answered
simply, 'My poems.'  He had said the same to Rosemary and to
Ravelston.  With Ravelston the answer had sufficed.  Rosemary had
no longer any belief in his poems, but she would not say so.  As
for Julia, his poems had never at any time meant anything to her.
'I don't see much sense in writing if you can't make money out of
it,' was what she had always said.  And he himself did not believe
in his poems any longer.  But he still struggled to 'write', at
least at times.  Soon after he changed his lodgings he had copied
out on to clean sheets the completed portions of London Pleasures--
not quite four hundred lines, he discovered.  Even the labour of
copying it out was a deadly bore.  Yet he still worked on it
occasionally; cutting out a line here, altering another there, not
making or even expecting to make any progress.  Before long the
pages were as they had been before, a scrawled, grimy labyrinth of
words.  He used to carry the wad of grimy manuscript about with him
in his pocket.  The feeling of it there upheld him a little; after
all it was a kind of achievement, demonstrable to himself though to
nobody else.  There it was, sole product of two years--of a
thousand hours' work, it might be.  He had no feeling for it any
longer as a poem.  The whole concept of poetry was meaningless to
him now.  It was only that if London Pleasures were ever finished
it would be something snatched from fate, a thing created OUTSIDE
the money-world.  But he knew, far more clearly than before, that
it never would be finished.  How was it possible that any creative
impulse should remain to him, in the life he was living now?  As
time went on, even the desire to finish London Pleasures vanished.
He still carried the manuscript about in his pocket; but it was
only a gesture, a symbol of his private war.  He had finished for
ever with that futile dream of being a 'writer'.  After all, was
not that too a species of ambition?  He wanted to get away from all
that, BELOW all that.  Down, down!  Into the ghost-kingdom, out of
the reach of hope, out of the reach of fear!  Under ground, under
ground!  That was where he wished to be.

Yet in a way it was not so easy.  One night about nine he was lying
on his bed, with the ragged counterpane over his feet, his hands
under his head to keep them warm.  The fire was out.  The dust was
thick on everything.  The aspidistra had died a week ago and was
withering upright in its pot.  He slid a shoeless foot from under
the counterpane, held it up, and looked at it.  His sock was full
of holes--there were more holes than sock.  So here he lay, Gordon
Comstock, in a slum attic on a ragged bed, with his feet sticking
out of his socks, with one and fourpence in the world, with three
decades behind him and nothing, nothing accomplished!  Surely NOW
he was past redemption?  Surely, try as they would, they couldn't
prise him out of a hole like this?  He had wanted to reach the mud--
well, this was the mud, wasn't it?

Yet he knew that it was not so.  That other world, the world of
money and success, is always so strangely near.  You don't escape
it merely by taking refuge in dirt and misery.  He had been
frightened as well as angry when Rosemary told him about Mr
Erskine's offer.  It brought the danger so close to him.  A letter,
a telephone message, and from this squalor he could step straight
back into the money-world--back to four quid a week, back to effort
and decency and slavery.  Going to the devil isn't so easy as it
sounds.  Sometimes your salvation hunts you down like the Hound of
Heaven.

For a while he lay in an almost mindless state, gazing at the
ceiling.  The utter futility of just lying there, dirty and cold,
comforted him a little.  But presently he was roused by a light tap
at the door.  He did not stir.  It was Mother Meakin, presumably,
though it did not sound like her knock.

'Come in,' he said.

The door opened.  It was Rosemary.

She stepped in, and then stopped as the dusty sweetish smell of the
room caught her.  Even in the bad light of the lamp she could see
the state of filth the room was in--the litter of food and papers
on the table, the grate full of cold ashes, the foul crocks in the
fender, the dead aspidistra.  As she came slowly towards the bed
she pulled her hat off and threw it on to the chair.

'WHAT a place for you to live in!' she said.

'So you've come back?' he said.

'Yes.'

He turned a little away from her, his arm over his face.  'Come
back to lecture me some more, I suppose?'

'No.'

'Then why?'

'Because--'

She had knelt down beside the bed.  She pulled his arm away, put
her face forward to kiss him, then drew back, surprised, and began
to stroke the hair over his temple with the tips of her fingers.

'Oh, Gordon!'

'What?'

'You've got grey in your hair!'

'Have I?  Where?'

'Here--over the temple.  There's quite a little patch of it.  It
must have happened all of a sudden.'

'"My golden locks time hath to silver turned,"' he said
indifferently.

'So we're both going grey,' she said.

She bent her head to show him the three white hairs on her crown.
Then she wriggled herself on to the bed beside him, put an arm
under him, pulled him towards her, covered his face with kisses.
He let her do it.  He did not want this to happen--it was the very
thing that he least wanted.  But she had wriggled herself beneath
him; they were breast to breast.  Her body seemed to melt into his.
By the expression of her face he knew what had brought her here.
After all, she was virgin.  She did not know what she was doing.
It was magnanimity, pure magnanimity, that moved her.  His
wretchedness had drawn her back to him.  Simply because he was
penniless and a failure she had got to yield to him, even if it was
only once.

'I had to come back,' she said.

'Why?'

'I couldn't bear to think of you here alone.  It seemed so awful,
leaving you like that.'

'You did quite right to leave me.  You'd much better not have come
back.  You know we can't ever get married.'

'I don't care.  That isn't how one behaves to people one loves.  I
don't care whether you marry me or not.  I love you.'

'This isn't wise,' he said.

'I don't care.  I wish I'd done it years ago.'

'We'd much better not.'

'Yes.'

'No.'

'Yes!'

After all, she was too much for him.  He had wanted her so long,
and he could not stop to weigh the consequences.  So it was done
at last, without much pleasure, on Mother Meakin's dingy bed.
Presently Rosemary got up and rearranged her clothes.  The room,
though stuffy, was dreadfully cold.  They were both shivering a
little.  She pulled the coverlet further over Gordon.  He lay
without stirring, his back turned to her, his face hidden against
his arm.  She knelt down beside the bed, took his other hand, and
laid it for a moment against her cheek.  He scarcely noticed her.
Then she shut the door quietly behind her and tiptoed down the
bare, evil-smelling stairs.  She felt dismayed, disappointed, and
very cold.



11


Spring, spring!  Bytuene Mershe ant Averil, when spray biginneth to
spring!  When shaws be sheene and swards full fayre, and leaves
both large and longe!  When the hounds of spring are on winter's
traces, in the spring time, the only pretty ring time, when the
birds do sing, hey-ding-a-ding ding, cuckoo, jug-jug, pu-wee, ta-
witta-woo!  And so on and so on and so on.  See almost any poet
between the Bronze Age and 1805.

But how absurd that even now, in the era of central heating and
tinned peaches, a thousand so-called poets are still writing in the
same strain!  For what difference does spring or winter or any
other time of year make to the average civilized person nowadays?
In a town like London the most striking seasonal change, apart from
the mere change of temperature, is in the things you see lying
about on the pavement.  In late winter it is mainly cabbage leaves.
In July you tread on cherry stones, in November on burnt-out
fireworks.  Towards Christmas the orange peel grows thicker.  It
was a different matter in the Middle Ages.  There was some sense in
writing poems about spring when spring meant fresh meat and green
vegetables after months of frowsting in some windowless hut on a
diet of salt fish and mouldy bread.

If it was spring Gordon failed to notice it.  March in Lambeth did
not remind you of Persephone.  The days grew longer, there were
vile dusty winds and sometimes in the sky patches of harsh blue
appeared.  Probably there were a few sooty buds on the trees if you
cared to look for them.  The aspidistra, it turned out, had not
died after all; the withered leaves had dropped off it, but it was
putting forth a couple of dull green shoots near its base.

Gordon had been three months at the library now.  The stupid
slovenly routine did not irk him.  The library had swelled to a
thousand 'assorted titles' and was bringing Mr Cheeseman a pound a
week clear profit, so Mr Cheeseman was happy after his fashion.
He was, nevertheless, nurturing a secret grudge against Gordon.
Gordon had been sold to him, so to speak, as a drunkard.  He had
expected Gordon to get drunk and miss a day's work at least once,
thus giving a sufficient pretext for docking his wages; but Gordon
had failed to get drunk.  Queerly enough, he had no impulse to
drink nowadays.  He would have gone without beer even if he could
have afforded it.  Tea seemed a better poison.  All his desires and
discontents had dwindled.  He was better off on thirty bob a week
than he had been previously on two pounds.  The thirty bob covered,
without too much stretching, his rent, cigarettes, a washing bill
of about a shilling a week, a little fuel, and his meals, which
consisted almost entirely of bacon, bread-and-marg, and tea, and
cost about two bob a day, gas included.  Sometimes he even had
sixpence over for a seat at a cheap but lousy picture-house near
the Westminster Bridge Road.  He still carried the grimy manuscript
of London Pleasures to and fro in his pocket, but it was from mere
force of habit; he had dropped even the pretence of working.  All
his evenings were spent in the same way.  There in the remote
frowzy attic, by the fire if there was any coal left, in bed if
there wasn't, with teapot and cigarettes handy, reading, always
reading.  He read nothing nowadays except twopenny weekly papers.
Tit Bits, Answers, Peg's Paper, The Gem, The Magnet, Home Notes,
The Girl's Own Paper--they were all the same.  He used to get them
a dozen at a time from the shop.  Mr Cheeseman had great dusty
stacks of them, left over from his uncle's day and used for
wrapping paper.  Some of them were as much as twenty years old.

He had not seen Rosemary for weeks past.  She had written a number
of times and then, for some reason, abruptly stopped writing.
Ravelston had written once, asking him to contribute an article on
twopenny libraries to Antichrist.  Julia had sent a desolate little
letter, giving family news.  Aunt Angela had had bad colds all the
winter, and Uncle Walter was complaining of bladder trouble.
Gordon did not answer any of their letters.  He would have
forgotten their existence if he could.  They and their affection
were only an encumbrance.  He would not be free, free to sink down
into the ultimate mud, till he had cut his links with all of them,
even with Rosemary.

One afternoon he was choosing a book for a tow-headed factory girl,
when someone he only saw out of the corner of his eye came into the
library and hesitated just inside the door.

'What kind of book did you want?' he asked the factory girl.

'Oo--jest a kind of a ROmance, please.'

Gordon selected a ROmance.  As he turned, his heart bounded
violently.  The person who had just come in was Rosemary.  She did
not make any sign, but stood waiting, pale, and worried-looking,
with something ominous in her appearance.

He sat down to enter the book on the girl's ticket, but his hands
had begun trembling so that he could hardly do it.  He pressed the
rubber stamp in the wrong place.  The girl trailed out, peeping
into the book as she went.  Rosemary was watching Gordon's face.
It was a long time since she had seen him by daylight, and she was
struck by the change in him.  He was shabby to the point of
raggedness, his face had grown much thinner and had the dingy,
greyish pallor of people who live on bread and margarine.  He
looked much older--thirty-five at the least.  But Rosemary herself
did not look quite as usual.  She had lost her gay trim bearing,
and her clothes had the appearance of having been thrown on in a
hurry.  It was obvious that there was something wrong.

He shut the door after the factory girl.  'I wasn't expecting you,'
he began.

'I had to come.  I got away from the studio at lunch time.  I told
them I was ill.'

'You don't look well.  Here, you'd better sit down.'

There was only one chair in the library.  He brought it out from
behind the desk and was moving towards her, rather vaguely, to
offer some kind of caress.  Rosemary did not sit down, but laid her
small hand, from which she had removed the glove, on the top rung
of the chair-back.  By the pressure of her fingers he could see how
agitated she was.

'Gordon, I've a most awful thing to tell you.  It's happened after
all.'

'What's happened?'

'I'm going to have a baby.'

'A baby?  Oh, Christ!'

He stopped short.  For a moment he felt as though someone had
struck him a violent blow under the ribs.  He asked the usual
fatuous question:

'Are you sure?'

'Absolutely.  It's been weeks now.  If you knew the time I've had!
I kept hoping and hoping--I took some pills--oh, it was too
beastly!'

'A baby!  Oh, God, what fools we were!  As though we couldn't have
foreseen it!'

'I know.  I suppose it was my fault.  I--'

'Damn!  Here comes somebody.'

The door-bell ping'd.  A fat, freckled woman with an ugly under-lip
came in at a rolling gait and demanded 'Something with a murder in
it.'  Rosemary had sat down and was twisting her glove round and
round her fingers.  The fat woman was exacting.  Each book that
Gordon offered her she refused on the ground that she had 'had it
already' or that it 'looked dry'.  The deadly news that Rosemary
had brought had unnerved Gordon.  His heart pounding, his entrails
constricted, he had to pull out book after book and assure the fat
woman that this was the very book she was looking for.  At last,
after nearly ten minutes, he managed to fob her off with something
which she said grudgingly she 'didn't think she'd had before'.

He turned back to Rosemary.  'Well, what the devil are we going to
do about it?' he said as soon as the door had shut.

'I don't see what I can do.  If I have this baby I'll lose my job,
of course.  But it isn't only that I'm worrying about.  It's my
people finding out.  My mother--oh, dear!  It simply doesn't bear
thinking of.'

'Ah, your people!  I hadn't thought of them.  One's people!  What a
cursed incubus they are!'

'MY people are all right.  They've always been good to me.  But
it's different with a thing like this.'

He took a pace or two up and down.  Though the news had scared him
he had not really grasped it as yet.  The thought of a baby, his
baby, growing in her womb had awoken in him no emotion except
dismay.  He did not think of the baby as a living creature; it was
a disaster pure and simple.  And already he saw where it was going
to lead.

'We shall have to get married, I suppose,' he said flatly.

'Well, shall we?  That's what I came here to ask you.'

'But I suppose you want me to marry you, don't you?'

'Not unless YOU want to.  I'm not going to tie you down.  I know
it's against your ideas to marry.  You must decide for yourself.'

'But we've no alternative--if you're really going to have this
baby.'

'Not necessarily.  That's what you've got to decide.  Because after
all there IS another way.'

'What way?'

'Oh, YOU know.  A girl at the studio gave me an address.  A friend
of hers had it done for only five pounds.'

That pulled him up.  For the first time he grasped, with the only
kind of knowledge that matters, what they were really talking
about.  The words 'a baby' took on a new significance.  They did
not mean any longer a mere abstract disaster, they meant a bud of
flesh, a bit of himself, down there in her belly, alive and
growing.  His eyes met hers.  They had a strange moment of sympathy
such as they had never had before.  For a moment he did feel that
in some mysterious way they were one flesh.  Though they were feet
apart he felt as though they were joined together--as though some
invisible living cord stretched from her entrails to his.  He knew
then that it was a dreadful thing they were contemplating--a
blasphemy, if that word had any meaning.  Yet if it had been put
otherwise he might not have recoiled from it.  It was the squalid
detail of the five pounds that brought it home.

'No fear!' he said.  'Whatever happens we're not going to do THAT.
It's disgusting.'

'I know it is.  But I can't have the baby without being married.'

'No!  If that's the alternative I'll marry you.  I'd sooner cut my
right hand off than do a thing like that.'

Ping! went the door-bell.  Two ugly louts in cheap bright blue
suits, and a girl with a fit of the giggles, came in.  One of the
youths asked with a sort of sheepish boldness for 'something with
a kick in it--something smutty'.  Silently, Gordon indicated the
shelves where the 'sex' books were kept.  There were hundreds of
them in the library.  They had titles like Secrets of Paris and The
Man She Trusted; on their tattered yellow jackets were pictures of
half-naked girls lying on divans with men in dinner-jackets
standing over them.  The stories inside, however, were painfully
harmless.  The two youths and the girl ranged among them,
sniggering over the pictures on their covers, the girl letting out
little squeals and pretending to be shocked.  They disgusted Gordon
so much that he turned his back on them till they had chosen their
books.

When they had gone he came back to Rosemary's chair.  He stood
behind her, took hold of her small firm shoulders, then slid a hand
inside her coat and felt the warmth of her breast.  He liked the
strong springy feeling of her body; he liked to think that down
there, a guarded seed, his baby was growing.  She put a hand up and
caressed the hand that was on her breast, but did not speak.  She
was waiting for him to decide.

'If I marry you I shall have to turn respectable,' he said
musingly.

'Could you?' she said with a touch of her old manner.

'I mean I shall have to get a proper job--go back to the New
Albion.  I suppose they'd take me back.'

He felt her grow very still and knew that she had been waiting for
this.  Yet she was determined to play fair.  She was not going to
bully him or cajole him.

'I never said I wanted you to do that.  I want you to marry me--
yes, because of the baby.  But it doesn't follow you've got to keep
me.'

'There's no sense in marrying if I can't keep you.  Suppose I
married you when I was like I am at present--no money and no proper
job?  What would you do then?'

'I don't know.  I'd go on working as long as I could.  And
afterwards, when the baby got too obvious--well, I suppose I'd
have to go home to father and mother.'

'That would be jolly for you, wouldn't it?  But you were so anxious
for me to go back to the New Albion before.  You haven't changed
your mind?'

'I've thought things over.  I know you'd hate to be tied to a
regular job.  I don't blame you.  You've got your own life to
live.'

He thought it over a little while longer.  'It comes down to this.
Either I marry you and go back to the New Albion, or you go to one
of those filthy doctors and get yourself messed about for five
pounds.'

At this she twisted herself out of his grasp and stood up facing
him.  His blunt words had upset her.  They had made the issue
clearer and uglier than before.

'Oh, why did you say that?'

'Well, those ARE the alternatives.'

'I'd never thought of it like that.  I came here meaning to be
fair.  And now it sounds as if I was trying to bully you into it--
trying to play on your feelings by threatening to get rid of the
baby.  A sort of beastly blackmail.'

'I didn't mean that.  I was only stating facts.'

Her face was full of lines, the black brows drawn together.  But
she had sworn to herself that she would not make a scene.  He could
guess what this meant to her.  He had never met her people, but he
could imagine them.  He had some notion of what it might mean to go
back to a country town with an illegitimate baby; or, what was
almost as bad, with a husband who couldn't keep you.  But she was
going to play fair.  No blackmail!  She drew a sharp inward breath,
taking a decision.

'All right, then, I'm not going to hold THAT over your head.  It's
too mean.  Marry me or don't marry me, just as you like.  But I'll
have the baby, anyway.'

'You'd do that?  Really?'

'Yes, I think so.'

He took her in his arms.  Her coat had come open, her body was warm
against him.  He thought he would be a thousand kinds of fool if he
let her go.  Yet the alternative was impossible, and he did not see
it any less clearly because he held her in his arms.

'Of course, you'd like me to go back to the New Albion,' he said.

'No, I wouldn't.  Not if you don't want to.'

'Yes, you would.  After all, it's natural.  You want to see me
earning a decent income again.  In a GOOD job, with four pounds a
week and an aspidistra in the window.  Wouldn't you, now?  Own up.'

'All right, then--yes, I would.  But it's only something I'd LIKE
to see happening; I'm not going to MAKE you do it.  I'd just hate
you to do it if you didn't really want to.  I want you to feel
free.'

'Really and truly free?'

'Yes.'

'You know what that means?  Supposing I decided to leave you and
the baby in the lurch?'

'Well--if you really wanted to.  You're free--quite free.'

After a little while she went away.  Later in the evening or
tomorrow he would let her know what he decided.  Of course it was
not absolutely certain that the New Albion would give him a job
even if he asked them; but presumably they would, considering what
Mr Erskine had said.  Gordon tried to think and could not.  There
seemed to be more customers than usual this afternoon.  It maddened
him to have to bounce out of his chair every time he had sat down
and deal with some fresh influx of fools demanding crime-stories
and sex-stories and ROmances.  Suddenly, about six o'clock, he
turned out the lights, locked up the library, and went out.  He had
got to be alone.  The library was not due to shut for two hours
yet.  God knew what Mr Cheeseman would say when he found out.  He
might even give Gordon the sack.  Gordon did not care.

He turned westward, up Lambeth Cut.  It was a dull sort of evening,
not cold.  There was muck underfoot, white lights, and hawkers
screaming.  He had got to think this thing out, and he could think
better walking.  But it was so hard, so hard!  Back to the New
Albion, or leave Rosemary in the lurch; there was no other
alternative.  It was no use thinking, for instance, that he might
find some 'good' job which would offend his sense of decency a bit
less.  There aren't so many 'good' jobs waiting for moth-eaten
people of thirty.  The New Albion was the only chance he had or
ever would have.

At the corner, on the Westminster Bridge Road, he paused a moment.
There were some posters opposite, livid in the lamplight.  A
monstrous one, ten feet high at least, advertised Bovex.  The Bovex
people had dropped Corner Table and got on to a new tack.  They
were running a series of four-line poems--Bovex Ballads, they were
called.  There was a picture of a horribly eupeptic family, with
grinning ham-pink faces, sitting at breakfast; underneath, in
blatant lettering:


Why should YOU be thin and white?
And have that washed-out feeling?
Just take hot Bovex every night--
Invigorating--healing!


Gordon gazed at the thing.  He drank in its puling silliness.  God,
what trash!  'Invigorating--healing!'  The weak incompetence of it!
It hadn't even the vigorous badness of the slogans that really
stick.  Just soppy, lifeless drivel.  It would have been almost
pathetic in its feebleness if one hadn't reflected that all over
London and all over every town in England that poster was
plastered, rotting the minds of men.  He looked up and down the
graceless street.  Yes, war is coming soon.  You can't doubt it
when you see the Bovex ads.  The electric drills in our streets
presage the rattle of the machine-guns.  Only a little while before
the aeroplanes come.  Zoom--bang!  A few tons of T.N.T. to send our
civilization back to hell where it belongs.

He crossed the road and walked on, southward.  A curious thought
had struck him.  He did not any longer want that war to happen.  It
was the first time in months--years, perhaps--that he had thought
of it and not wanted it.

If he went back to the New Albion, in a month's time he might be
writing Bovex Ballads himself.  To go back to THAT!  Any 'good' job
was bad enough; but to be mixed up in THAT!  Christ!  Of course he
oughtn't to go back.  It was just a question of having the guts to
stand firm.  But what about Rosemary?  He thought of the kind of
life she would live at home, in her parents' house, with a baby and
no money; and of the news running through that monstrous family
that Rosemary had married some awful rotter who couldn't even keep
her.  She would have the whole lot of them nagging at her together.
Besides, there was the baby to think about.  The money-god is so
cunning.  If he only baited his traps with yachts and race-horses,
tarts and champagne, how easy it would be to dodge them.  It is
when he gets at you through your sense of decency that he finds you
helpless.

The Bovex Ballad jungled in Gordon's head.  He ought to stand firm.
He had made war on money--he ought to stick it out.  After all,
hitherto he HAD stuck it out, after a fashion.  He looked back over
his life.  No use deceiving himself.  It had been a dreadful life--
lonely, squalid, futile.  He had lived thirty years and achieved
nothing except misery.  But that was what he had chosen.  It was
what he WANTED, even now.  He wanted to sink down, down into the
muck where money does not rule.  But this baby-business had upset
everything.  It was a pretty banal predicament, after all.  Private
vices, public virtues--the dilemma is as old as the world.

He looked up and saw that he was passing a public library.  A
thought struck him.  That baby.  What did it mean, anyway, having a
baby?  What was it that was actually happening to Rosemary at this
moment?  He had only vague and general ideas of what pregnancy
meant.  No doubt they would have books in there that would tell him
about it.  He went in.  The lending library was on the left.  It
was there that you had to ask for works of reference.

The woman at the desk was a university graduate, young, colourless,
spectacled, and intensely disagreeable.  She had a fixed suspicion
that no one--at least, no male person--ever consulted works of
reference except in search of pornography.  As soon as you
approached she pierced you through and through with a flash of her
pince-nez and let you know that your dirty secret was no secret
from HER.  After all, all works of reference are pornographical,
except perhaps Whitaker's Almanack.  You can put even the Oxford
Dictionary to evil purposes by looking up words like ---- and ----.

Gordon knew her type at a glance, but he was too preoccupied to
care.  'Have you any book on gynaecology?' he said.

'Any WHAT?' demanded the young woman with a pince-nez flash of
unmistakable triumph.  As usual!  Another male in search of dirt!

'Well, any books on midwifery?  About babies being born, and so
forth.'

'We don't issue books of that description to the general public,'
said the young woman frostily.

'I'm sorry--there's a point I particularly want to look up.'

'Are you a medical student?'

'No.'

'Then I don't QUITE see what you want with books on midwifery.'

Curse the woman!  Gordon thought.  At another time he would have
been afraid of her; at present, however, she merely bored him.

'If you want to know, my wife's going to have a baby.  We neither
of us know much about it.  I want to see whether I can find out
anything useful.'

The young woman did not believe him.  He looked too shabby and
worn, she decided, to be a newly married man.  However, it was her
job to lend out books, and she seldom actually refused them, except
to children.  You always got your book in the end, after you had
been made to feel yourself a dirty swine.  With an aseptic air she
led Gordon to a small table in the middle of the library and
presented him with two fat books in brown covers.  Thereafter she
left him alone, but kept an eye on him from whatever part of the
library she happened to be in.  He could feel her pince-nez probing
the back of his neck at long range, trying to decide from his
demeanour whether he was really searching for information or merely
picking out the dirty bits.

He opened one of the books and searched inexpertly through it.
There were acres of close-printed text full of Latin words.  That
was no use.  He wanted something simple--pictures, for choice.  How
long had this thing been going on?  Six weeks--nine weeks, perhaps.
Ah!  This must be it.

He came on a print of a nine weeks' foetus.  It gave him a shock to
see it, for he had not expected it to look in the least like that.
It was a deformed, gnomelike thing, a sort of clumsy caricature of
a human being, with a huge domed head as big as the rest of its
body.  In the middle of the great blank expanse of head there was a
tiny button of an ear.  The thing was in profile; its boneless arm
was bent, and one hand, crude as a seal's flipper, covered its
face--fortunately, perhaps.  Below were little skinny legs, twisted
like a monkey's with the toes turned in.  It was a monstrous thing,
and yet strangely human.  It surprised him that they should begin
looking human so soon.  He had pictured something much more
rudimentary; a mere blob of nucleus, like a bubble of frog-spawn.
But it must be very tiny, of course.  He looked at the dimensions
marked below.  Length 30 millimetres.  About the size of a large
gooseberry.

But perhaps it had not been going on quite so long as that.  He
turned back a page or two and found a print of a six weeks' foetus.
A really dreadful thing this time--a thing he could hardly even
bear to look at.  Strange that our beginnings and endings are so
ugly--the unborn as ugly as the dead.  This thing looked as if it
were dead already.  Its huge head, as though too heavy to hold
upright, was bent over at right angles at the place where its neck
ought to have been.  There was nothing you could call a face, only
a wrinkle representing the eye--or was it the mouth?  It had no
human resemblance this time; it was more like a dead puppy-dog.
Its short thick arms were very doglike, the hands being mere stumpy
paws.  15.5 millimetres long--no bigger than a hazel nut.

He pored for a long time over the two pictures.  Their ugliness
made them more credible and therefore more moving.  His baby had
seemed real to him from the moment when Rosemary spoke of abortion;
but it had been a reality without visual shape--something that
happened in the dark and was only important after it had happened.
But here was the actual process taking place.  Here was the poor
ugly thing, no bigger than a gooseberry, that he had created by
his heedless act.  Its future, its continued existence perhaps,
depended on him.  Besides, it was a bit of himself--it WAS himself.
Dare one dodge such a responsibility as that?

But what about the alternative?  He got up, handed over his books
to the disagreeable young woman, and went out; then, on an impulse,
turned back and went into the other part of the library, where the
periodicals were kept.  The usual crowd of mangy-looking people
were dozing over the papers.  There was one table set apart for
women's papers.  He picked up one of them at random and bore it off
to another table.

It was an American paper of the more domestic kind, mainly adverts
with a few stories lurking apologetically among them.  And WHAT
adverts!  Quickly he flicked over the shiny pages.  Lingerie,
jewellery, cosmetics, fur coats, silk stockings flicked up and down
like the figures in a child's peepshow.  Page after page, advert
after advert.  Lipsticks, undies, tinned food, patent medicines,
slimming cures, face-creams.  A sort of cross-section of the money-
world.  A panorama of ignorance, greed, vulgarity, snobbishness,
whoredom, and disease.

And THAT was the world they wanted him to re-enter.  THAT was the
business in which he had a chance of Making Good.  He flicked over
the pages more slowly.  Flick, flick.  Adorable--until she smiles.
The food that is shot out of a gun.  Do you let foot-fag affect
your personality?  Get back that peach-bloom on a Beautyrest
Mattress.  Only a PENETRATING face-cream will reach that
undersurface dirt.  Pink toothbrush is HER trouble.  How to
alkalize your stomach almost instantly.  Roughage for husky kids.
Are you one of the four out of five?  The world-famed Culturequick
Scrapbook.  Only a drummer and yet he quoted Dante.

Christ, what muck!

But of course it was an American paper.  The Americans always go
one better on any kinds of beastliness, whether it is ice-cream
soda, racketeering, or theosophy.  He went over to the women's
table and picked up another paper.  An English one this time.
Perhaps the ads in an English paper wouldn't be quite so bad--
a little less brutally offensive?

He opened the paper.  Flick, flick.  Britons never shall be slaves!

Flick, flick.  Get that waist-line back to normal!  She SAID
'Thanks awfully for the lift,' but she THOUGHT, 'Poor boy, why
doesn't somebody tell him?'  How a woman of thirty-two stole her
young man from a girl of twenty.  Prompt relief for feeble kidneys.
Silkyseam--the smooth-sliding bathroom tissue.  Asthma was choking
her!  Are YOU ashamed of your undies?  Kiddies clamour for their
Breakfast Crisps.  Now I've a schoolgirl complexion all over.  Hike
all day on a slab of Vitamalt!

To be mixed up in THAT!  To be in it and of it--part and parcel of
it!  God, God, God!

Presently he went out.  The dreadful thing was that he knew already
what he was going to do.  His mind was made up--had been made up
for a long time past.  When this problem appeared it had brought
its solution with it; all his hesitation had been a kind of make-
believe.  He felt as though some force outside himself were pushing
him.  There was a telephone booth near by.  Rosemary's hostel was
on the phone--she ought to be at home by now.  He went into the
booth, feeling in his pocket.  Yes, exactly two pennies.  He
dropped them into the slot, swung the dial.

A refaned, adenoidal feminine voice answered him:  'Who's thyah,
please?'

He pressed Button A.  So the die was cast.

'Is Miss Waterlow in?'

'Who's THYAH, please?'

'Say it's Mr Comstock.  She'll know.  Is she at home?'

'Ay'll see.  Hold the lane, please.'

A pause.

'Hullo!  Is that you, Gordon?'

'Hullo!  Hullo!  Is that you, Rosemary?  I just wanted to tell you.
I've thought it over--I've made up my mind.'

'Oh!'  There was another pause.  With difficulty mastering her
voice, she added:  'Well, what did you decide?'

'It's all right.  I'll take the job--if they'll give it me, that
is.'

'Oh, Gordon, I'm so glad!  You're not angry with me?  You don't
feel I've sort of bullied you into it?'

'No, it's all right.  It's the only thing I can do.  I've thought
everything out.  I'll go up to the office and see them tomorrow.'

'I AM so glad!'

'Of course, I'm assuming they'll give me the job.  But I suppose
they will, after what old Erskine said.'

'I'm sure they will.  But, Gordon, there's just one thing.  You
will go there nicely dressed, won't you?  It might make a lot of
difference.'

'I know.  I'll have to get my best suit out of pawn.  Ravelston
will lend me the money.'

'Never mind about Ravelston.  I'll lend you the money.  I've got
four pounds put away.  I'll run out and wire it you before the
post-office shuts.  I expect you'll want some new shoes and a new
tie as well.  And, oh, Gordon!'

'What?'

'Wear a hat when you go up to the office, won't you?  It looks
better, wearing a hat.'

'A hat!  God!  I haven't worn a hat for two years.  Must I?'

'Well--it does look more business-like, doesn't it?'

'Oh, all right.  A bowler hat, even, if you think I ought.'

'I think a soft hat would do.  But get your hair cut, won't you,
there's a dear?'

'Yes, don't you worry.  I'll be a smart young business man.  Well
groomed, and all that.'

'Thanks ever so, Gordon dear.  I must run out and wire that money.
Good night and good luck.'

'Good night.'

He came out of the booth.  So that was that.  He had torn it now,
right enough.

He walked rapidly away.  What had he done?  Chucked up the sponge!
Broken all his oaths!  His long and lonely war had ended in
ignominious defeat.  Circumcise ye your foreskins, saith the Lord.
He was coming back to the fold, repentant.  He seemed to be walking
faster than usual.  There was a peculiar sensation, an actual
physical sensation, in his heart, in his limbs, all over him.  What
was it?  Shame, misery, despair?  Rage at being back in the clutch
of money?  Boredom when he thought of the deadly future?  He
dragged the sensation forth, faced it, examined it.  It was relief.

Yes, that was the truth of it.  Now that the thing was done he felt
nothing but relief; relief that now at last he had finished with
dirt, cold, hunger, and loneliness and could get back to decent,
fully human life.  His resolutions, now that he had broken them,
seemed nothing but a frightful weight that he had cast off.
Moreover, he was aware that he was only fulfilling his destiny.  In
some corner of his mind he had always known that this would happen.
He thought of the day when he had given them notice at the New
Albion; and Mr Erskine's kind, red, beefish face, gently counselling
him not to chuck up a 'good' job for nothing.  How bitterly he had
sworn, then, that he was done with 'good' jobs for ever!  Yet it was
foredoomed that he should come back, and he had known it even then.
And it was not merely because of Rosemary and the baby that he had
done it.  That was the obvious cause, the precipitating cause, but
even without it the end would have been the same; if there had been
no baby to think about, something else would have forced his hand.
For it was what, in his secret heart, he had desired.

After all he did not lack vitality, and that moneyless existence to
which he had condemned himself had thrust him ruthlessly out of the
stream of life.  He looked back over the last two frightful years.
He had blasphemed against money, rebelled against money, tried to
live like an anchorite outside the money-world; and it had brought
him not only misery, but also a frightful emptiness, an inescapable
sense of futility.  To abjure money is to abjure life.  Be not
righteous over much; why shouldst thou die before thy time?  Now he
was back in the money-world, or soon would be.  Tomorrow he would
go up to the New Albion, in his best suit and overcoat (he must
remember to get his overcoat out of pawn at the same time as his
suit), in homburg hat of the correct gutter-crawling pattern,
neatly shaved and with his hair cut short.  He would be as though
born anew.  The sluttish poet of today would be hardly recognizable
in the natty young business man of tomorrow.  They would take him
back, right enough; he had the talent they needed.  He would buckle
to work, sell his soul, and hold down his job.

And what about the future?  Perhaps it would turn out that these
last two years had not left much mark upon him.  They were merely a
gap, a small setback in his career.  Quite quickly, now that he had
taken the first step, he would develop the cynical, blinkered
business mentality.  He would forget his fine disgusts, cease to
rage against the tyranny of money--cease to be aware of it, even--
cease to squirm at the ads for Bovex and Breakfast Crisps.  He
would sell his soul so utterly that he would forget it had ever
been his.  He would get married, settle down, prosper moderately,
push a pram, have a villa and a radio and an aspidistra.  He would
be a law-abiding little cit like any other law-abiding little cit--
a soldier in the strap-hanging army.  Probably it was better so.

He slowed his pace a little.  He was thirty and there was grey in
his hair, yet he had a queer feeling that he had only just grown
up.  It occurred to him that he was merely repeating the destiny of
every human being.  Everyone rebels against the money-code, and
everyone sooner or later surrenders.  He had kept up his rebellion
a little longer than most, that was all.  And he had made such a
wretched failure of it!  He wondered whether every anchorite in his
dismal cell pines secretly to be back in the world of men.  Perhaps
there were a few who did not.  Somebody or other had said that the
modern world is only habitable by saints and scoundrels.  He,
Gordon, wasn't a saint.  Better, then, to be an unpretending
scoundrel along with the others.  It was what he had secretly pined
for; now that he had acknowledged his desire and surrendered to it,
he was at peace.

He was making roughly in the direction of home.  He looked up at
the houses he was passing.  It was a street he did not know.
Oldish houses, mean-looking and rather dark, let off in flatlets
and single rooms for the most part.  Railed areas, smoke-grimed
bricks, whited steps, dingy lace curtains.  'Apartments' cards in
half the windows, aspidistras in nearly all.  A typical lower-
middle-class street.  But not, on the whole, the kind of street
that he wanted to see blown to hell by bombs.

He wondered about the people in houses like those.  They would be,
for example, small clerks, shop-assistants, commercial travellers,
insurance touts, tram conductors.  Did THEY know that they were
only puppets dancing when money pulled the strings?  You bet they
didn't.  And if they did, what would they care?  They were too busy
being born, being married, begetting, working, dying.  It mightn't
be a bad thing, if you could manage it, to feel yourself one of
them, one of the ruck of men.  Our civilization is founded on greed
and fear, but in the lives of common men the greed and fear are
mysteriously transmuted into something nobler.  The lower-middle-
class people in there, behind their lace curtains, with their
children and their scraps of furniture and their aspidistras--they
lived by the money-code, sure enough, and yet they contrived to
keep their decency.  The money-code as they interpreted it was not
merely cynical and hoggish.  They had their standards, their
inviolable points of honour.  They 'kept themselves respectable'--
kept the aspidistra flying.  Besides, they were ALIVE.  They were
bound up in the bundle of life.  They begot children, which is what
the saints and the soul-savers never by any chance do.

The aspidistra is the tree of life, he thought suddenly.

He was aware of a lumpish weight in his inner pocket.  It was the
manuscript of London Pleasures.  He took it out and had a look at
it under a street lamp.  A great wad of paper, soiled and tattered,
with that peculiar, nasty, grimed-at-the-edges look of papers which
have been a long time in one's pocket.  About four hundred lines in
all.  The sole fruit of his exile, a two years' foetus which would
never be born.  Well, he had finished with all that.  Poetry!
POETRY, indeed!  In 1935.

What should he do with the manuscript?  Best thing, shove it down
the W.C.  But he was a long way from home and had not the necessary
penny.  He halted by the iron grating of a drain.  In the window of
the nearest house an aspidistra, a striped one, peeped between the
yellow lace curtains.

He unrolled a page of London Pleasures.  In the middle of the
labyrinthine scrawlings a line caught his eye.  Momentary regret
stabbed him.  After all, parts of it weren't half bad!  If only it
could ever be finished!  It seemed such a shame to shy it away
after all the work he had done on it.  Save it, perhaps?  Keep it
by him and finish it secretly in his spare time?  Even now it might
come to something.

No, no!  Keep your parole.  Either surrender or don't surrender.

He doubled up the manuscript and stuffed it between the bars of the
drain.  It fell with a plop into the water below.

Vicisti, O aspidistra!



12


Ravelston wanted to say good-bye outside the registry office, but
they would not hear of it, and insisted on dragging him off to have
lunch with them.  Not at Modigliani's, however.  They went to one
of those jolly little Soho restaurants where you can get such a
wonderful four-course lunch for half a crown.  They had garlic
sausage with bread and butter, fried plaice, entrecote aux pommes
frites, and a rather watery caramel pudding; also a bottle of Medoc
Superieur, three and sixpence the bottle.

Only Ravelston was at the wedding.  The other witness was a poor
meek creature with no teeth, a professional witness whom they
picked up outside the registry office and tipped half a crown.
Julia hadn't been able to get away from the teashop, and Gordon and
Rosemary had only got the day off from the office by pretexts
carefully manoeuvred a long time ahead.  Nobody knew they were
getting married, except Ravelston and Julia.  Rosemary was going to
go on working at the studio for another month or two.  She had
preferred to keep her marriage a secret until it was over, chiefly
for the sake of her innumerable brothers and sisters, none of whom
could afford wedding presents.  Gordon, left to himself, would have
done it in a more regular manner.  He had even wanted to be married
in church.  But Rosemary had put her foot down to that idea.

Gordon had been back at the office two months now.  Four ten a week
he was getting.  It would be a tight pinch when Rosemary stopped
working, but there was hope of a rise next year.  They would have
to get some money out of Rosemary's parents, of course, when the
baby was due to arrive.  Mr Clew had left the New Albion a year
ago, and his place had been taken by a Mr Warner, a Canadian who
had been five years with a New York publicity firm.  Mr Warner was
a live wire but quite a likeable person.  He and Gordon had a big
job on hand at the moment.  The Queen of Sheba Toilet Requisites
Co. were sweeping the country with a monster campaign for their
deodorant, April Dew.  They had decided that B.O. and halitosis
were worked out, or nearly, and had been racking their brains for a
long time past to think of some new way of scaring the public.
Then some bright spark suggested, What about smelling feet?  That
field had never been exploited and had immense possibilities.  The
Queen of Sheba had turned the idea over to the New Albion.  What
they asked for was a really telling slogan; something in the class
of 'Night-starvation'--something that would rankle in the public
consciousness like a poisoned arrow.  Mr Warner had thought it over
for three days and then emerged with the unforgettable phrase
'P.P.'  'P.P.' stood for Pedic Perspiration.  It was a real flash
of genius, that.  It was so simple and so arresting.  Once you knew
what they stood for, you couldn't possibly see those letters 'P.P.'
without a guilty tremor.  Gordon had searched for the word 'pedic'
in the Oxford Dictionary and found that it did not exist.  But Mr
Warner has said, Hell! what did it matter, anyway?  It would put
the wind up them just the same.  The Queen of Sheba had jumped at
the idea, of course.

They were putting every penny they could spare into the campaign.
On every hoarding in the British Isles huge accusing posters were
hammering 'P.P.' into the public mind.  All the posters were
identically the same.  They wasted no words, but just demanded with
sinister simplicity:


'P.P.'

WHAT ABOUT

YOU?


Just that--no pictures, no explanations.  There was no longer any
need to say what 'P.P.' stood for; everyone in England knew it by
this time.  Mr Warner, with Gordon to help him, was designing the
smaller ads for the newspapers and magazines.  It was Mr Warner who
supplied the bold sweeping ideas, sketched the general lay-out of
the ads, and decided what pictures would be needed; but it was
Gordon who wrote most of the letterpress--wrote the harrowing
little stories, each a realistic novel in a hundred words, about
despairing virgins of thirty, and lonely bachelors whose girls had
unaccountably thrown them over, and overworked wives who could not
afford to change their stockings once a week and who saw their
husbands subsiding into the clutches of 'the other woman'.  He did
it very well; he did it far better than he had ever done anything
else in his life.  Mr Warner gave golden reports of him.  There was
no doubt about Gordon's literary ability.  He could use words with
the economy that is only learned by years of effort.  So perhaps
his long agonizing struggles to be a 'writer' had not been wasted
after all.

They said good-bye to Ravelston outside the restaurant.  The taxi
bore them away.  Ravelston had insisted on paying for the taxi from
the registry office, so they felt they could afford another taxi.
Warmed with wine, they lolled together, in the dusty May sunshine
that filtered through the taxi window.  Rosemary's head on Gordon's
shoulder, their hands together in her lap.  He played with the very
slender wedding ring on Rosemary's ring finger.  Rolled gold, five
and sixpence.  It looked all right, however.

'I must remember to take if off before I go to the studio tomorrow,'
said Rosemary reflectively.

'To think we're really married!  Till death do us part.  We've done
it now, right enough.'

'Terrifying, isn't it?'

'I expect we'll settle down all right, though.  With a house of our
own and a pram and an aspidistra.'

He lifted her face up to kiss her.  She had a touch of make-up on
today, the first he had ever seen on her, and not too skilfully
applied.  Neither of their faces stood the spring sunshine very
well.  There were fine lines on Rosemary's, deep seams on Gordon's.
Rosemary looked twenty-eight, perhaps; Gordon looked at least
thirty-five.  But Rosemary had pulled the three white hairs out of
her crown yesterday.

'Do you love me?' he said.

'Adore you, silly.'

'I believe you do.  It's queer.  I'm thirty and moth-eaten.'

'I don't care.'

They began to kiss, then drew hurriedly apart as they saw two
scrawny upper-middle-class women, in a car that was moving parallel
to their own, observing them with catty interest.

The flat off the Edgware Road wasn't too bad.  It was a dull
quarter and rather a slummy street, but it was convenient for the
centre of London; also it was quiet, being a blind alley.  From
the back window (it was a top floor) you could see the roof of
Paddington Station.  Twenty-one and six a week, unfurnished.  One
bed, one reception, kitchenette, bath (with geyser), and W.C.  They
had got their furniture already, most of it on the never-never.
Ravelston had given them a complete set of crockery for a wedding
present--a very kindly thought, that.  Julia had given them a rather
dreadful 'occasional' table, veneered walnut with a scalloped edge.
Gordon had begged and implored her not to give them anything.  Poor
Julia!  Christmas had left her utterly broke, as usual, and Aunt
Angela's birthday had been in March.  But it would have seemed to
Julia a kind of crime against nature to let a wedding go by without
giving a present.  God knew what sacrifices she had made to scrape
together thirty bob for that 'occasional' table.  They were still
very short of linen and cutlery.  Things would have to be bought
piecemeal, when they had a few bob to spare.

They ran up the last flight of stairs in their excitement to get to
the flat.  It was all ready to inhabit.  They had spent their
evenings for weeks past getting the stuff in.  It seemed to them a
tremendous adventure to have this place of their own.  Neither of
them had ever owned furniture before; they had been living in
furnished rooms ever since their childhood.  As soon as they got
inside they made a careful tour of the flat, checking, examining,
and admiring everything as though they did not know by heart
already every item that was there.  They fell into absurd raptures
over each separate stick of furniture.  The double bed with the
clean sheet ready turned down over the pink eiderdown!  The linen
and towels stowed away in the chest of drawers!  The gateleg table,
the four hard chairs, the two armchairs, the divan, the bookcase,
the red Indian rug, the copper coal-scuttle which they had picked
up cheap in the Caledonian market!  And it was all their own, every
bit of it was their own--at least, so long as they didn't get
behind with the instalments!  They went into the kitchenette.
Everything was ready, down to the minutest detail.  Gas stove, meat
safe, enamel-topped table, plate rack, saucepans, kettle, sink
basket, mops, dishcloths--even a tin of Panshine, a packet of
soapflakes, and a pound of washing soda in a jam-jar.  It was all
ready for use, ready for life.  You could have cooked a meal in it
here and now.  They stood hand in hand by the enamel-topped table,
admiring the view of Paddington Station.

'Oh, Gordon, what fun it all is!  To have a place that's really our
own and no landladies interfering!'

'What I like best of all is to think of having breakfast together.
You opposite me on the other side of the table, pouring out coffee.
How queer it is!  We've known each other all these years and we've
never once had breakfast together.'

'Let's cook something now.  I'm dying to use those saucepans.'

She made some coffee and brought it into the front room on the red
lacquered tray which they had bought in Selfridge's Bargain
Basement.  Gordon wandered over to the 'occasional' table by the
window.  Far below the mean street was drowned in a haze of
sunlight, as though a glassy yellow sea had flooded it fathoms
deep.  He laid his coffee cup down on the 'occasional' table.

'This is where we'll put the aspidistra,' he said.

'Put the WHAT?'

'The aspidistra.'

She laughed.  He saw that she thought he was joking, and added:
'We must remember to go out and order it before all the florists
are shut.'

'Gordon!  You don't mean that?  You aren't REALLY thinking of
having an aspidistra?'

'Yes, I am.  We won't let ours get dusty, either.  They say an old
toothbrush is the best thing to clean them with.'

She had come over to his side, and she pinched his arm.

'You aren't serious, by any chance, are you?'

'Why shouldn't I be?'

'An aspidistra!  To think of having one of those awful depressing
things in here!  Besides, where could we put it?  I'm not going to
have it in this room, and in the bedroom it would be worse.  Fancy
having an aspidistra in one's bedroom!'

'We don't want one in the bedroom.  This is the place for an
aspidistra.  In the front window, where the people opposite can
see it.'

'Gordon, you ARE joking--you must be joking!'

'No, I'm not.  I tell you we've got to have an aspidistra.'

'But why?'

'It's the proper thing to have.  It's the first thing one buys
after one's married.  In fact, it's practically part of the wedding
ceremony.'

'Don't be so absurd!  I simply couldn't bear to have one of those
things in here.  You shall have a geranium if you really must.  But
not an aspidistra.'

'A geranium's no good.  It's an aspidistra we want.'

'Well, we're not going to have one, that's flat.'

'Yes, we are.  Didn't you promise to obey me just now?'

'No, I did not.  We weren't married in church.'

'Oh, well, it's implied in the marriage service.  "Love, honour,
and obey" and all that.'

'No, it isn't.  Anyway we aren't going to have that aspidistra.'

'Yes, we are.'

'We are NOT, Gordon!'

'Yes.'

'No!'

'Yes!'

'NO!'

She did not understand him.  She thought he was merely being
perverse.  They grew heated, and, according to their habit,
quarrelled violently.  It was their first quarrel as man and wife.
Half an hour later they went out to the florist's to order the
aspidistra.

But when they were half-way down the first flight of stairs
Rosemary stopped short and clutched the banister.  Her lips parted;
she looked very queer for a moment.  She pressed a hand against her
middle.

'Oh, Gordon!'

'What?'

'I felt it move!'

'Felt what move?'

'The baby.  I felt it move inside me.'

'You did?'

A strange, almost terrible feeling, a sort of warm convulsion,
stirred in his entrails.  For a moment he felt as though he were
sexually joined to her, but joined in some subtle way that he had
never imagined.  He had paused a step or two below her.  He fell on
his knees, pressed his ear to her belly, and listened.

'I can't hear anything,' he said at last.

'Of course not, silly!  Not for months yet.'

'But I shall be able to hear it later on, shan't I?'

'I think so.  YOU can hear it at seven months, _I_ can feel it at
four.  I think that's how it is.'

'But it really did move?  You're sure?  You really felt it move?'

'Oh, yes.  It moved.'

For a long time he remained kneeling there, his head pressed
against the softness of her belly.  She clasped her hands behind
his head and pulled it closer.  He could hear nothing, only the
blood drumming in his own ear.  But she could not have been
mistaken.  Somewhere in there, in the safe, warm, cushioned
darkness, it was alive and stirring.

Well, once again things were happening in the Comstock family.



THE END


Title:      Shooting an Elephant
Author:     George Orwell


In Moulmein, in lower Burma, I was hated by large numbers of people--the
only time in my life that I have been important enough for this to happen
to me. I was sub-divisional police officer of the town, and in an
aimless, petty kind of way anti-European feeling was very bitter. No one
had the guts to raise a riot, but if a European woman went through the
bazaars alone somebody would probably spit betel juice over her dress. As
a police officer I was an obvious target and was baited whenever it
seemed safe to do so. When a nimble Burman tripped me up on the football
field and the referee (another Burman) looked the other way, the crowd
yelled with hideous laughter. This happened more than once. In the end
the sneering yellow faces of young men that met me everywhere, the
insults hooted after me when I was at a safe distance, got badly on my
nerves. The young Buddhist priests were the worst of all. There were
several thousands of them in the town and none of them seemed to have
anything to do except stand on street corners and jeer at Europeans.

All this was perplexing and upsetting. For at that time I had already
made up my mind that imperialism was an evil thing and the sooner I
chucked up my job and got out of it the better. Theoretically--and
secretly, of course--I was all for the Burmese and all against their
oppressors, the British. As for the job I was doing, I hated it more
bitterly than I can perhaps make clear. In a job like that you see the
dirty work of Empire at close quarters. The wretched prisoners huddling
in the stinking cages of the lock-ups, the grey, cowed faces of the
long-term convicts, the scarred buttocks of the men who had been Bogged
with bamboos--all these oppressed me with an intolerable sense of guilt.
But I could get nothing into perspective. I was young and ill-educated
and I had had to think out my problems in the utter silence that is
imposed on every Englishman in the East. I did not even know that the
British Empire is dying, still less did I know that it is a great deal
better than the younger empires that are going to supplant it. All I knew
was that I was stuck between my hatred of the empire I served and my rage
against the evil-spirited little beasts who tried to make my job
impossible. With one part of my mind I thought of the British Raj as an
unbreakable tyranny, as something clamped down, in saecula saeculorum,
upon the will of prostrate peoples; with another part I thought that the
greatest joy in the world would be to drive a bayonet into a Buddhist
priest's guts. Feelings like these are the normal by-products of
imperialism; ask any Anglo-Indian official, if you can catch him off
duty.

One day something happened which in a roundabout way was enlightening. It
was a tiny incident in itself, but it gave me a better glimpse than I had
had before of the real nature of imperialism--the real motives for which
despotic governments act. Early one morning the sub-inspector at a police
station the other end of the town rang me up on the phone and said that
an elephant was ravaging the bazaar. Would I please come and do something
about it? I did not know what I could do, but I wanted to see what was
happening and I got on to a pony and started out. I took my rifle, an
old .44 Winchester and much too small to kill an elephant, but I thought
the noise might be useful in terrorem. Various Burmans stopped me on the
way and told me about the elephant's doings. It was not, of course, a wild
elephant, but a tame one which had gone "must." It had been chained up,
as tame elephants always are when their attack of "must" is due, but on
the previous night it had broken its chain and escaped. Its mahout, the
only person who could manage it when it was in that state, had set out in
pursuit, but had taken the wrong direction and was now twelve hours'
journey away, and in the morning the elephant had suddenly reappeared in
the town. The Burmese population had no weapons and were quite helpless
against it. It had already destroyed somebody's bamboo hut, killed a cow
and raided some fruit-stalls and devoured the stock; also it had met the
municipal rubbish van and, when the driver jumped out and took to his
heels, had turned the van over and inflicted violences upon it.

The Burmese sub-inspector and some Indian constables were waiting for me
in the quarter where the elephant had been seen. It was a very poor
quarter, a labyrinth of squalid bamboo huts, thatched with palmleaf,
winding all over a steep hillside. I remember that it was a cloudy,
stuffy morning at the beginning of the rains. We began questioning the
people as to where the elephant had gone and, as usual, failed to get any
definite information. That is invariably the case in the East; a story
always sounds clear enough at a distance, but the nearer you get to the
scene of events the vaguer it becomes. Some of the people said that the
elephant had gone in one direction, some said that he had gone in
another, some professed not even to have heard of any elephant. I had
almost made up my mind that the whole story was a pack of lies, when we
heard yells a little distance away. There was a loud, scandalized cry of
"Go away, child! Go away this instant!" and an old woman with a switch in
her hand came round the corner of a hut, violently shooing away a crowd
of naked children. Some more women followed, clicking their tongues and
exclaiming; evidently there was something that the children ought not to
have seen. I rounded the hut and saw a man's dead body sprawling in the
mud. He was an Indian, a black Dravidian coolie, almost naked, and he
could not have been dead many minutes. The people said that the elephant
had come suddenly upon him round the corner of the hut, caught him with
its trunk, put its foot on his back and ground him into the earth. This
was the rainy season and the ground was soft, and his face had scored a
trench a foot deep and a couple of yards long. He was lying on his belly
with arms crucified and head sharply twisted to one side. His face was
coated with mud, the eyes wide open, the teeth bared and grinning with an
expression of unendurable agony. (Never tell me, by the way, that the
dead look peaceful. Most of the corpses I have seen looked devilish.) The
friction of the great beast's foot had stripped the skin from his back as
neatly as one skins a rabbit. As soon as I saw the dead man I sent an
orderly to a friend's house nearby to borrow an elephant rifle. I had
already sent back the pony, not wanting it to go mad with fright and
throw me if it smelt the elephant.

The orderly came back in a few minutes with a rifle and five cartridges,
and meanwhile some Burmans had arrived and told us that the elephant was
in the paddy fields below, only a few hundred yards away. As I started
forward practically the whole population of the quarter flocked out of
the houses and followed me. They had seen the rifle and were all shouting
excitedly that I was going to shoot the elephant. They had not shown much
interest in the elephant when he was merely ravaging their homes, but it
was different now that he was going to be shot. It was a bit of fun to
them, as it would be to an English crowd; besides they wanted the meat.
It made me vaguely uneasy. I had no intention of shooting the elephant--I
had merely sent for the rifle to defend myself if necessary--and it is
always unnerving to have a crowd following you. I marched down the hill,
looking and feeling a fool, with the rifle over my shoulder and an
ever-growing army of people jostling at my heels. At the bottom, when you
got away from the huts, there was a metalled road and beyond that a miry
waste of paddy fields a thousand yards across, not yet ploughed but soggy
from the first rains and dotted with coarse grass. The elephant was
standing eight yards from the road, his left side towards us. He took not
the slightest notice of the crowd's approach. He was tearing up bunches
of grass, beating them against his knees to clean them and stuffing them
into his mouth.

I had halted on the road. As soon as I saw the elephant I knew with
perfect certainty that I ought not to shoot him. It is a serious matter
to shoot a working elephant--it is comparable to destroying a huge and
costly piece of machinery--and obviously one ought not to do it if it can
possibly be avoided. And at that distance, peacefully eating, the
elephant looked no more dangerous than a cow. I thought then and I think
now that his attack of "must" was already passing off; in which case he
would merely wander harmlessly about until the mahout came back and
caught him. Moreover, I did not in the least want to shoot him. I decided
that I would watch him for a little while to make sure that he did not
turn savage again, and then go home.

But at that moment I glanced round at the crowd that had followed me. It
was an immense crowd, two thousand at the least and growing every minute.
It blocked the road for a long distance on either side. I looked at the
sea of yellow faces above the garish clothes-faces all happy and excited
over this bit of fun, all certain that the elephant was going to be shot.
They were watching me as they would watch a conjurer about to perform a
trick. They did not like me, but with the magical rifle in my hands I was
momentarily worth watching. And suddenly I realized that I should have to
shoot the elephant after all. The people expected it of me and I had got
to do it; I could feel their two thousand wills pressing me forward,
irresistibly. And it was at this moment, as I stood there with the rifle
in my hands, that I first grasped the hollowness, the futility of the
white man's dominion in the East. Here was I, the white man with his gun,
standing in front of the unarmed native crowd--seemingly the leading
actor of the piece; but in reality I was only an absurd puppet pushed to
and fro by the will of those yellow faces behind. I perceived in this
moment that when the white man turns tyrant it is his own freedom that he
destroys. He becomes a sort of hollow, posing dummy, the conventionalized
figure of a sahib. For it is the condition of his rule that he shall
spend his life in trying to impress the "natives," and so in every crisis
he has got to do what the "natives" expect of him. He wears a mask, and
his face grows to fit it. I had got to shoot the elephant. I had
committed myself to doing it when I sent for the rifle. A sahib has got
to act like a sahib; he has got to appear resolute, to know his own mind
and do definite things. To come all that way, rifle in hand, with two
thousand people marching at my heels, and then to trail feebly away,
having done nothing--no, that was impossible. The crowd would laugh at
me. And my whole life, every white man's life in the East, was one long
struggle not to be laughed at.

But I did not want to shoot the elephant. I watched him beating his bunch
of grass against his knees, with that preoccupied grandmotherly air that
elephants have. It seemed to me that it would be murder to shoot him. At
that age I was not squeamish about killing animals, but I had never shot
an elephant and never wanted to. (Somehow it always seems worse to kill a
large animal.) Besides, there was the beast's owner to be considered.
Alive, the elephant was worth at least a hundred pounds; dead, he would
only be worth the value of his tusks, five pounds, possibly. But I had
got to act quickly. I turned to some experienced-looking Burmans who had
been there when we arrived, and asked them how the elephant had been
behaving. They all said the same thing: he took no notice of you if you
left him alone, but he might charge if you went too close to him.

It was perfectly clear to me what I ought to do. I ought to walk up to
within, say, twenty-five yards of the elephant and test his behavior. If
he charged, I could shoot; if he took no notice of me, it would be safe
to leave him until the mahout came back. But also I knew that I was going
to do no such thing. I was a poor shot with a rifle and the ground was
soft mud into which one would sink at every step. If the elephant charged
and I missed him, I should have about as much chance as a toad under a
steam-roller. But even then I was not thinking particularly of my own
skin, only of the watchful yellow faces behind. For at that moment, with
the crowd watching me, I was not afraid in the ordinary sense, as I would
have been if I had been alone. A white man mustn't be frightened in front
of "natives"; and so, in general, he isn't frightened. The sole thought
in my mind was that if anything went wrong those two thousand Burmans
would see me pursued, caught, trampled on and reduced to a grinning
corpse like that Indian up the hill. And if that happened it was quite
probable that some of them would laugh. That would never do.

There was only one alternative. I shoved the cartridges into the magazine
and lay down on the road to get a better aim. The crowd grew very still,
and a deep, low, happy sigh, as of people who see the theatre curtain go
up at last, breathed from innumerable throats. They were going to have
their bit of fun after all. The rifle was a beautiful German thing with
cross-hair sights. I did not then know that in shooting an elephant one
would shoot to cut an imaginary bar running from ear-hole to ear-hole. I
ought, therefore, as the elephant was sideways on, to have aimed straight
at his ear-hole, actually I aimed several inches in front of this,
thinking the brain would be further forward.

When I pulled the trigger I did not hear the bang or feel the kick--one
never does when a shot goes home--but I heard the devilish roar of glee
that went up from the crowd. In that instant, in too short a time, one
would have thought, even for the bullet to get there, a mysterious,
terrible change had come over the elephant. He neither stirred nor fell,
but every line of his body had altered. He looked suddenly stricken,
shrunken, immensely old, as though the frighfful impact of the bullet had
paralysed him without knocking him down. At last, after what seemed a
long time--it might have been five seconds, I dare say--he sagged
flabbily to his knees. His mouth slobbered. An enormous senility seemed
to have settled upon him. One could have imagined him thousands of years
old. I fired again into the same spot. At the second shot he did not
collapse but climbed with desperate slowness to his feet and stood weakly
upright, with legs sagging and head drooping. I fired a third time. That
was the shot that did for him. You could see the agony of it jolt his
whole body and knock the last remnant of strength from his legs. But in
falling he seemed for a moment to rise, for as his hind legs collapsed
beneath him he seemed to tower upward like a huge rock toppling, his
trunk reaching skyward like a tree. He trumpeted, for the first and only
time. And then down he came, his belly towards me, with a crash that
seemed to shake the ground even where I lay.

I got up. The Burmans were already racing past me across the mud. It was
obvious that the elephant would never rise again, but he was not dead. He
was breathing very rhythmically with long rattling gasps, his great mound
of a side painfully rising and falling. His mouth was wide open--I could
see far down into caverns of pale pink throat. I waited a long time for
him to die, but his breathing did not weaken. Finally I fired my two
remaining shots into the spot where I thought his heart must be. The
thick blood welled out of him like red velvet, but still he did not die.
His body did not even jerk when the shots hit him, the tortured breathing
continued without a pause. He was dying, very slowly and in great agony,
but in some world remote from me where not even a bullet could damage him
further. I felt that I had got to put an end to that dreadful noise. It
seemed dreadful to see the great beast Lying there, powerless to move and
yet powerless to die, and not even to be able to finish him. I sent back
for my small rifle and poured shot after shot into his heart and down his
throat. They seemed to make no impression. The tortured gasps continued
as steadily as the ticking of a clock.

In the end I could not stand it any longer and went away. I heard later
that it took him half an hour to die. Burmans were bringing dahs and
baskets even before I left, and I was told they had stripped his body
almost to the bones by the afternoon.

Afterwards, of course, there were endless discussions about the shooting
of the elephant. The owner was furious, but he was only an Indian and
could do nothing. Besides, legally I had done the right thing, for a mad
elephant has to be killed, like a mad dog, if its owner fails to control
it. Among the Europeans opinion was divided. The older men said I was
right, the younger men said it was a damn shame to shoot an elephant for
killing a coolie, because an elephant was worth more than any damn
Coringhee coolie. And afterwards I was very glad that the coolie had been
killed; it put me legally in the right and it gave me a sufficient
pretext for shooting the elephant. I often wondered whether any of the
others grasped that I had done it solely to avoid looking a fool.

THE END

Title:      The Road to Wigan Pier
Author:     George Orwell




PART ONE

  1

The first sound in the mornings was the clumping of the mill-girls' clogs
down the cobbled street. Earlier than that, I suppose, there were factory
whistles which I was never awake to hear.

There were generally four of us in the bedroom, and a beastly place it
was, with that defiled impermanent look of rooms that are not serving
their rightful purpose. Years earlier the house had been an ordinary
dwelling-house, and when the Brookers had taken it and fitted it out as
a tripe-shop and lodging-house, they had inherited some of the more
useless pieces of furniture and had never had the energy to remove them.
We were therefore sleeping in what was still recognizably a
drawing-room. Hanging from the ceiling there was a heavy glass
chandelier on which the dust was so thick that it was like fur. And
covering most of one wall there was a huge hideous piece of junk,
something between a sideboard and a hall-stand, with lots of carving and
little drawers and strips of looking-glass, and there was a once-gaudy
carpet ringed by the slop-pails of years, and two gilt chairs with burst
seats, and one of those old-fashioned horsehair armchairs which you
slide off when you try to sit on them. The room had been turned into a
bedroom by thrusting four squalid beds in among this other wreckage.

My bed was in the right-hand corner on the side nearest the door. There
was another bed across the foot of it and jammed hard against it (it had
to be in that position to allow the door to open) so that I had to sleep
with my legs doubled up; if I straightened them out I kicked the
occupant of the other bed in the small of the back. He was an elderly
man named Mr Reilly, a mechanic of sorts and employed 'on top' at one of
the coal pits. Luckily he had to go to work at five in the morning, so I
could uncoil my legs and have a couple of hours' proper sleep after he
was gone. In the bed opposite there was a Scotch miner who had been
injured in a pit accident (a huge chunk of stone pinned him to the
ground and it was a couple of hours before they could lever it off), and
had received five hundred pounds compensation. He was a big handsome man
of forty, with grizzled hair and a clipped moustache, more like a
sergeant-major than a miner, and he would lie in bed till late in the
day, smoking a short pipe. The other bed was occupied by a succession of
commercial travellers, newspaper-canvassers, and hire-purchase touts who
generally stayed for a couple of nights. It was a double bed and much
the best in the room. I had slept in it myself my first night there, but
had been manoeuvred out of it to make room for another lodger. I believe
all newcomers spent their first night in the double bed, which was used,
so to speak, as bait. All the windows were kept tight shut, with a red
sandbag jammed in the bottom, and in the morning the room stank like a
ferret's cage. You did not notice it when you got up, but if you went
out of the room and came back, the smell hit you in the face with a
smack.

I never discovered how many bedrooms the house contained, but strange to
say there was a bathroom, dating from before the Brookers' time.
Downstairs there was the usual kitchen living-room with its huge open
range burning night and day. It was lighted only by a skylight, for on
one side of it was the shop and on the other the larder, which opened
into some dark subterranean place where the tripe was stored. Partly
blocking the door of the larder there was a shapeless sofa upon which
Mrs Brooker, our landlady, lay permanently ill, festooned in grimy
blankets. She had a big, pale yellow, anxious face. No one knew for
certain what was the matter with her; I suspect that her only real
trouble was over-eating. In front of the fire there was almost always a
line of damp washing, and in the middle of the room was the big kitchen
table at which the family and all the lodgers ate. I never saw this
table completely uncovered, but I saw its various wrappings at different
times. At the bottom there was a layer of old newspaper stained by
Worcester Sauce; above that a sheet of sticky white oil-cloth; above
that a green serge cloth; above that a coarse linen cloth, never changed
and seldom taken off. Generally the crumbs from breakfast were still on
the table at supper. I used to get to know individual crumbs by sight
and watch their progress up and down the table from day to day.

The shop was a narrow, cold sort of room. On the outside of the window
a few white letters, relics of ancient chocolate advertisements, were
scattered like stars. Inside there was a slab upon which lay the great
white folds of tripe, and the grey flocculent stuff known as 'black
tripe', and the ghostly translucent feet of pigs, ready boiled. It was
the ordinary 'tripe and pea' shop, and not much else was stocked except
bread, cigarettes, and tinned stuff. 'Teas' were advertised in the
window, but if a customer demanded a cup of tea he was usually put off
with excuses. Mr Brooker, though out of work for two years, was a miner
by trade, but he and his wife had been keeping shops of various kinds as
a side-line all their lives. At one time they had had a pub, but they
had lost their licence for allowing gambling on the premises. I doubt
whether any of their businesses had ever paid; they were the kind of
people who run a business chiefly in order to have something to grumble
about. Mr Brooker was a dark, small-boned, sour, Irish-looking man, and
astonishingly dirty. I don't think I ever once saw his hands clean. As
Mrs Brooker was now an invalid he prepared most of the food, and like
all people with permanently dirty hands he had a peculiarly intimate,
lingering manner of handling things. If he gave you a slice of
bread-and-butter there was always a black thumb-print on it. Even in the
early morning when he descended into the mysterious den behind Mrs
Brooker's sofa and fished out the tripe, his hands were already black. I
heard dreadful stories from the other lodgers about the place where the
tripe was kept. Blackbeetles were said to swarm there. I do not know how
often fresh consignments of tripe were ordered, but it was at long
intervals, for Mrs Brooker used to date events by it. 'Let me see now,
I've had in three lots of froze (frozen tripe) since that happened,'
etc. We lodgers were never given tripe to eat. At the time I imagined
that this was because tripe was too expensive; I have since thought that
it was merely because we knew too much about it. The Brookers never ate
tripe themselves, I noticed.

The only permanent lodgers were the Scotch miner, Mr Reilly, two old-age
pensioners, and an unemployed man on the P.A.C. named Joe--he was the
kind of person who has no surname. The Scotch miner was a bore when you
got to know him. Like so many unemployed men he spent too much time
reading newspapers, and if you did not head him off he would discourse
for hours about such things as the Yellow Peril, trunk murders,
astrology, and the conflict between religion and science. The old-age
pensioners had, as usual, been driven from their homes by the Means
Test. They handed their weekly ten shillings over to the Brookers and in
return got the kind of accommodation you would expect for ten shillings;
that is, a bed in the attic and meals chiefly of bread-and-butter. One
of them was of 'superior' type and was dying of some malignant
disease--cancer, I believe. He only got out of bed on the days when he
went to draw his pension. The other, called by everyone Old Jack, was an
ex-miner aged seventy-eight who had worked well over fifty years in the
pits. He was alert and intelligent, but curiously enough he seemed only
to remember his boyhood experiences and to have forgotten all about the
modern mining machinery and improvements. He used to tell me tales of
fights with savage horses in the narrow galleries underground. When he
heard that I was arranging to go down several coal mines he was
contemptuous and declared that a man of my size (six feet two and a
half) would never manage the 'travelling'; it was no use telling him
that the 'travelling' was better than it used to be. But he was friendly
to everyone and used to give us all a fine shout of 'Good night, boys!'
as he crawled up the stairs to his bed somewhere under the rafters. What
I most admired about Old Jack was that he never cadged; he was generally
out-of tobacco towards the end of the week, but he always refused to
smoke anyone else's. The Brookers had insured the lives of both old-age
pensioners with one of the tanner-a-week companies. It was said that
they were overheard anxiously asking the insurance-tout 'how long people
lives when they've got cancer'.

Joe, like the Scotchman, was a great reader of newspapers and spent
almost his entire day in the public library. He was the typical
unmarried unemployed man, a derelict-looking, frankly ragged creature
with a round, almost childish face on which there was a naively naughty
expression. He looked more like a neglected little boy than a grown-up
man. I suppose it is the complete lack of responsibility that makes so
many of these men look younger than their ages. From Joe's appearance I
took him to be about twenty-eight, and was amazed to learn that he was
forty-three. He had a love of resounding phrases and was very proud of
the astuteness with which he had avoided getting married. He often said
to me, 'Matrimonial chains is a big item,' evidently feeling this to be
a very subtle and portentous remark. His total income was fifteen
shillings a week, and he paid out six or seven to the Brookers for his
bed. I sometimes used to see him making himself a cup of tea over the
kitchen fire, but for the rest he got his meals somewhere out of doors;
it was mostly slices of bread-and-marg and packets of fish and chips, I
suppose.

Besides these there was a floating clientele of commercial travellers of
the poorer sort, travelling actors--always common in the North because
most of the larger pubs hire variety artists at the week-ends--and
newspaper-canvassers. The newspaper-canvassers were a type I had never
met before. Their job seemed to me so hopeless, so appalling that I
wondered how anyone could put up with such a thing when prison was a
possible alternative. They were employed mostly by weekly or Sunday
papers, and they were sent from town to town, provided with maps and
given a list of streets which they had to 'work' each day. If they
failed to secure a minimum of twenty orders a day, they got the sack. So
long as they kept up their twenty orders a day they received a small
salary--two pounds a week, I think; on any order over the twenty they
drew a tiny commission. The thing is not so impossible as it sounds,
because in working-class districts every family takes in a twopenny
weekly paper and changes it every few weeks; but I doubt whether anyone
keeps a job of that kind long. The newspapers engage poor desperate
wretches, out-of-work clerks and commercial travellers and the like, who
for a while make frantic efforts and keep their sales up to the minimum;
then as the deadly work wears them down they are sacked and fresh men
are taken on. I got to know two who were employed by one of the more
notorious weeklies. Both of them were middle-aged men with families to
support, and one of them was a grandfather. They were on their feet ten
hours a day, 'working' their appointed streets, and then busy late into
the night filling in blank forms for some swindle their paper was
running--one of those schemes by which you are 'given' a set of crockery
if you take out a six weeks' subscription and send a two-shilling postal
order as well. The fat one, the grandfather, used to fall asleep with
his head on a pile of forms. Neither of them could afford the pound a
week which the Brookers charged for full board. They used to pay a small
sum for their beds and make shamefaced meals in a corner of the kitchen
off bacon and bread-and-margarine which they stored in their
suit-cases.

The Brookers had large numbers of sons and daughters, most of whom had
long since fled from home. Some were in Canada 'at Canada', as Mrs
Brooker used to put it. There was only one son living near by, a large
pig-like young man employed in a garage, who frequently came to the
house for his meals. His wife was there all day with the two children,
and most of the cooking and laundering was done by her and by Emmie, the
fiancee of another son who was in London. Emmie was a fair-haired,
sharp-nosed, unhappy-looking girl who worked at one of the mills for
some starvation wage, but nevertheless spent all her evenings in bondage
at the Brookers' house. I gathered that the marriage was constantly
being postponed and would probably never take place, but Mrs Brooker had
already appropriated Emmie as a daughter-in-law, and nagged her in that
peculiar watchful, loving way that invalids have. The rest of the
housework was done, or not done, by Mr Brooker. Mrs Brooker seldom rose
from her sofa in the kitchen (she spent the night there as well as the
day) and was too ill to do anything except eat stupendous meals. It was
Mr Brooker who attended to the shop, gave the lodgers their food, and
'did out' the bedrooms. He was always moving with incredible slowness
from one hated job to another. Often the beds were still unmade at six
in the evening, and at any hour of the day you were liable to meet Mr
Brooker on the stairs, carrying a full chamber-pot which he gripped with
his thumb well over the rim. In the mornings he sat by the fire with a
tub of filthy water, peeling potatoes at the speed of a slow-motion
picture. I never saw anyone who could peel potatoes with quite such an
air of brooding resentment. You could see the hatred of this 'bloody
woman's work', as he called it, fermenting inside him, a kind of bitter
juice. He was one of those people who can chew their grievances like a
cud.

Of course, as I was indoors a good deal, I heard all about the Brookers'
woes, and how everyone swindled them and was ungrateful to them, and how
the shop did not pay and the lodging-house hardly paid. By local
standards they were not so badly off, for, in some way I did not
understand, Mr Brooker was dodging the Means Test and drawing an
allowance from the P.A.C., but their chief pleasure was talking about
their grievances to anyone who would listen. Mrs Brooker used to lament
by the hour, lying on her sofa, a soft mound of fat and self-pity,
saying the same things over and over again.' We don't seem to get no
customers nowadays. I don't know 'ow it is. The tripe's just a-laying
there day after day--such beautiful tripe it is, too! It does seem 'ard,
don't it now?' etc., etc., etc. All Mrs Brookers' laments ended with'
It does seem 'ard, don't it now?' like the refrain of a ballade.
Certainly it was true that the shop did not pay. The whole place had the
unmistakable dusty, flyblown air of a business that is going down. But
it would have been quite useless to explain to them _why_ nobody came to
the shop, even if one had had the face to do it; neither was capable of
understanding that last year's dead bluebottles supine in the shop
window are not good for trade.

But the thing that really tormented them was the thought of those two
old-age pensioners living in their house, usurping floor-space,
devouring food, and paying only ten shillings a week. I doubt whether
they were really losing money over the old-age pensioners, though
certainly the profit on ten shillings a week must have been very small.
But in their eyes the two old men were a kind of dreadful parasite who
had fastened on them and were living on their charity. Old Jack they
could just tolerate, because he kept out-of-doors most of the day, but
they really hated the bedridden one, Hooker by name. Mr Brooker had a
queer way of pronouncing his name, without the H and with a long
U--'Uker'. What tales I heard about old Hooker and his fractiousness,
the nuisance of making his bed, the way he 'wouldn't eat' this and
'wouldn't eat' that, his endless ingratitude and, above all, the selfish
obstinacy with which he refused to die! The Brookers were quite openly
pining for him to die. When that happened they could at least draw the
insurance money. They seemed to feel him there, eating their substance
day after day, as though he had been a living worm in their bowels.
Sometimes Mr Brooker would look up from his potato-peeling, catch my
eye, and jerk his head with a look of inexpressible bitterness towards
the ceiling, towards old Hooker's room. 'It's a b-, ain't it?' he would
say. There was no need to say more; I had heard all about old Hooker's
ways already. But the Brookers had grievances of one kind and another
against all their lodgers, myself included, no doubt. Joe, being on the
P.A.C., was practically in the same category as the old-age pensioners.
The Scotchman paid a pound a week, but he was indoors most of the day
and they 'didn't like him always hanging round the place', as they put
it. The newspaper-canvassers were out all day, but the Brookers bore
them a grudge for bringing in their own food, and even Mr Reilly, their
best lodger, was in disgrace because Mrs Brooker said that he woke her
up when he came downstairs in the mornings. They couldn't, they
complained perpetually, get the kind of lodgers they wanted--good-class
'commercial gentlemen' who paid full board and were out all day. Their
ideal lodger would have been somebody who paid thirty shillings a week
and never came indoors except to sleep. I have noticed that people who
let lodgings nearly always hate their lodgers. They want their money but
they look on them as intruders and have a curiously watchful, jealous
attitude which at bottom is a determination not to let the lodger make
himself too much at home. It is an inevitable result of the bad system
by which the lodger has to live in somebody else's house without being
one of the family.

The meals at the Brookers' house were uniformly disgusting. For
breakfast you got two rashers of bacon and a pale fried egg, and
bread-and-butter which had often been cut overnight and always had
thumb-marks on it. However tactfully I tried, I could never induce Mr
Brooker to let me cut my own bread-and-butter; he _would_ hand it to me
slice by slice, each slice gripped firmly under that broad black thumbs.
For dinner there were generally those threepenny steak puddings which
are sold ready-made in tins--these were part of the stock of the shop, I
think--and boiled potatoes and rice pudding. For tea there was more
bread-and-butter and frayed-looking sweet cakes which were probably
bought as 'stales' from the baker. For supper there was the pale flabby
Lancashire cheese and biscuits. The Brookers never called these biscuits
biscuits. They always referred to them reverently as 'cream
crackers'--'Have another cream cracker, Mr Reilly. You'll like a cream
cracker with your cheese'--thus glozing over the fact that there was
only cheese for supper. Several bottles of Worcester Sauce and a
half-full jar of marmalade lived permanently on the table. It was usual
to souse everything, even a piece of cheese, with Worcester Sauce, but I
never saw anyone brave the marmalade jar, which was an unspeakable mass
of stickiness and dust. Mrs Brooker had her meals separately but also
took snacks from any meal that happened to be going, and manoeuvred with
great skill for what she called 'the bottom of the pot', meaning the
strongest cup of tea. She had a habit of constantly wiping her mouth on
one of her blankets. Towards the end of my stay she took to tearing off
strips of newspaper for this purpose, and in the morning the floor was
often littered with crumpled-up balls of slimy paper which lay there for
hours. The smell of the kitchen was dreadful, but, as with that of the
bedroom, you ceased to notice it after a while.

It struck me that this place must be fairly normal as lodging-houses in
the industrial areas go, for on the whole the lodgers did not complain.
The only one who ever did so to my knowledge was a little black-haired,
sharp-nosed Cockney, a traveller for a cigarette firm. He had never been
in the North before, and I think that till recently he had been in
better employ and was used to staying in commercial hotels. This was his
first glimpse of really low-class lodgings, the kind of place in which
the poor tribe of touts and canvassers have to shelter upon their
endless journeys. In the morning as we were dressing (he had slept in
the double bed, of course) I saw him look round the desolate room with a
sort of wondering aversion. He caught my eye and suddenly divined that I
was a fellow-Southerner. 'The filthy bloody bastards!' he said
feelingly. After that he packed his suit-case, went downstairs and, with
great strength of mind, told the Brookers that this was not the kind of
house he was accustomed to and that he was leaving immediately. The
Brookers could never understand why. They were astonished and hurt. The
ingratitude of it! Leaving them like that for no reason after a single
night! Afterwards they discussed it over and over again, in all its
bearings. It was added to their store of grievances.

On the day when there was a full chamber-pot under the breakfast table I
decided to leave. The place was beginning to depress me. It was not only
the dirt, the smells, and the vile food, but the feeling of stagnant
meaningless decay, of having got down into some subterranean place where
people go creeping round and round, just like blackbeetles, in an
endless muddle of slovened jobs and mean grievances. The most dreadful
thing about people like the Brookers is the way they say the same things
over and over again. It gives you the feeling that they are not real
people at all, but a kind of ghost for ever rehearsing the same futile
rigmarole. In the end Mrs Brooker's self-pitying talk--always the same
complaints, over and over, and always ending with the tremulous whine of
'It does seem 'ard, don't it now?'--revolted me even more than her habit
of wiping her mouth with bits of newspaper. But it is no use saying that
people like the Brookers are just disgusting and trying to put them out
of mind. For they exist in tens and hundreds of thousands; they are one
of the characteristic by-products of the modern world. You cannot
disregard them if you accept the civilization that produced them. For
this is part at least of what industrialism has done for us. Columbus
sailed the Atlantic, the first steam engines tottered into motion, the
British squares stood firm under the French guns at Waterloo, the
one-eyed scoundrels of the nineteenth century praised God and filled
their pockets; and this is where it all led--to labyrinthine slums and
dark back kitchens with sickly, ageing people creeping round and round
them like blackbeetles. It is a kind of duty to see and smell such
places now and again, especially smell them, lest you should forget that
they exist; though perhaps it is better not to stay there too long.

The train bore me away, through the monstrous scenery of slag-heaps,
chimneys, piled scrap-iron, foul canals, paths of cindery mud
criss-crossed by the prints of clogs. This was March, but the weather
had been horribly cold and everywhere there were mounds of blackened
snow. As we moved slowly through the outskirts of the town we passed row
after row of little grey slum houses running at right angles to
the-embankment. At the back of one of the houses a young woman was
kneeling on the stones, poking a stick up the leaden waste-pipe which
ran from the sink inside and which I suppose was blocked. I had time to
see everything about her--her sacking apron, her clumsy clogs, her arms
reddened by the cold. She looked up as the train passed, and I was
almost near enough to catch her eye. She had a round pale face, the
usual exhausted face of the slum girl who is twenty-five and looks
forty, thanks to miscarriages and drudgery; and it wore, for the second
in which I saw it, the most desolate, hopeless expression I have
ever seen. It struck me then that we are mistaken when we say that 'It
isn't the same for them as it would be for us,' and that people bred in
the slums can imagine nothing but the slums. For what I saw in her face
was not the ignorant suffering of an animal. She knew well enough what
was happening to her--understood as well as I did how dreadful a destiny
it was to be kneeling there in the bitter cold, on the slimy stones of a
slum backyard, poking a stick up a foul drain-pipe.

But quite soon the train drew away into open country, and that seemed
strange, almost unnatural, as though the open country had been a kind of
park; for in the industrial areas one always feels that the smoke and
filth must go on for ever and that no part of the earth's surface can
escape them. In a crowded, dirty little country like ours one takes
defilement almost for granted. Slag-heaps and chimneys seem a more
normal, probable landscape than grass and trees, and even in the depths
of the country when you drive your fork into the ground you half expect
to lever up a broken bottle or a rusty can. But out here the snow was
untrodden and lay so deep that only the tops of the stone boundary-walls
were showing, winding over the hills like black paths. I remembered that
D. H. Lawrence, writing of this same landscape or another near by, said
that the snow-covered hills rippled away into the distance 'like
muscle'. It was not the simile that would have occurred to me. To my eye
the snow and the black walls were more like a white dress with black
piping running across it.

Although the snow was hardly broken the sun was shining brightly, and
behind the shut windows of the carriage it seemed warm. According to the
almanac this was spring, and a few of the birds seemed to believe it.
For the first time in my life, in a bare patch beside the line, I saw
rooks treading. They did it on the ground and not, as I should have
expected, in a tree. The manner of courtship was curious. The female
stood with her beak open and the male walked round her and appeared to
be feeding her. I had hardly been in the train half an hour, but it
seemed a very long way from the Brookers' back-kitchen to the empty
slopes of snow, the bright sunshine, and the big gleaming birds.

The whole of the industrial districts are really one enormous town, of
about the same population as Greater London but, fortunately, of much
larger area; so that even in the middle of them there is still room for
patches of cleanness and decency. That is an encouraging thought. In
spite of hard trying, man has not yet succeeded in doing his dirt
everywhere. The earth is so vast and still so empty that even in the
filthy heart of civilization you find fields where the grass is green
instead of grey; perhaps if you looked for them you might even find
streams with live fish in them instead of salmon tins. For quite a long
time, perhaps another twenty minutes, the train was rolling through open
country before the villa-civilization began to close in upon us again,
and then the outer slums, and then the slag-heaps, belching chimneys,
blast-furnaces, canals, and gaso-meters of another industrial town.




  2



Our civilization, _pace_ Chesterton, is founded on coal, more completely
than one realizes until one stops to think about it. The machines that
keep us alive, and the machines that make machines, are all directly or
indirectly dependent upon coal. In the metabolism of the Western world
the coal-miner is second in importance only to the man who ploughs the
soil. He is a sort of caryatid upon whose shoulders nearly everything
that is not grimy is supported. For this reason the actual process by
which coal is extracted is well worth watching, if you get the chance
and are willing to take the trouble.

When you go down a coal-mine it is important to try and get to the coal
face when the 'fillers' are at work. This is not easy, because when the
mine is working visitors are a nuisance and are not encouraged, but if
you go at any other time, it is possible to come away with a totally
wrong impression. On a Sunday, for instance, a mine seems almost
peaceful. The time to go there is when the machines are roaring and the
air is black with coal dust, and when you can actually see what the
miners have to do. At those times the place is like hell, or at any rate
like my own mental picture of hell. Most of the things one imagines in
hell are if there--heat, noise, confusion, darkness, foul air, and,
above all, unbearably cramped space. Everything except the fire, for
there is no fire down there except the feeble beams of Davy lamps and
electric torches which scarcely penetrate the clouds of coal dust.

When you have finally got there--and getting there is a job in itself: I
will explain that in a moment--you crawl through the last line of pit
props and see opposite you a shiny black wall three or four feet high.
This is the coal face. Overhead is the smooth ceiling made by the rock
from which the coal has been cut; underneath is the rock again, so that
the gallery you are in is only as high as the ledge of coal itself,
probably not much more than a yard. The first impression of all,
overmastering everything else for a while, is the frightful, deafening
din from the conveyor belt which carries the coal away. You cannot see
very far, because the fog of coal dust throws back the beam of your
lamp, but you can see on either side of you the line of half-naked
kneeling men, one to every four or five yards, driving their shovels
under the fallen coal and flinging it swiftly over their left shoulders.
They are feeding it on to the conveyor belt, a moving rubber belt a
couple of feet wide which runs a yard or two behind them. Down this belt
a glittering river of coal races constantly. In a big mine it is
carrying away several tons of coal every minute. It bears it off to some
place in the main roads where it is shot into tubs holding half a ton,
and thence dragged to the cages and hoisted to the outer air.

It is impossible to watch the 'fillers' at work without feeling a pang
of envy for their toughness. It is a dreadful job that they do, an
almost superhuman job by the standard of an ordinary person. For they
are not only shifting monstrous quantities of coal, they are also doing
it in a position that doubles or trebles the work. They have got to
remain kneeling all the while--they could hardly rise from their knees
without hitting the ceiling--and you can easily see by trying it what a
tremendous effort this means. Shovelling is comparatively easy when you
are standing up, because you can use your knee and thigh to drive the
shovel along; kneeling down, the whole of the strain is thrown upon your
arm and belly muscles. And the other conditions do not exactly make
things easier. There is the heat--it varies, but in some mines it is
suffocating--and the coal dust that stuffs up your throat and nostrils
and collects along your eyelids, and the unending rattle of the conveyor
belt, which in that confined space is rather like the rattle of a
machine gun. But the fillers look and work as though they were made of
iron. They really do look like iron hammered iron statues--under the
smooth coat of coal dust which clings to them from head to foot. It is
only when you see miners down the mine and naked that you realize what
splendid men they are. Most of them are small (big men are at a
disadvantage in that job) but nearly all of them have the most noble
bodies; wide shoulders tapering to slender supple waists, and small
pronounced buttocks and sinewy thighs, with not an ounce of waste flesh
anywhere. In the hotter mines they wear only a pair of thin drawers,
clogs and knee-pads; in the hottest mines of all, only the clogs and
knee-pads. You can hardly tell by the look of them whether they are
young or old. They may be any age up to sixty or even sixty-five, but
when they are black and naked they all look alike. No one could do their
work who had not a young man's body, and a figure fit for a guardsman at
that, just a few pounds of extra flesh on the waist-line, and the
constant bending would be impossible. You can never forget that
spectacle once you have seen it--the line of bowed, kneeling figures,
sooty black all over, driving their huge shovels under the coal with
stupendous force and speed. They are on the job for seven and a half
hours, theoretically without a break, for there is no time 'off'.
Actually they snatch a quarter of an hour or so at some time during the
shift to eat the food they have brought with them, usually a hunk of
bread and dripping and a bottle of cold tea. The first time I was
watching the 'fillers' at work I put my hand upon some dreadful slimy
thing among the coal dust. It was a chewed quid of tobacco. Nearly all
the miners chew tobacco, which is said to be good against thirst.

Probably you have to go down several coal-mines before you can get much
grasp of the processes that are going on round you. This is chiefly
because the mere effort of getting from place to place makes it
difficult to notice anything else. In some ways it is even
disappointing, or at least is unlike what you have, expected. You get
into the cage, which is a steel box about as wide as a telephone box and
two or three times as long. It holds ten men, but they pack it like
pilchards in a tin, and a tall man cannot stand upright in it. The steel
door shuts upon you, and somebody working the winding gear above drops
you into the void. You have the usual momentary qualm in your belly and
a bursting sensation in the cars, but not much sensation of movement
till you get near the bottom, when the cage slows down so abruptly that
you could swear it is going upwards again. In the middle of the run the
cage probably touches sixty miles an hour; in some of the deeper mines
it touches even more. When you crawl out at the bottom you are perhaps
four hundred yards underground. That is to say you have a
tolerable-sized mountain on top of you; hundreds of yards of solid rock,
bones of extinct beasts, subsoil, flints, roots of growing things, green
grass and cows grazing on it--all this suspended over your head and held
back only by wooden props as thick as the calf of your leg. But because
of the speed at which the cage has brought you down, and the complete
blackness through which you have travelled, you hardly feel yourself
deeper down than you would at the bottom of the Piccadilly tube.

What is surprising, on the other hand, is the immense horizontal
distances that have to be travelled underground. Before I had been down
a mine I had vaguely imagined the miner stepping out of the cage and
getting to work on a ledge of coal a few yards away. I had not realized
that before he even gets to work he may have had to creep along passages
as long as from London Bridge to Oxford Circus. In the beginning, of
course, a mine shaft is sunk somewhere near a seam of coal; But as that
seam is worked out and fresh seams are followed up, the workings get
further and further from the pit bottom. If it is a mile from the pit
bottom to the coal face, that is probably an average distance; three
miles is a fairly normal one; there are even said to be a few mines
where it is as much as five miles. But these distances bear no relation
to distances above ground. For in all that mile or three miles as it may
be, there is hardly anywhere outside the main road, and not many places
even there, where a man can stand upright.

You do not notice the effect of this till you have gone a few hundred
yards. You start off, stooping slightly, down the dim-lit gallery, eight
or ten feet wide and about five high, with the walls built up with slabs
of shale, like the stone walls in Derbyshire. Every yard or two there
are wooden props holding up the beams and girders; some of the girders
have buckled into fantastic curves under which you have to duck. Usually
it is bad going underfoot--thick dust or jagged chunks of shale, and in
some mines where there is water it is as mucky as a farm-yard. Also
there is the track for the coal tubs, like a miniature railway track
with sleepers a foot or two apart, which is tiresome to walk on.
Everything is grey with shale dust; there is a dusty fiery smell which
seems to be the same in all mines. You see mysterious machines of which
you never learn the purpose, and bundles of tools slung together on
wires, and sometimes mice darting away from the beam of the lamps. They
are surprisingly common, especially in mines where there are or have
been horses. It would be interesting to know how they got there in the
first place; possibly by falling down the shaft--for they say a mouse
can fall any distance uninjured, owing to its surface area being so
large relative to its weight. You press yourself against the wall to
make way for lines of tubs jolting slowly towards the shaft, drawn by an
endless steel cable operated from the surface. You creep through sacking
curtains and thick wooden doors which, when they are opened, let out
fierce blasts of air. These doors are an important part of the
ventilation system. The exhausted air is sucked out of one shaft by
means of fans, and the fresh air enters the other of its own accord. But
if left to itself the air will take the shortest way round, leaving the
deeper workings unventilated; so all the short cuts have to be
partitioned off.

At the start to walk stooping is rather a joke, but it is a joke that
soon wears off. I am handicapped by being exceptionally tall, but when
the roof falls to four feet or less it is a tough job for anybody except
a dwarf or a child. You not only have to bend double, you have also got
to keep your head up all the while so as to see the beams and girders
and dodge them when they come. You have, therefore, a constant crick in
the neck, but this is nothing to the pain in your knees and thighs.
After half a mile it becomes (I am not exaggerating) an unbearable
agony. You begin to wonder whether you will ever get to the end--still
more, how on earth you are going to get back. Your pace grows slower and
slower. You come to a stretch of a couple of hundred yards where it is
all exceptionally low and you have to work yourself along in a squatting
position. Then suddenly the roof opens out to a mysterious height--scene
of and old fall of rock, probably--and for twenty whole yards you can
stand upright. The relief is overwhelming. But after this there is
another low stretch of a hundred yards and then a succession of beams
which you have to crawl under. You go down on all fours; even this is a
relief after the squatting business. But when you come to the end of the
beams and try to get up again, you find that your knees have temporarily
struck work and refuse to lift you. You call a halt, ignominiously, and
say that you would like to rest for a minute or two. Your guide (a
miner) is sympathetic. He knows that your muscles are not the same as
his. 'Only another four hundred yards,' he says encouragingly; you feel
that he might as well say another four hundred miles. But finally you do
somehow creep as far as the coal face. You have gone a mile and taken
the best part of an hour; a miner would do it in not much more than
twenty minutes. Having got there, you have to sprawl in the coal dust
and get your strength back for several minutes before you can even watch
the work in progress with any kind of intelligence.

Coming back is worse than going, not only because you are already tired
out but because the journey back to the shaft is slightly uphill. You
get through the low places at the speed of a tortoise, and you have no
shame now about calling a halt when your knees give way. Even the lamp
you are carrying becomes a nuisance and probably when you stumble you
drop it; whereupon, if it is a Davy lamp, it goes out. Ducking the beams
becomes more and more of an effort, and sometimes you forget to duck.
You try walking head down as the miners do, and then you bang your
backbone. Even the miners bang their backbones fairly often. This is the
reason why in very hot mines, where it is necessary to go about half
naked, most of the miners have what they call 'buttons down the
back'--that is, a permanent scab on each vertebra. When the track is
down hill the miners sometimes fit their clogs, which are hollow
underneath, on to the trolley rails and slide down. In mines where the
'travelling' is very bad all the miners carry sticks about two and a
half feet long, hollowed out below the handle. In normal places you keep
your hand on top of the stick and in the low places you slide your hand
down into the hollow. These sticks are a great help, and the wooden
crash-helmets--a comparatively recent invention--are a godsend. They
look like a French or Italian steel helmet, but they are made of some
kind of pith and very light, and so strong, that you can take a violent
blow on the head without feeling it. When finally you get back to the
surface you have been perhaps three hours underground and travelled two
miles, and you are more exhausted than you would be by a
twenty-five-mile walk above ground. For a week afterwards your thighs
are so stiff that coming downstairs is quite a difficult feat; you have
to work your way down in a peculiar sidelong manner, without bending the
knees. Your miner friends notice the stiffness of your walk and chaff
you about it. ('How'd ta like to work down pit, eh?' etc.) Yet even a
miner who has been long away from work--from illness, for
instance--when he comes back to the pit, suffers badly for the first few
days.

It may seem that I am exaggerating, though no one who has been down an
old-fashioned pit (most of the pits in England are old-fashioned) and
actually gone as far as the coal face, is likely to say so. But what I
want to emphasize is this. Here is this frightful business of crawling
to and fro, which to any normal person is a hard day's work in itself;
and it is not part of the miner's work at all, it is merely an extra,
like the City man's daily ride in the Tube. The miner does that journey
to and fro, and sandwiched in between there are seven and a half hours
of savage work. I have never travelled much more than a mile to the coal
face; but often it is three miles, in which case I and most people other
than coal-miners would never get there at all. This is the kind of point
that one is always liable to miss. When you think of the coal-mine you
think of depth, heat, darkness, blackened figures hacking at walls of
coal; you don't think, necessarily, of those miles of creeping to and
fro. There is the question of time, also. A miner's working shift of
seven and a half hours does not sound very long, but one has got to add
on to it at least an hour a day for 'travelling', more often two hours
and sometimes three. Of course, the 'travelling' is not technically work
and the miner is not paid for it; but it is as like work as makes no
difference. It is easy to say that miners don't mind all this.
Certainly, it is not the same for them as it would be for you or me.
They have done it since childhood, they have the right muscles hardened,
and they can move to and fro underground with a startling and rather
horrible agility. A miner puts his head down and runs, with a long
swinging stride, through places where I can only stagger. At the
workings you see them on all fours, skipping round the pit props almost
like dogs. But it is quite a mistake to think that they enjoy it. I have
talked about this to scores of miners and they all admit that the
'travelling' is hard work; in any case when you hear them discussing a
pit among themselves the 'travelling' is always one of the things they
discuss. It is said that a shift always returns from work faster than it
goes; nevertheless the miners all say that it is the coming away after a
hard day's work, that is especially irksome. It is part of their work
and they are equal to it, but certainly it is an effort. It is
comparable, perhaps, to climbing a smallish mountain before and after
your day's work.

When you have been down in two or three pits you begin to get some grasp
of the processes that are going on underground. (I ought to say, by the
way, that I know nothing whatever about the technical side of mining: I
am merely describing what I have seen.) Coal lies in thin seams between
enormous layers of rock, so that essentially the process of getting it
out is like scooping the central layer from a Neapolitan ice. In the old
days the miners used to cut straight into the coal with pick and
crowbar--a very slow job because coal, when lying in its virgin state,
is almost as hard as rock. Nowadays the preliminary work is done by an
electrically-driven coal-cutter, which in principle is an immensely
tough and powerful band-saw, running horizontally instead of vertically,
with teeth a couple of inches long and half an inch or an inch thick. It
can move backwards or forwards on its own power, and the men operating
it can rotate it this way or that. Incidentally it makes one of the most
awful noises I have ever heard, and sends forth clouds of coal dust
which make it impossible to see more than two to three feet and almost
impossible to breathe. The machine travels along the coal face cutting
into the base of the coal and undermining it to the depth of five feet
or five feet and a half; after this it is comparatively easy to extract
the coal to the depth to which it has been undermined. Where it is
'difficult getting', however, it has also to be loosened with
explosives. A man with an electric drill, like a rather small version of
the drills used in street-mending, bores holes at intervals in the coal,
inserts blasting powder, plugs it with clay, goes round the corner if
there is one handy (he is supposed to retire to twenty-five yards
distance) and touches off the charge with an electric current. This is
not intended to bring the coal out, only to loosen it. Occasionally, of
course, the charge is too powerful, and then it not only brings the coal
out but brings the roof down as well.

After the blasting has been done the 'fillers' can tumble the coal out,
break it up and shovel it on to the conveyor belt. It comes out first in
monstrous boulders which may weigh anything up to twenty tons. The
conveyor belt shoots it on to tubs, and the tubs are shoved into the
main road and hitched on to an endlessly revolving steel cable which
drags them to the cage. Then they are hoisted, and at the surface the
coal is sorted by being run over screens, and if necessary is washed as
well. As far as possible the 'dirt'--the shale, that is--is used for
making the roads below. All what cannot be used is sent to the surface
and dumped; hence the monstrous 'dirt-heaps', like hideous grey
mountains, which are the characteristic scenery of the coal areas. When
the coal has been extracted to the depth to which the machine has cut,
the coal face has advanced by five feet. Fresh props are put in to hold
up the newly exposed roof, and during the next shift the conveyor belt
is taken to pieces, moved five feet forward and re-assembled. As far as
possible the three operations of cutting, blasting and extraction are
done in three separate shifts, the cutting in the afternoon, the
blasting at night (there is a law, not always kept, that forbids its
being done when other men are working near by), and the 'filling' in the
morning shift, which lasts from six in the morning until half past one.

Even when you watch the process of coal-extraction you probably only
watch it for a short time, and it is not until you begin making a few
calculations that you realize what a stupendous task the 'fillers' are
performing. Normally each man has to clear a space four or five yards
wide. The cutter has undermined the coal to the depth of five feet, so
that if the seam of coal is three or four feet high, each man has to cut
out, break up and load on to the belt something between seven and twelve
cubic yards of coal. This is to say, taking a cubic yard as weighing
twenty-seven hundred-weight, that each man is shifting coal at a speed
approaching two tons an hour. I have just enough experience of pick and
shovel work to be able to grasp what this means. When I am digging
trenches in my garden, if I shift two tons of earth during the
afternoon, I feel that I have earned my tea. But earth is tractable
stuff compared with coal, and I don't have to work kneeling down, a
thousand feet underground, in suffocating heat and swallowing coal dust
with every breath I take; nor do I have to walk a mile bent double
before I begin. The miner's job would be as much beyond my power as it
would be to perform on a flying trapeze or to win the Grand National. I
am not a manual labourer and please God I never shall be one, but there
are some kinds of manual work that I could do if I had to. At a pitch I
could be a tolerable road-sweeper or an inefficient gardener or even a
tenth-rate farm hand. But by no conceivable amount of effort or training
could I become a coal-miner, the work would kill me in a few weeks.

Watching coal-miners at work, you realize momentarily what different
universes people inhabit. Down there where coal is dug is a sort of
world apart which one can quite easily go through life without ever
hearing about. Probably majority of people would even prefer not to hear
about it. Yet it is the absolutely necessary counterpart of our world
above. Practically everything we do, from eating an ice to crossing the
Atlantic, and from baking a loaf to writing a novel, involves the use of
coal, directly or indirectly. For all the arts of peace coal is needed;
if war breaks out it is needed all the more. In time of revolution the
miner must go on working or the revolution must stop, for revolution as
much as reaction needs coal. Whatever may be happening on the surface,
the hacking and shovelling have got to continue without a pause, or at
any rate without pausing for more than a few weeks at the most. In order
that Hitler may march the goose-step, that the Pope may denounce
Bolshevism, that the cricket crowds may assemble at Lords, that the
poets may scratch one another's backs, coal has got to be forthcoming.
But on the whole we are not aware of it; we all know that we 'must have
coal', but we seldom or never remember what coal-getting involves. Here
am I sitting writing in front of my comfortable coal fire. It is April
but I still need a fire. Once a fortnight the coal cart drives up to the
door and men in leather jerkins carry the coal indoors in stout sacks
smelling of tar and shoot it clanking into the coal-hole under the
stairs. It is only very rarely, when I make a definite mental-effort,
that I connect this coal with that far-off labour in the mines. It is
just 'coal'--something that I have got to have; black stuff that arrives
mysteriously from nowhere in particular, like manna except that you have
to pay for it. You could quite easily drive a car right across the north
of England and never once remember that hundreds of feet below the road
you are on the miners are hacking at the coal. Yet in a sense it is the
miners who are driving your car forward. Their lamp-lit world down there
is as necessary to the daylight world above as the root is to the
flower.

It is not long since conditions in the mines were worse than they are
now. There are still living a few very old women who in their youth have
worked underground, with the harness round their waists, and a chain
that passed between their legs, crawling on all fours and dragging tubs
of coal. They used to go on doing this even when they were pregnant. And
even now, if coal could not be produced without pregnant women dragging
it to and fro, I fancy we should let them do it rather than deprive
ourselves of coal. But-most of the time, of course, we should prefer to
forget that they were doing it. It is so with all types of manual work;
it keeps us alive, and we are oblivious of its existence. More than
anyone else, perhaps, the miner can stand as the type of the manual
worker, not only because his work is so exaggeratedly awful, but also
because it is so vitally necessary and yet so remote from our
experience, so invisible, as it were, that we are capable of forgetting
it as we forget the blood in our veins. In a way it is even humiliating
to watch coal-miners working. It raises in you a momentary doubt about
your own status as an 'intellectual' and a superior person generally.
For it is brought home to you, at least while you are watching, that it
is only because miners sweat their guts out that superior persons can
remain superior. You and I and the editor of the _Times Lit._ _Supp._,
and the nancy poets and the Archbishop of Canterbury and Comrade X,
author of _Marxism for Infants_--all of us _really_ owe the comparative
decency of our lives to poor drudges underground, blackened to the eyes,
with their throats full of coal dust, driving their shovels forward with
arms and belly muscles of steel.




3

When the miner comes up from the pit his face is so pale that it is
noticeable even through the mask of coal dust. This is due to the foul
air that he has been breathing, and will wear off presently. To a
Southerner, new to the mining districts, the spectacle of a shift of
several hundred miners streaming out of the pit is strange and slightly
sinister. Then-exhausted faces, with the grime clinging in all the
hollows, have a fierce, wild look. At other times, when their faces are
clean, there is not much to distinguish them from the rest of the
population. They have a very upright square-shouldered walk, a reaction
from the constant bending underground, but most of them are shortish men
and their thick ill-fitting clothes hide the splendour of their bodies.
The most definitely distinctive thing about them is the blue scars on
their noses. Every miner has blue scars on his nose and forehead, and
will carry them to his death. The coal dust of which the air underground
is full enters every cut, and then the skin grows over it and forms a
blue stain like tattooing, which in fact it is. Some of the older men
have their foreheads veined like Roquefort cheeses from this cause.

As soon as the miner comes above ground he gargles a little water to get
the worst of the coal dust out of his throat and nostrils, and then goes
home and either washes or does not wash according to his temperament.
From what I have seen I should say that a majority of miners prefer to
eat their meal first and wash afterwards, as I should do in their
circumstances. It is the normal thing to see a miner sitting down to his
tea with a Christy-minstrel face, completely black except for very red
lips which become clean by eating. After his meal he takes a largish
basin of water and washes very methodically, first his hands, then his
chest, neck, and armpits, then his forearms, then his face and scalp (it
is on the scalp that the grime clings thickest), and then his wife takes
the flannel and washes his back. He has only washed the top half of his
body and probably his navel is still a nest of coal dust, but even so it
takes some skill to get pass-ably clean in a single basin of water. For
my own part I found I needed two complete baths after going down a
coal-mine. Getting the dirt out of one's eyelids is a ten minutes' job
in itself.

At some of the larger and better appointed collieries there are pithead
baths. This is an enormous advantage, for not only can the miner wash
himself all over every day, in comfort and even luxury, but at the baths
he has two lockers where he can keep his pit clothes separate from his
day clothes, so that within twenty minutes of emerging as black as a
Negro he can be riding off to a football match dressed up to the nines.
But it is only comparatively seldom because a seam of coal does not last
for ever, so that it is not necessarily worth building a bath every time
a shaft is sunk. I can-not get hold of exact figures, but it seems
likely that rather less than one miner in three has access to a pithead
bath. Probably a large majority of miners are completely black from the
waist down for at least six days a week. It is almost impossible for
them to wash all over in their own homes. Every drop of water has got to
be heated up, and in a tiny living-room which contains, apart from the
kitchen range and a quantity of furniture, a wife, some children, and
probably a dog, there is simply not room to have a proper bath. Even
with a basin one is bound to splash the furniture. Middle-class people
are fond of saying that the miners would not wash themselves properly
even if they could, but this is nonsense, as is shown by the fact that
where pithead baths exist practically all the men use them. Only among
the very old men does the belief still linger that washing one's legs
'causes lumbago'. Moreover the pithead baths, where they exist, are paid
for wholly or partly by the miners themselves, out of the Miners'
Welfare Fund. Sometimes the colliery company subscribes, some-times the
Fund bears the whole cost. But doubtless even at this late date the old
ladies in Brighton boarding-houses are saying that 'if you give those
miners baths they only use them to keep coal in'.

As a matter of fact it is surprising that miners wash as regularly as
they do, seeing how little time they have between work and sleep. It is
a great mistake to think of a miner's working day as being only seven
and a half hours. Seven and a half hours is the time spent actually on
the job, but, as I have already explained, one has got to add on to this
time taken up in 'travelling', which is seldom less than an hour and may
often be three hours. In addition most miners have to spend a
considerable time in getting to and from the pit. Throughout the
industrial districts there is an acute shortage of houses, and it is
only in the small mining villages, where the village is grouped round
the pit, that the men can be certain of living near their work. In the
larger mining towns where I have stayed, nearly everyone went to work by
bus; half a crown a week seemed to be the normal amount to spend on
fares. One miner I stayed with was working on the morning shift, which
was from six in the morning till half past one. He had to be out of bed
at a quarter to four and got back somewhere after three in the
afternoon. In another house where I stayed a boy of fifteen was working
on the night shift. He left for work at nine at night and got back at
eight in the morning, had his breakfast, and then promptly went to bed
and slept till six in the evening; so that his leisure time amounted to,
about four hours a day--actually a good deal less, if you take off the
time for washing, eating, and dressing.

The adjustments a miner's family have to make when he is changed from
one shift to another must be tiresome in the extreme. If he is on the
night shift he gets home in time for breakfast, on the morning shift he
gets home in the middle of the afternoon, and on the afternoon shift he
gets home in the middle of the night; and in each case, of course, he
wants his principal meal of the day as soon as he returns. I notice that
the Rev. W. R. Inge, in his book _England_, accuses the miners of
gluttony. From my own observation I should say that they eat
astonishingly little. Most of the miners I stayed with ate slightly less
than I did. Many of them declare that they cannot do their day's work if
they have had a heavy meal beforehand, and the food they take with them
is only a snack, usually bread-and-dripping and cold tea. They carry it
in a flat tin called a snap-can which they strap to their belts. When a
miner gets back late at night his wife waits up for him, but when he is
on the morning shift it seems to be the custom for him to get his
breakfast for himself. Apparently the old superstition that it is bad
luck to see a woman before going to work on the morning shift is not
quite extinct. In the old days, it is said, a miner who happened to meet
a woman in the early morning would often turn back and do no work that
day.

Before I had been in the coal areas I shared the wide-spread illusion
that miners are comparatively well paid. One hears it loosely stated
that a miner is paid ten or eleven shillings a shift, and one does a
small multiplication sum and concludes that every miner is earning round
about £2 a week or £150 a year. But the statement that a miner receives
ten or eleven shillings a shift is very misleading. To begin with, it is
only the actual coal 'getter' who is paid at this rate; a 'dataller',
for instance, who attends to the roofing, is paid at a lower rate,
usually eight or nine shillings a shift. Again, when the coal 'getter'
is paid piecework, so much per ton extracted, as is the case in many
mines, he is dependent on the quality of the coal; a breakdown in the
machinery or a 'fault'--that is, a streak of rock running through the
coal seam--may rob him of his earnings for a day or two at a time. But
in any case one ought not to think of the miner as working six days a
week, fifty-two weeks a year. Almost certainly there will be a number of
days when he is' laid off'. The average earning per shift worked for
every mine-worker, of all ages and both sexes, in Great Britain in 1934,
was 9s. 1 3/4d. [From the _Colliery Year Book_ and Coal Trades
Directory_ for 1935.] If everyone were in work all the time, this would
mean that the mine-worker was earning a little over £142 a year, or
nearly £2 15s. a week. His real income, however, is far lower than this,
for the 9s. 1 3/4d. is merely an average calculation on shifts actually
worked and takes no account of blank days.

I have before me five pay-checks belonging to a Yorkshire miner, for
five weeks (not consecutive) at the beginning of 1936. Averaging them
up, the gross weekly wages they represent is £2 15s. 2d.; this is an
average of nearly 9s. 2 1/2d. a shift. But these pay-checks are for the
winter, when nearly all mines are running full time. As spring advances
the coal trade slacks off and more and more men are 'temporarily
stopped', while others still technically in work are laid off for a day
or two in every week. It is obvious therefore that £150 or even £142 is
an immense over-estimate for the mine-worker's yearly income. As a
matter of fact, for the year 1934 the average gross earnings of all
miners through-out Great Britain was only £115 11s. 6d. It varied
consider-ably from district to district, rising as high as £133 2s. 8d.
in Scotland, while in Durham it was a little under £105 or barely more
than £2 a week. I take these figures from The Coal Scuttle, by Mr Joseph
Jones, Mayor of Barnsley, Yorkshire. Mr Jones adds:

These figures cover the earnings of youths as well as adults and of the
higher- as well as the lower-paid grades...any particularly high
earning would be included in these figures, as would the earnings of
certain officials and other higher-paid men as well as the higher
amounts paid for overtime work.

_The figures, being averages, fail...to reveal the position of thousands
of adult workers whose earnings were substantially below the average
and' who received only 30s. to 40s. or less per week._

Mr Jones's italics. But please notice that even these wretched earnings
are _gross_ earnings. On top of this there are all kinds of stoppages
which are deducted from the miner's wages every week. Here is a list of
weekly stoppages which was given me as typical in one Lancashire
district:

                                        s. d.

Insurance (unemployment and health)     1  5
Hire of lamp                               6
For sharpening tools                       6
Check-weighman                             9
Infirmary                                  2
Hospital                                   1
Benevolent Fund                            6
Union fees                                 6
                                        ----
Total                                    4 5
                                        ----

Some of these stoppages, such as the Benevolent Fund and the union fees,
are, so to speak, the miner's own responsibility, others are imposed by
the colliery company. They are not the same in all districts. For
instance, the iniquitous swindle of making the miner pay for the hire of
his lamp (at sixpence a week he buys the lamp several times over in a
single year) does not obtain everywhere. But the stoppages always seem
to total up to about the same amount. On the Yorkshire miner's five
pay-checks, the average gross earning per week is £2 15s. 2d.; the
average net earning, after the stoppages have come off, is only £2 11s.
4d.--a reduction of 3s. 10d. a week. But the pay-check, naturally, only
mentions stoppages which are imposed or paid through the colliery
company; one has got to add the union fees, bringing the total reduction
up to something over four shillings. Probably it is safe to say that
stoppages of one kind and another cut four shillings or thereabouts from
_every_ adult miner's weekly wage. So that the £115 11s. 6d. which was
the mine-worker's average earning throughout Great Britain in 1934
should really be something nearer £105. As against this, most miners
receive allowances in kind, being able to purchase coal for their own
use at a reduced rate, usually eight or nine shillings a ton. But
according to Mr Jones, quoted above, 'the average value of all
allowances in kind for the country as a whole is only fourpence a day'.
And this fourpence a day is offset, in many cases, by the amount the
miner has to spend on fares in getting to and from the pit. So, taking
the industry as a whole, the sum the miner can actually bring home and
call his own does not average more, perhaps slightly less, than two
pounds a week.

Meanwhile, how much coal is the average miner producing?

The tonnage of coal raised yearly per person employed in mining rises
steadily though rather slowly. In 1914 every mine-worker produced, on
average, 253 tons of coal; in 1934 he produced 280 tons.[_The Coal
Scuttle_. The _Colliery Year Book end Coal Trades Directory_ gives a
slightly higher figure.] This of course is an average figure for
mine-workers of all kinds; those actually working at the coal face
extract an enormously greater amount--in many cases, probably, well over
a thousand tons each. But taking 280 tons as a representative figure, it
is worth noticing what a vast achievement this is. One gets the best
idea of it by comparing a miner's life with somebody else's. If I live
to be sixty I shall probably have produced thirty novels, or enough to
fill two medium-sized library shelves. In the same period the average
miner produces 8400 tons of coal; enough coal to pave Trafalgar Square
nearly two feet deep or to supply seven large families with fuel for
over a hundred years.

Of the five pay-checks I mentioned above, no less than three are
rubber-stamped with the words 'death stoppage'. When a miner is killed
at work it is usual for the other miners to make up a subscription,
generally of a shilling each, for his widow, and this is collected by
the colliery company and automatically deducted from their wages. The
significant detail here is the rubber stamp. The rate of accidents among
miners is so high, compared with that in other trades, that casualties
are taken for granted almost as they would be in a minor war. Every year
one miner in about nine hundred is killed and one in about six is
injured; most of these injuries, of course, are petty ones, but a fair
number amount to total disablement. This means that if a miner's working
life is forty years the chances are nearly seven to one against his
escaping injury and not much more than twenty to one against his being
killed outright. No other trade approaches this in dangerousness; the
next most dangerous is the shipping trade, one sailor in a little under
1300 being killed every year. The figures I have given apply, of course,
to mine-workers as a whole; for those actually working underground the
proportion of injuries would be very much higher. Every miner of long
standing that I have talked to had either been in a fairly serious
accident himself or had seen some of his mates killed, and in every
mining family they tell you tales of fathers, brothers, or uncles killed
at work. ('And he fell seven hundred feet, and they wouldn't never have
collected t'pieces only he were wearing a new suit of oil-skins,' etc.,
etc., etc.) Some of these tales are appalling in the extreme. One miner,
for instance, described to me how a mate of his, a 'dataller', was
buried by a fall of rock. They rushed to him and managed to uncover his
head and shoulders so that he could breathe, and he was alive and spoke
to them. Then they saw that the roof was coming down again and had to
run to save themselves; the 'dataller' was buried a second time. Once
again they rushed to him and got his head and shoulders free, and again
he was alive and spoke to them. Then the roof came down a third time,
and this time they could not uncover him for several hours, after which,
of course, he was dead. But the miner who told me the story (he had been
buried himself on one occasion, but he was lucky enough to have his head
jammed between his legs so that there was a small space in which he
could breathe) did not think it was a particularly appalling one. Its
significance, for him, was that the 'dataller' had known perfectly well
that the place where he was working was unsafe, and had gone there in
daily expectation of an accident. 'And it worked on his mind to that
extent that he got to kissing his wife before he went to work. And she
told me afterwards that it were over twenty years since he'd kissed
her.'

The most obviously understandable cause of accidents is explosions of
gas, which is always more or less present in the atmosphere of the pit.
There is a special lamp which is used to test the air for gas, and when
it is present in at all large quantities it can be detected by the flame
of an ordinary Davy lamp burning blue. If the wick can be turned up to
its full extent and the flame is still blue, the proportion of gas is
dangerously high; it is, nevertheless, difficult to detect, because it
does not distribute itself evenly throughout the atmosphere but hangs
about in cracks and crevices. Before starting work a miner often tests
for gas by poking his lamp into all the corners. The gas may be touched
off by a spark during blasting operations, or by a pick striking a spark
from a stone, or by a defective lamp, or by 'gob fires'--spontaneously
generated fires which' smoulder in the coal dust and are very hard to
put out. The great mining disasters which happen from time to time, in
which several hundred men are killed, are usually caused by explosions;
hence one tends to think of explosions as the chief danger of mining.
Actually, the great majority of accidents are due to the normal
every-day dangers of the pit; in particular, to falls of roof. There
are, for instance, 'pot-holes'--circular holes from which a lump of
stone big enough to kill a man shoots out with the promptitude of a
bullet. With, so far as I can remember, only one exception, all the
miners I have talked to declared that the new machinery, and 'speeding
up' generally, have made the work more dangerous. This may be partly due
to conservatism, but they can give plenty of reasons. To begin with, the
speed at which the coal is now extracted means that for hours at a time
a dangerously large stretch of roof remains unpropped. Then there is the
vibration, which tends to shake everything loose, and the noise, which
makes it harder to detect signs of danger. One must remember that a
miner's safety underground depend largely on his own care and skill. An
experienced miner claims to know by a sort of instinct when the roof is
unsafe; the way he puts it is that he 'can feel the weight on him'. He
can, for instance, hear the faint creaking of the props. The reason why
wooden props are still generally preferred to iron girders is that a
wooden prop which is about to collapse gives warning by creaking,
whereas a girder flies out un-expectedly. The devastating noise of the
machines makes it impossible to hear anything else, and thus the danger
is increased.

When a miner is hurt it is of course impossible to attend to him
immediately. He lies crushed under several hundred-weight of stone in
some dreadful cranny underground, and even after he has been extricated
it is necessary to drag his body a mile or more, perhaps, through
galleries where nobody can stand upright. Usually when you talk to a man
who has been injured you find that it was a couple of hours or so before
they got him to the surface. Sometimes, of course, there are accidents
to the cage. The cage is shooting several yards up or down at the speed
of an express train, and it is operated by somebody on the surface who
cannot see what is happening. He has very delicate indicators to tell
him how far the cage has got, but it is possible for him to make a
mistake, and there have been cases of the cage crashing into the
pit-bottom at its very maximum speed. This seems to me a dreadful way to
die. For as that tiny steel box whizzes through the blackness there must
come a moment when the ten men who are locked inside it _know_ that
something has gone wrong; and the remaining seconds before they are
smashed to pieces hardly bear thinking about. A miner told me he was
once in a cage in which something went wrong. It did not slow up when it
should have done, and they thought the cable must have snapped. As it
happened they got to the bottom safely, but when he stepped out he found
that he had broken a tooth; he had been clenching his teeth so hard in
expectation of that frightful crash.

Apart from accidents miners seem to be healthy, as obviously they have
got to be, considering the muscular efforts demanded of them. They are
liable to rheumatism and a man with defective lungs does not last long
in that dust-impregnated air, but the most characteristic industrial
disease is nystagmus. This is a disease of the eyes which makes the
eyeballs oscillate in a strange manner when they come near a light. It
is due presumably to working in half-darkness, and sometimes results in
total blindness. Miners who are disabled in this way or any other way
are compensated by the colliery company, sometimes with a lump sum,
sometimes with a weekly pension. This pension never amounts to more than
twenty-nine shillings a week; if it falls below fifteen shillings the
disabled man can also get something from the dole or the P.A.C. If I
were a disabled miner I should very much prefer the lump sum, for then
at any rate I should know that I had got my money. Disability pensions
are not guaranteed by any centralized fund, so that if the colliery
company goes bankrupt that is the end of the disabled miner's pension,
though he does figure among the other creditors.

In Wigan I stayed for a while with a miner who was suffering from
nystagmus. He could see across the room but not much further. He had
been drawing compensation of twenty-nine shillings a week for the past
nine months, but the colliery company were now talking of putting him on
'partial compensation' of fourteen shillings a week. It all depended on
whether the doctor passed him as fit for light work 'on top'. Even if
the doctor did pass him there would, needless to say, be no light work
available, but he could draw the dole and the company would have saved
itself fifteen shillings a week. Watching this man go to the colliery to
draw his compensation, I was struck by the profound differences that are
still made by _status_. Here was a man who had been half blinded in one
of the most useful of all jobs and was drawing a pension to which he had
a perfect right, if anybody has a right to anything. Yet he could not,
so to speak, _demand_ this pension--he could not, for instance, draw it
when and how he wanted it. He had to go to the colliery once a week at a
time named by the company, and when he got there he was kept waiting
about for hours in the cold wind. For all I know he was also expected to
touch his cap and show gratitude to whoever paid him; at any rate he had
to waste an afternoon and spend sixpence in bus fares. It is very
different for a member of the bourgeoisie, even such a down-at-heel
member as I am. Even when I am on the verge of starvation I have certain
rights attaching to my bourgeois status. I do not earn much more than a
miner earns, but I do at least get it paid into my bank in a
gentle-manly manner and can draw it out when I choose. And even when my
account is exhausted the bank people are passably polite.

This business of petty inconvenience and indignity, of being kept
waiting about, of having to do everything at other people's convenience,
is inherent in working-class life. A thousand influences constantly
press a working man down into a passive role. He does not act, he is
acted upon. He feels himself the slave of mysterious authority and has a
firm conviction that 'they' will never allow him to do this, that, and
the other. Once when I was hop-picking I asked the sweated pickers (they
earn something under sixpence an hour) why they did not form a union. I
was told immediately that 'they' would never allow it. Who were 'they'?
I asked. Nobody seemed to know, but evidently 'they' were omnipotent.

A person of bourgeois origin goes through life with some expectation of
getting what he wants, within reasonable limits. Hence the fact that in
times of stress 'educated' people tend to come to the front; they are no
more gifted than the others and their 'education' is generally quite
useless in itself, but they are accustomed to a certain amount of
deference and consequently have the cheek necessary to a commander. That
they will come to the front seems to be taken for granted, always and
everywhere. In Lissagaray's _History of the Commune_ there is an
interesting passage describing the shootings that took place after the
Commune had been suppressed. The authorities were shooting the
ringleaders, and as they did not know who the ringleaders were, they
were picking them out on the principle that those of better class would
be the ringleaders. An officer walked down a line of prisoners, picking
out likely-looking types. One man was shot because he was wearing a
watch, another because he 'had an intelligent face'. I should not like
to be shot for having an intelligent face, but I do agree that in almost
any revolt the leaders would tend to be people who could pronounce their
aitches.




4

AS you walk through the industrial towns you lose yourself in labyrinths
of little brick houses blackened by smoke, festering in planless chaos
round miry alleys and little cindered yards where there are stinking
dust-bins and lines of grimy washing and half-ruinous w.c.s. The
interiors of these houses are always very much the same, though the
number of rooms varies between two or five. All have an almost exactly
similar living-room, ten or fifteen feet square, with an open kitchen
range; in the larger ones there is a scullery as well, in the smaller
ones the sink and copper are in the living-room. At the back there is
the yard, or part of a yard shared by a number of houses, just big
enough for the dustbin and the w.c.s. Not a single one has hot water
laid on. You might walk, I suppose, through literally hundreds of miles
of streets inhabited by miners, every one of whom, when he is in work,
gets black from head to foot every day, without ever passing a house in
which one could have a bath. It would have been very simple to install a
hot-water system working from the kitchen range, but the builder saved
perhaps ten pounds on each house by not doing so, and at the time when
these houses were built no one imagined that miners wanted baths.

For it is to be noted that the majority of these houses are old, fifty
or sixty years old at least, and great numbers of them are by any
ordinary standard not fit for human habitation. They go on being
tenanted simply because there are no others to be had. And that is the
central fact about housing in the industrial areas: not that the houses
are poky and ugly, and insanitary and comfortless, or that they are
distributed in incredibly filthy slums round belching foundries and
stinking canals and slag-heaps that deluge them with sulphurous
smoke--though all this is perfectly true--but simply that there are not
enough houses to go round.

'Housing shortage' is a phrase that has been bandied about pretty freely
since the war, but it means very little to anyone with an income of more
than £10 a week, or even £5 a week for that matter. Where rents are high
the difficulty is not to find houses but to find tenants. Walk down any
street in Mayfair and you will see 'To Let' boards in half the windows.
But in the industrial areas the mere difficulty of getting hold of a
house is one of the worst aggravations of poverty. It means that people
will put up with anything--any hole and corner slum, any misery of bugs
and rotting floors and cracking walls, any extortion of skinflint
landlords and blackmailing agents--simply to get a roof over their
heads. I have been into appalling houses, houses in which I would not
live a week if you paid me, and found that the tenants had been there
twenty and thirty years and only hoped they might have the luck to die
there. In general these conditions are taken as a matter of course,
though not always. Some people hardly seem to realize that such things
as decent houses exist and look on bugs and leaking roofs as acts of
God; others rail bitterly against their landlords; but all cling
desperately to their houses lest worse should befall. So long as the
housing shortage continues the local authorities cannot do much to make
existing houses more liveable. They can 'condemn' a house, but they
cannot order it to be pulled down till the tenant has another house to
go to; and so the condemned houses remain standing and are all the worse
for being condemned, because naturally the landlord will not spend more
than he can help on a house which is going to be demolished sooner or
later. In a town like Wigan, for instance, there are over two thousand
houses standing which have been condemned for years, and whole sections
of the town would be condemned en bloc if there were any hope of other
houses being built to replace them. Towns like Leeds and Sheffield have
scores of thousands of 'back to back' houses which are all of a
condemned type but will remain standing for decades.

I have inspected great numbers of houses in various mining towns and
villages and made notes on their essential points. I think I can best
give an idea of what conditions are like by transcribing a few extracts
from my notebook, taken more or less at random. They are only brief
notes and they will need certain explanations which I will give
afterwards. Here are a few from Wigan:


1. House in Wallgate quarter. Blind back type. One up, one down.
Living-room measures 12 ft by 10 ft, room upstairs the same. Alcove
under stairs measuring 5 ft by 5 ft and serving as larder, scullery, and
coal-hole. Windows will open. Distance to lavatory 50 yards. Rent 4s.
9d., rates 2s. 6d., total 7s. 3d.

2. Another near by. Measurements as above, but no alcove under stairs,
merely a recess two feet deep containing the sink--no room for larder,
etc. Rent 3s. 2d., rates 2s., total 5s. 2d.

3. House in Scholes quarter. Condemned house. One up, one down. Rooms 15
ft by 15 ft. Sink and copper in living-room, coal-hole under stairs.
Floor subsiding. No windows will open. House decently dry. Landlord
good. Rent 3s. 8d. rates 2s. 6d., total 6s. 2d.

4. Another near by. Two up, two down, and coal-hole. Walls falling
absolutely to pieces. Water comes into upstairs rooms in quantities.
Floor lopsided. Downstairs windows will not open. Landlord bad. Rent
6s., rates 3s. 6d., total 9s. 6d.

5. House in Greenough's Row. One up, two down. Living-room 13 ft by 8
ft. Walls coming apart and water comes in. Back windows will not open,
front ones will. Ten in family with eight children very near together in
age. Corporations are trying to evict them for overcrowding but cannot
find another house to send them to. Landlord bad. Rent 4s., rates 2s.
3d., total 6s. 3d.


So much for Wigan. I have pages more of the same type. Here is one from
Sheffield--a typical specimen of Sheffield's several score thousand
'back to back' houses:


House in Thomas Street. Back to back, two up, one down (i.e. a
three-storey house with one room on each storey). Cellar below.
Living-room 14 ft by 10 ft, and rooms above corresponding. Sink in
living-room. Top floor has no door but gives on open stairs, Walls in
living-room slightly damp, walls in top rooms coming to pieces and
oozing damp on all sides. House is so dark that light has to be kept
burning all day. Electricity estimated at 6d. a day (probably an
exaggeration). Six in family, parents and foul children. Husband (on
P.A.C.) is tuberculous. One child in hospital, the others appear
healthy. Tenants have been seven years in this house. Would move, but no
other house available. Rent 6s. 6d., rates included.


Here are one or two from Barnsley:


1. House in Wortley Street. Two up, one down. Living-room 12 ft by 10
ft. Sink and copper in living-room, coal-hole under stairs. Sink worn
almost flat and constantly overflowing. Walls not too sound. Penny in
slot gas-light. House very dark and gas-light estimated 4d. a day.
Upstairs rooms are really one large room partitioned into two. Walls
very bad--wall of back room cracked right through. Window-frames coming
to pieces and have to be stuffed with wood. Rain comes through in
several places. Sewer runs under house and stinks in summer but
Corporation 'says they can't do nowt'. Six people in house, two adults
and four children, the eldest aged fifteen. Youngest but one attending
hospital--tuberculosis suspected. House infested by bugs. Rent 5s. 3d.,
including rates.

2. House in Peel Street. Back to back, two up, two down and large
cellar. Living-room loft square with copper and sink. The other
downstairs room the same size, probably intended as par-lour but used as
bedroom. Upstairs rooms the same size as those below. Living-room very
dark. Gas-light estimated at 4 1/2d. a day. Distance to lavatory 70
yards. Four beds in house for eight people--two old parents, two adult
girls (the eldest aged twenty-seven), one young man, and three children.
Parents have one bed, eldest son another, and remaining five people
share the other two. Bugs very bad--'You can't keep 'em down when it's
'ot.' Indescribable squalor in downstairs room and smell upstairs almost
unbearable. Rent 5s. 7 1/2d., including rates.

3. House in Mapplewell (small mining village near Barnsley). Two up, one
down. Living-room 14 ft by 13 ft. Sink in living-room. Plaster cracking
and coming off walls. No shelves in oven. Gas leaking slightly. The
upstairs rooms each 10 ft by 8 ft. Four beds (for six persons, all
adult), but 'one bed does nowt', presumably for lack of bedclothes. Room
nearest stairs has no door and stairs have no banister, so that when you
step out of bed your foot hangs in vacancy and you may fall ten feet on
to stones. Dry rot so bad that one can see through the floor into the
room below. Bugs, but 'I keeps 'em down with sheep dip'. Earth road past
these cottages is like a muck-heap and said to be almost impassable in
winter. Stone lavatories at ends of gardens in semi-ruinous condition.
Tenants have been twenty-two years in this house. Are £11 in arrears
with rent, and have been paying an extra 1s. a week to pay this off.
Landlord now refuses this and has served orders to quit. Rent 5s.,
including rates.


And so on and so on and so on. I could multiply examples by the
score--they could be multiplied by the hundred thousand if anyone chose
to make a house-to-house inspection throughout the industrial districts.
Meanwhile some of the expressions I have used need explaining. 'One up,
one down' means one room on each storey--i.e. a two-roomed house. 'Back
to back' houses are two houses built in one, each side of the house
being somebody's front door, so that if you walk down a row of what is
apparently twelve houses you are in reality seeing not twelve houses but
twenty-four. The front houses give on the street and the back ones on
the yard, and there is only one way out of each house. The effect of
this is obvious. The lavatories are in the yard at the back, so that if
you live on the side facing the street, to get to the lavatory or the
dust-bin you have to go out of the front door and walk round the end of
the block--a distance that may be as much as two hundred yards; if you
live at the back, on the other hand, your outlook is on to a row of
lavatories. There are also houses of what is called the 'blind back'
type, which are single houses, but in which the builder has omitted to
put in a back door--from pure spite, apparently. The windows which
refuse to open are a peculiarity of old mining towns. Some of these
towns are so undermined by ancient workings that the ground is
constantly subsiding and the houses above slip sideways. In Wigan you
pass whole rows of houses which have slid to startling angles, their
windows being ten or twenty degrees out of the horizontal. Sometimes the
front wall bellies outward till it looks as though the house were seven
months gone in pregnancy. It can be refaced, but the new facing soon
begins to bulge again. When a house sinks at all suddenly its windows
are jammed for ever and the door has to be refitted. This excites no
surprise locally. The story of the miner who comes home from work and
finds that he can only get indoors by smashing down the front door with
an axe is considered humorous. In some cases I have noted 'Landlord
good' or 'Landlord bad', because there is great variation in what the
slum-dwellers say about their landlords. I found--one might expect it,
perhaps--that the small landlords are usually the worst. It goes against
the grain to say this, but one can see why it should be so. Ideally, the
worst type of slum landlord is a fat wicked man, preferably a bishop,
who is drawing an immense income from extortionate rents. Actually, it
is a poor old woman who has invested her life's savings in three slum
houses, inhabits one of them, and tries to live on the rent of the other
two--never, in consequence, having any money for repairs.

But mere notes like these are only valuable as reminders to myself. To
me as I read them they bring back what I have seen, but they cannot in
themselves give much idea of what conditions are like in those fearful
northern slums. Words are such feeble things. What is the use of a brief
phrase like 'roof leaks' or 'four beds for eight people'? It is the kind
of thing your eye slides over, registering nothing. And yet what a
wealth of misery it can cover! Take the question of overcrowding, for
instance. Quite often you have eight or even ten people living in a
three-roomed house. One of these rooms is a living-room, and as it
probably measures about a dozen feet square and contains, besides the
kitchen range and the sink, a table, some chairs, and a dresser, there
is no room in it for a bed. So there are eight or ten people sleeping in
two small rooms, probably in at most four beds. If some of these people
are adults and have to go to work, so much the worse. In one house, I
remember, three grown-up girls shared the same bed and all went to work
at different hours, each disturbing the others when she got up or came
in; in another house a young miner working on the night shift slept by
day in a narrow bed in which another member of the family slept by
night. There is an added difficulty when there are grown-up children, in
that you cannot let adolescent youths and girls sleep in the same bed.
In one family I visited there were a father and mother and a son and
daughter aged round about seventeen, and only two beds for the lot of
them. The father slept with the son and the mother with the daughter; it
was the only arrangement that ruled out the danger of incest. Then there
is the misery of leaking roofs and oozing walls, which in winter makes
some rooms almost uninhabitable. Then there are bugs. Once bugs get into
a house they are in it till the crack of doom; there is no sure way of
exterminating them. Then there are the windows that will not open. I
need not point out what this must mean, in summer, in a tiny stuffy
living-room where the fire, on which all the cooking is done, has to be
kept burning more or less constantly. And there are the special miseries
attendant upon back to back houses. A fifty yards' walk to the lavatory
or the dust-bin is not exactly an inducement to be clean. In the front
houses--at any rate in a side-street where the Corporation don't
interfere--the women get into the habit of throwing their refuse out of
the front door, so that the gutter is always littered with tea-leaves
and bread crusts. And it is worth considering what it is like for a
child to grow up in one of the back alleys where its gaze is bounded by
a row of lavatories and a wall.

In such places as these a woman is only a poor drudge muddling among an
infinity of jobs. She may keep up her spirits, but she cannot keep up
her standards of cleanliness and tidiness. There is always something to
be done, and no conveniences and almost literally not room to turn
round. No sooner have you washed one child's face than another's is
dirty; before you have washed the crocks from one meal the next is due
to be cooked. I found great variation in the houses I visited. Some were
as decent as one could possibly expect in the circumstances, some were
so appalling that I have no hope of describing them adequately. To begin
with, the smell, the dominant and essential thing, is indescribable. But
the squalor and the confusion! A tub full of filthy water here, a basin
full of unwashed crocks there, more crocks piled in any odd corner, torn
newspaper littered everywhere, and in the middle always the same
dreadful table covered with sticky oilcloth and crowded with cooking
pots and irons and half-darned stockings and pieces of stale bread and
bits of cheese wrapped round with greasy newspaper! And the congestion
in a tiny room where getting from one side to the other is a complicated
voyage between pieces of furniture, with a line of damp washing getting
you in the face every time you move and the children as thick underfoot
as toadstools! There are scenes that stand out vividly in my memory. The
almost bare living-room of a cottage in a little mining village, where
the whole family was out of work and everyone seemed to be underfed; and
the big family of grown-up sons and daughters sprawling aimlessly about,
all strangely alike with red hair, splendid bones, and pinched faces
ruined by malnutrition and idleness; and one tall son sitting by the
fire-place, too listless even to notice the entry of a stranger, and
slowly peeling a sticky sock from a bare foot. A dreadful room in Wigan
where all the furniture seemed to be made of packing cases and barrel
staves and was coming to pieces at that; and an old woman with a
blackened neck and her hair coining down denouncing her landlord in a
Lancashire-Irish accent; and her mother, aged well over ninety, sitting
in the background on the barrel that served her as a commode and
regarding us blankly with a yellow, cretinous face. I could fill up
pages with memories of similar interiors.

Of course the squalor of these people's houses is some-times their own
fault. Even if you live in a back to back house and have four children
and a total income of thirty-two and sixpence a week from the P.A.C.,
there is no need to have unemptied chamber-pots standing about in your
living-room. But it is equally certain that their circumstances do not
encourage self-respect. The determining factor is probably the number of
children. The best-kept interiors I saw were always childless houses or
houses where there were only one or two children; with, say, six
children in a three-roomed house it is quite impossible to keep anything
decent. One thing that is very noticeable is that the worst squalors are
never downstairs. You might visit quite a number of houses, even among
the poorest of the unemployed, and bring away a wrong impression. These
people, you might reflect, cannot be so badly off if they still have a
fair amount of furniture and crockery. But it is in the rooms upstairs
that the gauntness of poverty really discloses itself. Whether this is
because pride makes people cling to their living-room furniture to the
last, or because bedding is more pawnable, I do not know, but certainly
many of the bedrooms I saw were fearful places. Among people who have
been unemployed for several years continuously I should say it is the
exception to have anything like a full set of bedclothes. Often there is
nothing that can be properly called bedclothes at all--just a heap of
old overcoats and miscellaneous rags on a rusty iron bedstead. In this
way overcrowding is aggravated. One family of four persons that I knew,
a father and mother and two children, possessed two beds but could only
use one of them because they had not enough bedding for the other.

Anyone who wants to see the effects of the housing shortage at their
very worse should visit the dreadful caravan-dwellings that exist in
numbers in many of the northern towns. Ever since the war, in the
complete impossibility of getting houses, parts of the population have
overflowed into supposedly temporary quarters in fixed caravans. Wigan,
for instance, with a population of about 85,000, has round about 200
caravan-dwellings with a family in each--perhaps somewhere near 1000
people in all. How many of these caravan-colonies exist throughout the
industrial areas it would be difficult to discover with any accuracy.
The local authorities are reticent about them and the census report of
1931 seems to have decided to ignore them. But so far as I can discover
by inquiry they are to be found in most of the larger towns in
Lancashire and Yorkshire, and perhaps further north as well. The
probability is that throughout the north of England there are some
thousands, perhaps tens of thousands of _families_ (not individuals) who
have no home except a fixed caravan.

But the word 'caravan' is very misleading. It calls up a picture of a
cosy gypsy-encampment (in fine weather, of course) with wood fires
crackling and children picking blackberries and many-coloured washing
fluttering on the lines. The caravan-colonies in Wigan and Sheffield are
not like that. I had a look at several of them, I inspected those in
Wigan with considerable care, and I have never seen comparable squalor
except in the Far East. Indeed when I saw them I was immediately
reminded of the filthy kennels in which I have seen Indian coolies
living in Burma. But, as a matter of fact, nothing in the East could
ever be quite as bad, for in the East you haven't our clammy,
penetrating cold to contend with, and the sun is a disinfectant.

Along the banks of Wigan's miry canal are patches of waste ground on
which the caravans have been dumped like rubbish shot out of a bucket.
Some of them are actually gypsy caravans, but very old ones and in bad
repair. The majority are old single-decker buses (the rather smaller
buses of ten years ago) which have been taken off their wheels and
propped up with struts of wood. Some are simply wagons with
semi-circular slats on top, over which canvas is stretched, so that the
people inside have nothing but canvas between them and the outer air.
Inside, these places are usually about five feet wide by six high (I
could not stand quite upright in any of them) and anything from six to
fifteen feet long. Some, I suppose, are inhabited by only one person,
but I did not see any that held less than two persons, and some of them
contained large families. One, for instance, measuring fourteen feet
long, had seven people in it--seven people in about 450 cubic feet of
space; which is to say that each person had for his entire dwelling a
space a _good deal_ smaller than one compartment of a public lavatory.
The dirt and congestion of these places is such that you cannot well
imagine it unless you have tested it with your own eyes and more
particularly your nose. Each contains a tiny cottage Kitchener and such
furniture as can be crammed in--sometimes two beds, more usually one,
into which the whole family have to huddle as best they can. It is
almost impossible to sleep on the floor, because the damp soaks up from
below. I was shown mat-tresses which were still wringing wet at eleven
in the morning. In winter it is so cold that the Kitcheners have to be
kept burning day and night, and the windows, need-less to say, are never
opened. Water is got from a hydrant common to the whole colony, some of
the caravan-dwellers having to walk 150 or 200 yards for every bucket of
water. There are no sanitary arrangements at all. Most of the people
construct a little hut to serve as a lavatory on the tiny patch of
ground surrounding their caravan, and once a week dig a deep hole in
which to bury the refuse. All the people I saw in these places,
especially the children, were unspeakably dirty, and I do not doubt that
they were lousy as well. They could not possibly be otherwise. The
thought that haunted me as I went from caravan to caravan was, What can
happen in those cramped interiors when anybody dies? But that, of
course, is the kind of question you hardly care to ask.

Some of the people have been in their caravans for many years.
Theoretically the Corporation are doing away with the caravan-colonies
and getting the inhabitants out into houses; but as the houses don't get
built, the caravans remain standing. Most of the people I talked to had
given up the idea of ever getting a decent habitation again. They were
all out of work, and a job and a house seemed to them about equally
remote and impossible. Some hardly seemed to care; others realized quite
clearly in what misery they were living. One woman's face stays by me, a
worn skull-like face on which was a look of intolerable misery and
degradation. I gathered that in that dreadful pigsty, struggling to keep
her large brood of children clean, she felt as I should feel if I were
coated all over with dung. One must remember that these people are not
gypsies; they are decent English people who have all, except the
children born there, had homes of their own in their day; besides, their
caravans are greatly inferior to those of gypsies and they have not the
great advantage of being on the move. No doubt there are still
middle-class people who think that the Lower Orders don't mind that kind
of thing and who, if they happened to pass a caravan-colony in the
train, would immediately assume that the people lived there from choice.
I never argue nowadays with that kind of person. But it is worth
noticing that the caravan-dwellers don't even save money by living
there, for they are paying about the same rents as they would for
houses. I could not hear of any rent lower than five shillings a week
(five shillings for 200 cubic feet of space!) and there are even cases
where the rent is as high as ten shillings. Somebody must be making a
good thing out of those caravans! But dearly their continued existence
is due to the housing shortage and not directly to poverty.

Talking once with a miner I asked him when the housing shortage first
became acute in his district; he answered, 'When we were told about it',
meaning that till recently people's standards were so low that they took
almost any degree of overcrowding for granted. He added that when he was
a child his family had slept eleven in a room and thought nothing of it,
and that later, when he was grown-up, he and his wife had lived in one
of the old-style back to back houses in which you not only had to walk a
couple of hundred yards to the lavatory but often had to wait in a queue
when you got there, the lavatory being shared by thirty-six people. And
when his wife was sick with the illness that killed her, she still had
to make that two hundred yards' journey to the lavatory. This, he said,
was the kind of thing people would put up with 'till they were told
about it'.

I do not know whether that is true. What is certain is that nobody now
thinks it bearable to sleep eleven in a room, and that even people with
comfortable incomes are vaguely troubled by the thought of 'the slums'.
Hence the clatter about 'rehousing' and 'slum clearance' which we have
had at intervals ever since the war. Bishops, politicians,
philanthropists, and what not enjoy talking piously about 'slum
clearance', because they can thus divert attention from more serious
evils and pretend that if you abolish the slums you abolish poverty. But
all this talk has led to surprisingly small results. So far as one can
discover, the congestion is no better, perhaps slightly worse, than it
was a dozen years ago. There is certainly great variation in the speed
at which the different towns are attacking their housing problem. In
some towns building seems to be almost at a standstill, in others it is
proceeding rapidly and the private landlord is being driven out of
business. Liverpool, for instance, has been very largely rebuilt, mainly
by the efforts of the Corporation. Sheffield, too, is being torn down
and rebuilt pretty fast, though perhaps, considering the unparalleled
beastliness of its slums, not quite fast enough.[The number of
Corporation houses in process of construction in Sheffield at the
beginning of 1936 was 1398. To replace the slum areas entirely Sheffield
is said to need 100,000 houses.]

Why rehousing has on the whole moved so slowly, and why some towns can
borrow money for building purposes so much more easily than others, I do
not know. Those questions would have to be answered by someone who knows
more about the machinery of local government than I do. A Corporation
house costs normally somewhere between three and four hundred pounds; it
costs rather less when it is built by 'direct labour' than when built by
contract. The rent of these houses would average something over twenty
pounds a year not counting rates, so one would think that, even allowing
for overhead expenses and interest on loans, it would pay any
Corporation to build as many houses as could be tenanted. In many cases,
of course, the houses would have to be inhabited by people on the
P.A.C., so that the local bodies would merely be taking money out of one
pocket and putting it into another--i.e. paying out money in the form of
relief and taking it back in the form of rent. But they have got to pay
the relief in any case, and at present a proportion of what they pay is
being swallowed up by private landlords. The reasons given for the slow
rate of building are lack of money and the difficulty of getting hold of
sites--for Corporation houses are not erected piecemeal but in
'estates', sometimes of hundreds of houses at a time. One thing that
always strikes me as mysterious is that so many of the northern towns
see fit to build themselves immense and luxurious public buildings at
the same time as they are in crying need of dwelling houses. The town of
Barnsley, for instance, recently spent close on £150,000 on a new town
hall, although admittedly needing at least 2000 new working-class
houses, not to mention public baths. (The public baths in Barnsley
contain nineteen men's slipper baths--this in a town of 70,000
inhabitants, largely miners, not one of whom has a bath in his house!)
For £150,000 it could have built 350 Corporation houses and still had
£10,000 to spend on a town hall. However, as I say, I do not pretend to
understand the mysteries of local government. I merely record the fact
that houses are desperately needed and are being built, on the whole,
with paralytic slowness.

Still, houses are being built, and the Corporation building estates,
with their row upon row of little red houses, all much aliker than two
peas (where did that expression come from? Peas have great
individuality) are a regular feature of the outskirts of the industrial
towns. As to what they are like and how they compare with the slum
houses, I can best give an idea by transcribing two more extracts from
my diary. The tenants' opinions of their houses vary greatly, so I will
give one favourable extract and one unfavourable. Both of these are from
Wigan and both are the cheaper 'non-parlour type' houses:


1. House in Beech Hill Estate.

_Downstairs_. Large living-room with Kitchener fireplace, cup-boards,
and fixed dresser, composition floor. Small hallway, largish kitchen. Up
to date electric cooker hired from Corporation at much the same rate as
a gas cooker.

_Upstairs_. Two largish bedrooms, one tiny one--suitable only for a
boxroom or temporary bedroom. Bathroom, w.c., with hot and cold water.

Smallish garden. These vary throughout the estate, but mostly rather
smaller than an allotment.

Four in family, parents and two children. Husband in good employ. Houses
appear well built and are quite agreeable to look at. Various
restrictions, e.g. it is forbidden to keep poultry or pigeons, take in
lodgers, sub-let, or start any kind of business with-out leave from the
Corporation. (This is easily granted in the case of taking in lodgers,
but not in any of the others.) Tenant very well satisfied with house
and proud of it. Houses in this estate all well kept. Corporation are
good about repairs, but keep tenants up to the mark with regard to
keeping the place tidy, etc.

Rent 11s. 3d. including rates. Bus fare into town 2d.


2. House in Welly Estate.

_Downstairs_. Living-room 14 ft by 10 ft, kitchen a good deal smaller,
tiny larder under stairs, small but fairly good bathroom. Gas cooker,
electric lighting. Outdoor w.c.

_Upstairs_. One bedroom 12 ft by 10 ft with tiny fireplace, another the
same size without fireplace, another 7 ft by 6 ft. Best bedroom has
small wardrobe let into wall. 'Garden about 20 yards by 10.

Six in family, parents and four children, eldest son nineteen, eldest
daughter twenty-two. None in work except eldest son. Tenants very
discontented. Their complaints are: 'House is cold, draughty, and damp.
Fireplace in living-room gives out no heat and makes room very
dusty--attributed to its being set too low. Fireplace in best bedroom
too small to be of any use. Walls upstairs cracking. Owing to
uselessness of tiny bedroom, five are sleeping in one bedroom, one (the
eldest son) in the other.'

Gardens in this estate all neglected.

Rent 10s. 3d., inclusive. Distance to town a little over a mile--there
is no bus here.


I could multiply examples, but these two are enough, as the types of
Corporation houses being built do not vary greatly from place to place.
Two things are immediately obvious. The first is that at their very
worst the Corporation houses are better than the slums they replace. The
mere possession of a bathroom and a bit of garden would out-weigh almost
any disadvantage. The other is that they are much more expensive to live
in. It is common enough for a man to be turned out of a condemned house
where he is paying six or seven shillings a week and given a Corporation
house where he has to pay ten. This only affects those who are in work
or have recently been in work, because when a man is on the P.A.C. his
rent is assessed at a quarter of his dole, and if it is more than this
he gets an extra allowance; in any case, there are certain classes of
Corporation houses to which people on the dole are not admitted. But
there are other ways in which life in a Corporation estate is expensive,
whether you are in work or out of it. To begin with, owing to the higher
rents, the shops in the estate are much more expensive and there are not
so many of them. Then again, in a comparatively large, detached house,
away from the frowsy huddle of the slum, it is much colder and more fuel
has to be burnt. And again there is the expense, especially for a man in
work, of getting to and from town. This last is one of the more obvious
problems of rehousing. Slum clearance means diffusion of the population.
When you rebuild on a large scale, what you do in effect is to scoop out
the centre of the town and redistribute it on the outskirts. This is all
very well in a way; you have got the people out of fetid alleys into
places where they have room to breathe; but from the point of view of
the people themselves, what you have done is to pick them up and dump
them down five miles from their work. The simplest solution is flats. If
people are going to live in large towns at all they must learn to live
on top of one another. But the northern working people do not take
kindly to flats; even where fiats exist they are contemptuously named
'tenements'. Almost everyone will tell you that he 'wants a house of his
own', and apparently a house in the middle of an unbroken block of
houses a hundred yards long seems to them more 'their own' than a flat
situated in mid-air.

To revert to the second of the two Corporation houses I have just
mentioned. The tenant complained that the house was cold, damp, and so
forth. Perhaps the house was jerry-built, but equally probably he was
exaggerating. He had come there from a filthy hovel in the middle of
Wigan which I happened to have inspected previously; while there he had
made every effort to get hold of a Corporation house, and he was no
sooner in the Corporation house than he wanted to be back in the slum.
This looks like mere captiousness but it covers a perfectly genuine
grievance. In very many cases, perhaps in half the cases, I found that
the people in Corporation houses don't really like them. They are glad
to get out of the stink of the slum, they know that it is better for
their children to have space to play about in, but they don't feel
really at home. The exceptions are usually people in good employ who can
afford to spend a little extra on fuel and furniture and journeys, and
who in any case are of 'superior' type. The others, the typical
slum-dwellers, miss the frowsy warmth of the slum. They complain that
'out in the country', i.e. on the edge of the town, they are 'starving'
(freezing). Certainly most Corporation estates are pretty bleak in
winter. Some I have been through, perched on treeless clayey hillsides
and swept by icy winds, would be horrible places to live in. It is not
that slum-dwellers want dirt and congestion for their own sakes, as the
fat-bellied bourgeoisie love to believe. (See for instance the
conversation about slum-clearance in Galsworthy's Swan Song, where the
rentier's cherished belief that the slum-dweller makes the slum, and not
vice versa, is put into the mouth of a philanthropic Jew.) Give people a
decent house and they will soon learn to keep it decent. Moreover, with
a smart-looking house to live up to they improve in self-respect and
cleanliness, and their children start life with better chances.
Nevertheless, in a Corporation estate there is an uncomfortable, almost
prison-like atmosphere, and the people who live there are perfectly well
aware of it.

And it is here that one comes on the central difficulty of the housing
problem. When you walk through the smoke-dim slums of Manchester you
think that nothing is needed except to tear down these abominations and
build decent houses in their place. But the trouble is that in
destroying the slum you destroy other things as well. Houses are I'
desperately needed and are not being built fast enough; but in so far as
rehousing is being done, it is being done--perhaps it is unavoidable--in
a monstrously inhuman manner. I don't mean merely that the houses are
new and ugly. All houses have got to be new at some time, and as a
matter of fact the type of Corporation house now being built is not at
all offensive to look at. On the outskirts of Liverpool there are what
amount to whole towns consisting entirely of Corporation houses, and
they are quite pleasing to the eye; the blocks of workers' flats in the
centre of the town modelled, I believe, on the workers' flats in Vienna,
are definitely fine buildings. But there is something ruthless and
soulless about the whole business. Take, for instance, the restrictions
with which you are burdened in a Corporation house. You are not allowed
to keep your house and garden as you want them--in some estates there is
even a regulation that every garden must have the same kind of hedge.
You are not allowed to keep poultry or pigeons. The Yorkshire miners are
fond of keeping homer pigeons; they keep them in the back yard and take
them out and race them on Sundays. But pigeons are messy birds and the
Corporation suppresses them as a matter of course. The restrictions
about shops are more serious. The number of shops in a Corporation
estate is rigidly limited, and it is said that preference is given to
the Co-op and the chain stores; this may not be strictly true, but
certainly those are the shops that one usually sees there. This is bad
enough for the general public, but from the point of view of the
independent shopkeeper it is a disaster. Many a small shopkeeper is
utterly ruined by some rehousing scheme which takes no notice of his
existence. A whole section of the town is condemned en bloc; presently
the houses are pulled down and the people are transferred to some
housing estate miles away. In this way all the small shopkeepers of the
quarter have their whole clientele taken away from them at a single
swoop and receive not a penny of compensation. They cannot transfer
their business to the estate, because even if they can afford the move
and the much higher rents, they would probably be refused a licence. As
for pubs, they are banished from the housing estates almost completely,
and the few that remain are dismal sham-Tudor places fitted out by the
big brewery companies and very expensive. For a middle-class population
this would be a nuisance--it might mean walking a mile to get a glass of
beer; for a working-class population, which uses the pub as a kind of
club, it is a serious blow at communal life. It is a great achievement
to get slum-dwellers into decent houses, but it is unfortunate that,
owing to the peculiar temper of our time, it is also considered
necessary to rob them of the last vestiges of their liberty. The people
themselves feel this, and it is this feeling that they are rationalizing
when they complain that their new houses--so much better, as houses,
than those they have come out of--are cold and uncomfortable and
'unhomelike'.

I sometimes think that the price of liberty is not so much eternal
vigilance as eternal dirt. There are some Corporation estates in which
new tenants are systematically de-loused before being allowed into their
houses. All their possessions except what they stand up in are taken
away from them, fumigated, and sent on to the new house. This procedure
has its points, for it is a pity that people should take bugs into brand
new houses (a bug will follow you about in your luggage if he gets half
a chance), but it is the kind of thing that makes you wish that the word
'hygiene' could be dropped out of the dictionary. Bugs are bad, but a
state of affairs in which men will allow themselves to be dipped like
sheep is worse. 'Perhaps, however, when it is a case of slum clearance,
one must take for granted a certain amount of restrictions and
inhumanity. When all is said and done, the most important thing is that
people shall live in decent houses and not in pigsties. I have seen too
much of slums to go into Chestertonian raptures about them. A place
where the children can breathe clean air, and women have a few
conveniences to save them from drudgery, and a man has a bit of garden
to dig in, must be better than the stinking back-streets of Leeds and
Sheffield. On balance, the Corporation Estates are better than the
slums; but only by a small margin.

When I was looking into the housing question I visited and inspected
numbers of houses, perhaps a hundred or two hundred houses altogether,
in various mining towns and villages. I cannot end this chapter without
remarking on the extraordinary courtesy and good nature with which I was
received everywhere. I did not go alone--I always had some local friend
among the unemployed to show me round--but even so, it is an
impertinence to go poking into strangers' houses and asking to see the
cracks in the bedroom wall. Yet everyone was astonishingly patient and
seemed to understand almost without explanation why I was questioning
them and what I wanted to see. If any unauthorized person walked into
_my_ house and began asking me whether the roof leaked and whether I was
much troubled by bugs and what I thought of my landlord, I should
probably tell him to go to hell. This only happened to me once, and in
that case the woman was slightly deaf and took me for a Means Test nark;
but even she relented after a while and gave me the information I
wanted.

I am told that it is bad form for a writer to quote his own reviews, but
I want here to contradict a reviewer in the _Manchester Guardian_ who
says apropos of one of my books:


Set down in Wigan or Whitechapel Mr Orwell would still exercise an
unerring power of closing his vision to all that is good in order to
proceed with his wholehearted vilification of humanity.


Wrong. Mr Orwell was 'set down' in Wigan for quite a while and it did
not inspire him with any wish to vilify humanity. He liked Wigan very
much--the people, not the scenery. Indeed, he has only one fault to find
with it, and that is in respect of the celebrated Wigan Pier, which he
had set his heart on seeing. Alas! Wigan Pier had been demolished, and
even the spot where it used to stand is no longer certain.




5

When you see the unemployment figures quoted at two millions, it is
fatally easy to take this as meaning that two million people are out of
work and the rest of the population is comparatively comfortable. I
admit that till recently I was in the habit of doing so myself. I used
to calculate that if you put the registered unemployed at round about
two millions and threw in the destitute and those who for one reason and
another were not registered, you might take the number of underfed
people in England (for everyone on the dole or thereabouts is underfed)
as being, at the very most, five millions.

This is an enormous under-estimate, because, in the first place, the
only people shown on unemployment figures are those actually drawing the
dole--that is, in general, heads of families. An unemployed man's
dependants do not figure on the list unless they too are drawing a
separate allowance. A Labour Exchange officer told me that to get at the
real number of people _living on_ (not drawing) the dole, you have got
to multiply the official figures by something over three. This alone
brings the number of unemployed to round about six millions. But in
addition there are great numbers of people who are in work but who, from
a financial point of view, might equally well be unemployed, because
they are not drawing anything that can be described as a living
wage.[For instance, a recent census of the Lancashire cotton mills
revealed the fact that over 40,000 full-time employees receive less than
thirty shillings a week each. In Preston, to take only one town, the
number receiving over thirty shillings a week was 640 and the number
receiving under thirty shillings was 3113.] Allow for these and their
dependants, throw in as before the old-age pensioners, the destitute,
and other nondescripts, and you get an _underfed_ population of well
over ten millions. Sir John Orr puts it at twenty millions.

Take the figures for Wigan, which is typical enough of the industrial
and mining districts. The number of insured workers is round about
36,000 (26,000 men and 10,000 women). Of these, the number unemployed at
the beginning of 1936 was about 10,000. But this was in winter when the
mines are working full time; in summer it would probably be 12,000.
Multiply by three, as above, and you get 30,000 or 36,000. The total
population of Wigan is a little under 87,000; so that at any moment more
than one person in three out of the whole population--not merely the
registered workers--is either drawing or living on the dole. Those ten
or twelve thousand unemployed contain a steady core of from four to five
thousand miners who have been continuously unemployed for the past seven
years. And Wigan is not especially badly off as industrial towns go.
'Even in Sheffield, which has been doing well for the last year or so
because of wars and rumours of war, the proportion of unemployment is
about the same--one in three of registered workers unemployed.

When a man is first unemployed, until his insurance stamps are
exhausted, he draws 'full benefit', of which the rates are as follows:


                    per week

Single man            17s.
Wife                   9s.
Each child below 14    3s.


Thus in a typical family of parents and three children of whom one was
over fourteen, the total income would be 32s. per week, plus anything
that might be earned by the eldest child. When a man's stamps are
exhausted, before being turned over to the P.A.C. (Public Assistance
Committee), he receives twenty-six weeks' 'transitional benefit' from
the U.A.B. (Unemployment Assistance Board), the rates being as follows:



                   per week

Single man           15s.
Man and wife         24s.
Children 14-18        6s.
Children 11-14        4s. 6d.
Children 8-11         4s.
Children 5-8          3s. 6d.
Children 3-5          3s.


Thus on the U.A.B. the income of the typical family of five persons
would be 37s. 6d. a week if no child was in work. When a man is on the
U.A.B. a quarter of his dole is regarded as rent, with a minimum of 7s.
6d. a week. If the rent he is paying is more than a quarter of his dole
he receives an extra allowance, but if it is less than 7s. 6d., a
corresponding amount is deducted. Payments on the P.A.C. theoretically
comes out of the local rates, but are backed by a central fund. The
rates of benefit are:


                      per week

Single man             12s. 6d.
Man and wife           23s.
Eldest child            4s.
Any other child         3s.


Being at the discretion of the local bodies these rates vary slightly,
and a single man may or may not get an extra 2s. 6d. weekly, bringing
his benefit up to 15s. As on the U.A.B., a quarter of a married man's
dole is regarded as rent. Thus in the typical family considered above
the total income would be 33s. a week, a quarter of this being regarded
as rent. In addition, in most districts a coal allowance of 1s. 6d. a
week (1s. 6d. is equivalent to about a hundredweight of coal) is granted
for six weeks before and six weeks after Christmas.

It will be seen that the income of a family on the dole normally
averages round about thirty shillings a week. One can write at least a
quarter of this off as rent, which is to say that the average person,
child or adult, has got to be fed, clothed, warmed, and otherwise
cared-for for six or seven shillings a week. Enormous groups of people,
probably at least a third of the whole population of the industrial
areas, are living at this level. The Means Test is very strictly
enforced, and you are liable to be refused relief at the slightest hint
that you are getting money from another source. Dock-labourers, for
instance, who are generally hired by the half-day, have to sign on at a
Labour Exchange twice daily; if they fail to do so it is assumed that
they have been working and their dole is reduced correspondingly. I have
seen cases of evasion of the Means Test, but I should say that in the
industrial towns, where there is still a certain amount of communal life
and everyone has neighbours who know him, it is much harder than it
would be in London. The usual method is for a young man who is actually
living with his parents to get an accommodation address, so that
supposedly he has a separate establishment and draws a separate
allowance. But there is much spying and tale-bearing. One man I knew,
for instance, was seen feeding his neighbour's chickens while the
neighbour was away. It was reported to the authorities that he 'had a
job feeding chickens' and he had great difficulty in refuting this. The
favourite joke in Wigan was about a man who was refused relief on the
ground that he 'had a job carting firewood'. He had been seen, it was
said, carting firewood at night. He had to explain that he was not
carting firewood but doing a moonlight flit. The 'firewood' was his
furniture.

The most cruel and evil effect of the Means Test is the way in which it
breaks up families. Old people, sometimes bedridden, are driven out of
their homes by it. An old age pensioner, for instance, if a widower,
would normally live with one or other of his children; his weekly ten
shillings goes towards the household expenses, and probably he is not
badly cared for. Under the Means Test, however, he counts as a 'lodger'
and if he stays at home his children's dole will be docked. So, perhaps
at seventy or seventy-five years of age, he has to turn out into
lodgings, handing his pension over to the lodging-house keeper and
existing on the verge of starvation. I have seen several cases of this
myself. It is happening all over England at this moment, thanks to the
Means Test.

Nevertheless, in spite of the frightful extent of unemployment, it is a
fact that poverty--extreme poverty--is less in evidence in the
industrial North than it is in London. Everything is poorer and
shabbier, there are fewer motor-cars and fewer well-dressed people; but
also there are fewer people who are obviously destitute. Even in a town
the size of Liverpool or Manchester you are struck by the fewness of the
beggars. London is a sort of whirlpool which draws derelict people
towards it, and it is so vast that life there is solitary and anonymous.
Until you break the law nobody will take any notice of you, and you can
go to pieces as you could not possibly do in a place where you had
neighbours who knew you. But in the industrial towns the old communal
way of life has not yet broken up, tradition is still strong and almost
everyone has a family--potentially, therefore, a home. In a town of
50,000 or 100,000 inhabitants there is no casual and as it were
unaccounted-for population; nobody sleeping in the streets, for
instance. Moreover, there is just this to be said for the unemployment
regulations, that they do not discourage people from marrying. A man and
wife on twenty-three shillings a week are not far from the starvation
line, but they can make a home of sorts; they are vastly better off than
a single man on fifteen shillings. The life of a single unemployed man
is dreadful. He lives sometimes in a common lodging-house, more often in
a 'furnished' room for which he usually pays six shillings a week,
finding himself as best he can on the other nine (say six shillings a
week for food and three for clothes, tobacco, and amusements). Of course
he cannot feed or look after himself properly, and a man who pays six
shillings a week for his room is not encouraged to be indoors more than
is necessary. So he spends his days loafing in the public library or any
other place where he can keep warm. That keeping warm--is almost the
sole preoccupation of a single unemployed man in winter. In Wigan a
favourite refuge was the pictures, which are fantastically cheap there.
You can always get a seat for fourpence, and at the matinee at some
houses you can even get a seat for twopence. Even people on the verge of
starvation will readily pay twopence to get out of the ghastly cold of a
winter afternoon. In Sheffield I was taken to a public hall to listen to
a lecture by a clergyman, and it was by a long way the silliest and
worst-delivered lecture I have ever heard or ever expect to hear. I
found it physically impossible to sit it out, indeed my feet carried me
out, seemingly of their own accord, before it was half-way through. Yet
the hall was thronged with unemployed men; they would have sat through
far worse drivel for the sake of a warm place to shelter in.

At times I have seen unmarried men on the dole living in the extreme of
misery. In one town I remember a whole colony of them who were
squatting, more or less illicitly, in a derelict house which was
practically falling down. They had collected a few scraps of furniture,
presumably off refuse-tips, and I remember that their sole table was an
old marble-topped wash-hand-stand. But this kind of thing is
exceptional. A working-class bachelor is a rarity, and so long as a man
is married unemployment makes comparatively little alteration in his way
of life. His home is impoverished but it is still a home, and it is
noticeable everywhere that the anomalous position created by
unemployment--the man being out of work while the woman's work continues
as before--has not altered the relative status of the sexes. In a
working-class home it is the man who is the master and not, as in a
middle-class home, the woman or the baby. Practically never, for
instance, in a working-class home, will you see the man doing a stroke
of the housework. Unemployment has not changed this convention, which on
the face of it seems a little unfair. The man is idle from morning to
night but the woman is as busy as ever--more so, indeed, because she has
to manage with less money. Yet so far as my experience goes the women do
not protest. I believe that they, as well as the men, feel that a man
would lose his manhood if, merely because he was out of work, he
developed into a 'Mary Ann'.

But there is no doubt about the deadening, debilitating effect of
unemployment upon everybody, married or single, and upon men more than
upon women. The best intellects will not stand up against it. Once or
twice it has happened to me to meet unemployed men of genuine literary
ability; there are others whom I haven't met but whose work I
occasionally see in the magazines. Now and again, at long intervals,
these men will produce an article or a short story which is quite
obviously better than most of the stuff that gets whooped up by the
blurb-reviewers. Why, then, do they make so little use of their talents?
They have all the leisure in the world; why don't they sit down and
write books? Because to write books you need not only comfort and
solitude--and solitude is never easy to attain in a working-class
home--you also need peace of mind. You can't settle to anything, you
can't command the spirit of _hope_ in which anything has got to be
created, with that dull evil cloud of unemployment hanging over you.
Still, an unemployed man who feels at home with books can at any rate
occupy himself by reading. But what about the man who cannot read
without discomfort? Take a miner, for instance, who has worked in the
pit since childhood and has been trained to be a miner and nothing else.
How the devil is he to fill up the empty days? It is absurd to say that
he ought to be looking for work. There is no work to look for, and
everybody knows it. You can't go on looking for work every day for seven
years. There are allotments, which occupy the time and help to feed a
family, but in a big town there are only allotments for a small
proportion of the people. Then there are the occupational centres which
were started a few years ago to help the unemployed. On the whole this
movement has been a failure, but some of the centres are still
flourishing. I have visited one or two of them. There are shelters where
the men can keep warm and there are periodical classes in carpentering,
boot-making, leather-work, handloom-weaving, basket-work, sea-grass
work, etc., etc.; the idea being that the men can make furniture and so
forth, not for sale but for their own homes, getting tools free and
materials cheaply. Most of the Socialists I have talked to denounce this
movement as they denounce the project--it is always being talked about
but it never comes to anything--to give the unemployed small-holdings.
They say that the occupational centres are simply a device to keep the
unemployed quiet and give them the illusion that something is being done
for them. Undoubtedly that is the underlying motive. Keep a man busy
mending boots and he is less likely to read the _Daily Worker_. Also
there is a nasty Y.M.C.A. atmosphere about these places which you can
feel as soon as you go in. The unemployed men who frequent them are
mostly of the cap-touching type--the type who tells you oilily that he
is 'Temperance' and votes Conservative. Yet even here you feel yourself
torn both ways. For probably it is better that a man should waste his
time even with such rubbish as sea-grass work than that for years upon
end he should do absolutely _nothing_.

By far the best work for the unemployed is being done by the
N.U.W.M.--National Unemployed Workers' Movement. This is a revolutionary
organization intended to hold the unemployed together, stop them
blacklegging during strikes, and give them legal advice against the
Means Test. It is a movement that has been built out of nothing by the
pennies and efforts of the unemployed themselves. I have seen a good
deal of the N.U.W.M., and I greatly admire the men, ragged and underfed
like the others, who keep the organization going. Still more I admire
the tact and patience with which they do it; for it is not easy to coax
even a penny-a-week subscription out of the pockets of people on the
P.A.C. As I said earlier, the English working class do not show much
capacity for leadership, but they have a wonderful talent for
organization. The whole trade union movement testifies to this; so do
the excellent working-men's clubs--really a sort of glorified
cooperative pub, and splendidly organized--which are so common in
Yorkshire. In many towns the N.U.W.M. have shelters and arrange speeches
by Communist speakers. But even at these shelters the men who go there
do nothing but sit round the stove and occasionally play a game of
dominoes. If this move-met could be combined with something along the
lines of the occupational centres, it would be nearer what is needed. It
is a deadly thing to see a skilled man running to seed, year after year,
in utter, hopeless idleness. It ought not to be impossible to give him
the chance of using his hands and making furniture and so forth for his
own home, with-out turning him into a Y.M.C.A. cocoa-drunkard. We may as
well face the fact that several million men in England will--unless
another war breaks out--never have a real job this side the grave. One
thing that probably could be done and certainly ought to be done as a
matter of course is to give every unemployed man a patch of ground and
free tools if he chose to apply for them. It is disgraceful that men who
are expected to keep alive on the P.A.C. should not even have the chance
to grow vegetables for their families.

To study unemployment and its effects you have got to go to the
industrial areas. In the South unemployment exists, but it is scattered
and queerly unobtrusive. There are plenty of rural districts where a man
out of work is almost unheard-of, and you don't anywhere see the
spectacle of whole blocks of cities living on the dole and the P.A.C. It
is only when you lodge in streets where nobody has a job, where getting
a job seems about as probable as owning an aeroplane and much _less_
probable than winning fifty pounds in the Football Pool, that you begin
to grasp the changes that are being worked in our civilization. For a
change is taking place, there is no doubt about that. The attitude of
the submerged working class is profoundly different from what it was
seven or eight years ago.

I first became aware of the unemployment problem in 1928. At that time I
had just come back from Burma, where unemployment was only a word, and I
had gone to Burma when I was still a boy and the post-war boom was not
quite over. When I first saw unemployed men at close quarters, the thing
that horrified and amazed me was to find that many of them were
_ashamed_ of being unemployed. I was very ignorant, but not so ignorant
as to imagine that when the loss of foreign markets pushes two million
men out of work, those two million are any more to blame than the people
who draw blanks in the Calcutta Sweep. But at that time nobody cared to
admit that unemployment was inevitable, because this meant admitting
that it would probably continue. The middle classes were still talking
about 'lazy idle loafers on the dole' and saying that 'these men could
all find work if they wanted to', and naturally these opinions
percolated to the working class themselves. I remember the shock of
astonishment it gave me, when I first mingled with tramps and beggars,
to find that a fair proportion, perhaps a quarter, of these beings whom
I had been taught to regard as cynical parasites, were decent young
miners and cotton-workers gazing at their destiny with the same sort of
dumb amazement as an animal in a trap. They simply could not understand
what was happening to them. They had been brought up to work, and
behold! it seemed as if they were never going to have the chance of
working again. In their circumstances it was inevitable, at first, that
they should be haunted by a feeling of personal degradation. That was
the attitude towards unemployment in those days: it was a disaster which
happened to _you_ as an individual and for which _you_ were to blame.

When a quarter of a million miners are unemployed, it is part of the
order of things that Alf Smith, a miner living in the back streets of
Newcastle, should be out of work. Alf Smith is merely one of the quarter
million, a statistical unit. But no human being finds it easy to regard
himself as a statistical unit. So long as Bert Jones across the street
is still at work, Alf Smith is bound to feel himself dishonoured and a
failure. Hence that frightful feeling of impotence and despair which is
almost the worst evil of unemployment--far worse than any hardship,
worse than the demoralization of enforced idleness, and Only less bad
than the physical degeneracy of Alf Smith's children, born on the P.A.C.
Everyone who saw Greenwood's play _Love on the Dole_ must remember that
dreadful moment when the poor, good, stupid working man beats on the
table and cries out, 'O God, send me some work!' This was not dramatic
exaggeration, it was a touch from life. That cry must have been uttered,
in almost those words, in tens of thousands, perhaps hundreds of
thousands of English homes, during the past fifteen years.

But, I think not again--or at least, not so often. That is the real
point: people are ceasing to kick against the pricks. After all, even
the middle classes--yes, even the bridge dubs in the country towns--are
beginning to realize that there is such a thing as unemployment. The 'My
dear, I don't believe in all this nonsense about unemployment. Why, only
last week we wanted a man to weed the garden, and we simply couldn't get
one. They don't want to work, that's all it is!' which you heard at
every decent tea-table five years ago, is growing perceptibly less
frequent. As for the working class themselves, they have gained
immensely in economic knowledge. I believe that the _Daily Worker_ has
accomplished a great deal here: its influence is out of all proportion
to its circulation. But in any case they have had their lesson well
rubbed into them, not only because unemployment is so widespread but
because it has lasted so long. When people live on the dole for years at
a time they grow used to it, and drawing the dole, though it remains
unpleasant, ceases to be shameful. Thus the old, independent,
workhouse-fearing tradition is undermined, just as the ancient fear of
debt is undermined by the hire-purchase system. In the back streets of
Wigan and Barnsley I saw every kind of privation, but I probably saw
much less _conscious_ misery than I should have seen ten years ago. The
people have at any rate grasped that unemployment is a thing they cannot
help. It is not only Alf Smith who is out of work now; Bert Jones is out
of work as well, and both of them have been 'out' for years. It makes a
great deal of difference when things are the same for everybody.

So you have whole populations settling down, as it were, to a lifetime
on the P.A.C. And what I think is admirable, perhaps even hopeful, is
that they have managed to do it without going spiritually to pieces. A
working man does not disintegrate under the strain of poverty as a
middle-class person does. Take, for instance, the fact that the working
class think nothing of getting married on the dole. It annoys the old
ladies in Brighton, but it is a proof of their essential good sense;
they realize that losing your job does not mean that you cease to be a
human being. So that in one way things in the distressed areas are not
as bad as they might be. Life is still fairly normal, more normal than
one really has the right to expect. Families are impoverished, but the
family-system has not broken up. The people are in effect living a
reduced version of their former lives. Instead of raging against their
destiny they have made things tolerable by lowering their standards.

But they don't necessarily lower their standards by cutting out
luxuries and concentrating on necessities; more often it is the other
way about--the more natural way, if you come to think of it. Hence the
fact that in a decade of unparalleled depression, the consumption of all
cheap luxuries has in-creased. The two things that have probably made
the greatest difference of all are the movies and the mass-production of
cheap smart clothes since the war. The youth who leaves school at
fourteen and gets a blind-alley job is out of work at twenty, probably
for life; but for two pounds ten on the hire-purchase he can buy himself
a suit which, for a little while and at a little distance, looks as
though it had been tailored in Savile Row. The girl can look like a
fashion plate at an even lower price. You may have three halfpence in
your pocket and not a prospect in the world, and only the corner of a
leaky bedroom to go home to; but in your new clothes you can stand on
the street corner, indulging in a private daydream of yourself as Clark
Gable or Greta Garbo, which compensates you for a great deal. And even
at home there is generally a cup of tea going--a 'nice cup of tea'--and
Father, who has been out of work since 1929, is temporarily happy
because he has a sure tip for the Cesarewitch.

Trade since the war has had to adjust itself to meet the demands of
underpaid, underfed people, with the result that a luxury is nowadays
almost always cheaper than a necessity. One pair of plain solid shoes
costs as much as two ultra-smart pairs. For the price of one square meal
you can get two pounds of cheap sweets. You can't get much meat for
threepence, but you can get a lot offish-and-chips. Milk costs
threepence a pint and even 'mild' beer costs fourpence, but aspirins are
seven a penny and you can wring forty cups of tea out of a quarter-pound
packet. And above all there is gambling, the cheapest of all luxuries.
Even people on the verge of starvation can buy a few days' hope
('Something to live for', as they call it) by having a penny on a
sweepstake. Organized gambling has now risen almost to the status of a
major industry. Consider, for instance, a phenomenon like the Football
Pools, with a turnover of about six million pounds a year, almost all of
it from the pockets of working-class people. I happened to be in
Yorkshire when Hitler re-occupied the Rhineland. Hitler, Locarno,
Fascism, and the threat of war aroused hardly a flicker of interest
locally, but the decision of the Football Association to stop publishing
their fixtures in advance (this was an attempt to quell the Football
Pools) flung all Yorkshire into a storm of fury. And then there is the
queer spectacle of modern electrical science showering miracles upon
people with empty bellies. You may shiver all night for lack of
bedclothes, but in the morning you can go to the public library and read
the news that has been telegraphed for your benefit from San Francisco
and Singapore. Twenty million people are underfed but literally everyone
in England has access to a radio. What we have lost in food we have
gained in electricity. Whole sections of the working class who have been
plundered of all they really need are being compensated, in part, by
cheap luxuries which mitigate the surface of life.

Do you consider all this desirable? No, I don't. But it may be that the
psychological adjustment which the working class are visibly making is
the best they could make in the circumstances. They have neither turned
revolutionary nor lost their self-respect; merely they have kept their
tempers and settled down to make the best of things on a fish-and-chip
standard. The alternative would be God knows what continued agonies of
despair; or it might be attempted insurrections which, in a strongly
governed country like England, could only lead to futile massacres and a
regime of savage repression.

Of course the post-war development of cheap luxuries has been a very
fortunate thing for our rulers. It is quite likely that fish-and-chips,
art-silk stockings, tinned salmon, cut-price chocolate (five two-ounce
bars for sixpence), the movies, the radio, strong tea, and the Football
Pools have between them averted revolution. Therefore we are some-times
told that the whole thing is an astute manoeuvre by the governing
class--a sort of 'bread and circuses' business--to hold the unemployed
down. What I have seen of our governing class does not convince me that
they have that much intelligence. The thing has happened, but by an
un-conscious process--the quite natural interaction between the
manufacturer's need for a market and the need of half-starved people for
cheap palliatives.




6

When I was a small boy at school a lecturer used to come once a term and
deliver excellent lectures on famous battles of the past, such as
Blenheim, Austerlitz, etc. He was fond of quoting Napoleon's maxim 'An
army marches on its stomach', and at the end of his lecture he would
suddenly turn to us and demand, 'What's the most important thing in the
world?' We were expected to shout 'Food!' and if we did not do so he was
disappointed.

Obviously he was right in a way. A human being is primarily a bag for
putting food into; the other functions and faculties may be more
godlike, but in point of time they come afterwards. A man dies and is
buried, and all his words and actions are forgotten, but the food he has
eaten lives after him in the sound or rotten bones of his children. I
think it could be plausibly argued that changes of diet are more
important than changes of dynasty or even of religion. The Great War,
for instance, could never have happened if tinned food had not been
invented. And the history of the past four hundred years in England
would have been immensely different if it had not been for the
introduction of root-crops and various other vegetables at the end of
the Middle Ages, and a little later the introduction of non-alcoholic
drinks (tea, coffee, cocoa) and also of distilled liquors to which the
beer-drinking English were not accustomed. Yet it is curious how seldom
the all-importance of food is recognized. You see statues everywhere to
politicians, poets, bishops, but none to cooks or bacon-curers or
market-gardeners. The Emperor Charles V is said to have erected a statue
to the inventor of bloaters, but that is the only case I can think of at
the moment.

So perhaps the really important thing about the unemployed, the really
basic thing if you look to the future, is the diet they are living on.
As I said earlier, the average unemployed family lives on an income of
round about thirty shillings a week, of which at least a quarter goes in
rent. It is worth considering in some detail how the remaining money is
spent. I have here a budget which was made out for me by an unemployed
miner and his wife. I asked them to make a list which represented as
exactly as possible their expenditure in a typical week. This man's
allowance was thirty-two shillings a week, and besides his wife he had
two children, one aged two years and five months and the other ten
months. Here is the list:


                              s. d.

Rent                          9 0 1/2
Clothing Club                 3 0
Coal                          2 0
Gas                           1 3
Milk                          0 10 1/2
Union Fees                    0 3
Insurance (on the children)   0 2
Meat                          2 6
Flour (2 stone)               3 4
Yeast                         0 4
Potatoes                      1 0
Dripping                      0 10
Margarine                     0 10
Bacon                         1 2
Sugar                         1 9
Tea                           1 0
Jam                           0 7 1/2
Peas and cabbage              0 6
Carrots and onions            0 4
Quaker oats                   0 4 1/2
Soap, powders, blue, etc.     0 10
                          --------
Total                      £1 12 0
                           -------


In addition to this, three packets of dried milk were sup-plied weekly
for the baby by the Infants' Welfare Clinic. One or two comments are
needed here. To begin with the list leaves out a great deal--blacking,
pepper, salt, vinegar, matches, kindling-wood, razor blades,
replacements of utensils, and wear and tear of furniture and bedding, to
name the first few that come to mind. Any money spent on these would
mean reduction on some other item. A more serious charge is tobacco.
This man happened to be a small smoker, but even so his tobacco would
hardly cost less than a shilling a week, meaning a further reduction on
food. The 'clothing clubs' into which unemployed people pay so much a
week are run by big drapers in all the industrial towns. Without them it
would be impossible for unemployed people to buy new clothes at all. I
don't know whether or not they buy bedding through these clubs. This
particular family, as I happen to know, possessed next to no bedding.

In the above list, if you allow a shilling for tobacco and deduct this
and the other non-food items, you are left with sixteen and fivepence
halfpenny. Call it sixteen shillings and leave the baby out of
account--for the baby was getting its weekly packets of milk from the
Welfare Clinic. This sixteen shillings has got to provide the entire
nourishment, _including fuel_, of three persons, two of them adult. The
first question is whether it is even theoretically possible for three
persons to be properly nourished on sixteen shillings a week. When the
dispute over the Means Test was in progress there was a disgusting
public wrangle about the minimum weekly sum on which a human being could
keep alive. So far as I remember, one school of dietitians worked it out
at five and ninepence, while another school, more generous, put it at
five and ninepence halfpenny. After this there were letters to the
papers from a number of people who claimed to be feeding themselves on
four shillings a week. Here is a weekly budget (it was printed in the
_New Statesman_ and also in the _News of the World_) which I picked out
from among a number of others:


                             s. d.

3 wholemeal loaves           1 0
1/2 lb. margarine            0 2 1/2
1/2 lb. dripping             0 3
1 lb. cheese                 0 7
1 lb. onions                 0 1 1/2
1 lb. carrots                0 1 1/2
1 lb. broken biscuits        0 4
2 lb. dates                  0 6
1 tin evaporated milk        0 5
10 oranges                   0 5
                            ----
Total                        3 11 1/2
                            ----


Please notice that this budget contains _nothing for fuel_. In fact, the
writer explicitly stated that he could not afford to buy fuel and ate
all his food raw. Whether the letter was genuine or a hoax does not
matter at the moment. What I think will be admitted is that this list
represents about as wise an expenditure as could be contrived; if you
_had_ to live on three and elevenpence halfpenny a week, you could
hardly extract more food-value from it than that. So perhaps it is
possible to feed yourself adequately on the P.A.C. allowance if you
concentrate on essential foodstuffs; but not otherwise.

Now compare this list with the unemployed miner's budget that I gave
earlier. The miner's family spend only tenpence a week on green
vegetables and tenpence half-penny on milk (remember that one of them is
a child less than three years old), and nothing on fruit; but they spend
one and nine on sugar (about eight pounds of sugar, that is) and a
shilling on tea. The half-crown spent on meat _might_ represent a small
joint and the materials for a stew; probably as often as not it would
represent four or five tins of bully beef. The basis of their diet,
therefore, is white bread and margarine, corned beef, sugared tea, and
potatoes--an appalling diet. Would it not be better if they spent more
money on wholesome things like oranges and wholemeal bread or if they
even, like the writer of the letter to the _New Statesman_, saved on
fuel and ate their carrots raw? Yes, it would, but the point is that no
ordinary human being is ever going to do such a thing. The ordinary
human being would sooner starve than live on brown bread and raw
carrots. And the peculiar evil is this, that the less money you have,
the less inclined you feel to spend it on wholesome food. A millionaire
may enjoy breakfasting off orange juice and Ryvita biscuits; an
unemployed man doesn't. Here the tendency of which I spoke at the end of
the last chapter comes into play. When you are unemployed, which is to
say when you are underfed, harassed, bored, and miserable, you don't
want to eat dull wholesome food. You want something a little bit
'tasty'. There is always some cheaply pleasant thing to tempt you. Let's
have three pennorth of chips! Run out and buy us a twopenny ice-cream!
Put the kettle on and we'll all have a nice cup of tea! _That_ is how
your mind works when you are at the P.A.C. level. White bread-and-marg
and sugared tea don't nourish you to any extent, but they are _nicer_
(at least most people think so) than brown bread-and-dripping and cold
water. Unemployment is an endless misery that has got to be constantly
palliated, and especially with tea, the English-man's opium. A cup of
tea or even an aspirin is much better as a temporary stimulant than a
crust of brown bread.

The results of all this are visible in a physical degeneracy which you
can study directly, by using your eyes, or inferentially, by having a
look at the vital statistics. The physical average in the industrial
towns is terribly low, lower even than in London. In Sheffield you have
the feeling of walking among a population of troglodytes. The miners are
splendid men, but they are usually small, and the mere fact that their
muscles are toughened by constant work does not mean that their children
start life with a better physique. In any case the miners are physically
the pick of the population. The most obvious sign of under-nourishment
is the badness of everybody's teeth. In Lancashire you would have to
look for a long time before you saw a working-class person with good
natural teeth. Indeed, you see very few people with natural teeth at
all, apart from the children; and even the children's teeth have a frail
bluish appearance which means, I suppose, calcium deficiency. Several
dentists have told me that in industrial districts a person over thirty
with any of his or her own teeth is coming to be an abnormality. In
Wigan various people gave me their opinion that it is best to get shut
of your teeth as early in life as possible. 'Teeth is just a misery,'
one woman said to me. In one house where I stayed there were, apart from
myself, five people, the oldest being forty-three and the youngest a boy
of fifteen. Of these the boy was the only one who possessed a single
tooth of his own, and his teeth were obviously not going to last long.
As for the vital statistics, the fact that in any large industrial town
the death rate and infant mortality of the poorest quarters are always
about double those of the well-to-do residential quarters--a good deal
more than double in some cases--hardly needs commenting on.

Of course one ought not to imagine that the prevailing bad physique is
due solely to unemployment, for it is probable that the physical average
has been declining all over England for a long time past, and not merely
among the unemployed in the industrial areas. This cannot be proved
statistically, but it is a conclusion that is forced upon you if you use
your eyes, even in rural places and even in a prosperous town like
London. On the day when King George V's body passed through London on
its way to Westminster, I happened to be caught for an hour or two in
the crowd in Trafalgar Square. It was impossible, looking about one
then, not to be struck by the physical degeneracy of modern England. The
people surrounding me were _not_ working-class people for the most part;
they were the shopkeeper--commercial-traveller type, with a sprinkling
of the well-to-do. But what a set they looked! Puny limbs, sickly faces,
under the weeping London sky! Hardly a well-built man or a
decent-looking woman, and not a fresh complexion anywhere. As the King's
coffin went by, the men took off their hats, and a friend who was in the
crowd at the other side of the Strand said to me afterwards, 'The only
touch of colour anywhere was the bald heads.' Even the Guards, it seemed
to me--there was a squad of guardsmen marching beside the coffin--were
not what they used to be. Where are the monstrous men with chests like
barrels and moustaches like the wings of eagles who strode across my
child-hood's gaze twenty or thirty years ago? Buried, I suppose, in the
Flanders mud. In their place there are these pale-faced boys who have
been picked for their height and consequently look like hop-poles in
overcoats--the truth being that in modern England a man over six feet
high is usually skin and bone and not much else. If the English physique
has declined, this is no doubt partly due to the fact that the Great War
carefully selected the million best men in England and slaughtered them,
largely before they had had time to breed. But the process must have
begun earlier than that, and it must be due ultimately to un-healthy
ways of living, i.e. to industrialism. I don't mean 'the habit of living
in towns--probably the town is healthier than the country, in many
ways--but the modern industrial technique which provides you with cheap
substitutes for everything. We may find in the long run that tinned food
is a deadlier weapon than the machine gun.

It is unfortunate that the English working class--the English nation
generally, for that matter--are exception-ally ignorant about and
wasteful of food. I have pointed out elsewhere how civilized is a French
navvy's idea of a meal compared with an Englishman's, and I cannot
believe that you would ever see such wastage in a French house as you
habitually see in English ones. Of course, in the very poorest homes,
where everybody is unemployed, you don't see much actual waste, but
those who can afford to waste food often do so. I could give startling
instances of this. Even the Northern habit of baking one's own bread is
slightly wasteful in itself, because an overworked woman cannot bake
more than once or, at most, twice a week and it is impossible to tell
beforehand how much bread will be wasted, so that a certain amount
generally has to be thrown away. The usual thing is to bake six large
loaves and twelve small ones at a time. All this is part of the old,
generous English attitude to life, and it is an amiable quality, but a
disastrous one at the present moment.

English working people everywhere, so far as I know, refuse brown bread;
it is usually impossible to buy whole-meal bread in a working-class
district. They sometimes give the reason that brown bread is 'dirty'. I
suspect the real reason is that in the past brown bread has been
confused with black bread, which is traditionally associated with Popery
and wooden shoes. (They have plenty of Popery and wooden shoes in
Lancashire. A pity they haven't the black bread as well!) But the
English palate, especially the working-class palate, now rejects good
food almost automatically. The number of people who prefer tinned peas
and tinned fish to real peas and real fish must be increasing every
year, and plenty of people who could afford real milk in their tea would
much sooner have tinned milk--even that dreadful tinned milk which is
made of sugar and corn-flour and has UNFIT FOR BABIES on the tin in huge
letters. In some districts efforts are now being made to teach the
unemployed more about food-values and more about the intelligent
spending of money. When you hear of a thing like this you feel yourself
torn both ways. I have heard a Communist speaker on the platform grow
very angry about it. In London, he said, parties of Society dames now
have the cheek to walk into East End houses and give shopping-lessons to
the wives of the unemployed. He gave this as an instance of the
mentality of the English governing class. First you condemn a family to
live on thirty shillings a week, and then you have the damned
impertinence to tell them how they are to spend their money. He was
quite right--I agree heartily. Yet all the same it is a pity that,
merely for the lack of a proper tradition, people should pour muck like
tinned milk down their throats and not even know that it is inferior to
the product of the cow.

I doubt, however, whether the unemployed would ultimately benefit if
they learned to spend their money more economically. For it is only the
fact that they are _not_ economical that keeps their allowances so high.
An English-man on the P.A.C. gets fifteen shillings a week because
fifteen shillings is the smallest sum on which he can conceivably keep
alive. If he were, say, an Indian or Japanese coolie, who can live on
rice and onions, he wouldn't get fifteen shillings a week--he would be
lucky if he got fifteen shillings a month. Our unemployment allowances,
miser-able though they are, are framed to suit a population with very
high standards and not much notion of economy. If the unemployed learned
to be better managers they would be visibly better off, and I fancy it
would not be long before the dole was docked correspondingly.

There is one great mitigation of unemployment in the North, and that is
the cheapness of fuel. Anywhere in the coal areas the retail price of
coal is about one and sixpence a hundredweight; in the South of England
it is about half a crown. Moreover, miners in work can usually buy coal
direct from the pit at eight or nine shillings a ton, and those who have
a cellar in their homes sometimes store a ton and sell it (illicitly, I
suppose) to those who are out of work. But apart from this there is
immense and systematic thieving of coal by the unemployed. I call it
thieving because technically it is that, though it does no harm to
anybody. In the 'dirt' that is sent up from the pits there is a certain
amount of broken coal, and unemployed people spend a lot of time in
picking it out of the slag-heaps. All day long over those strange grey
mountains you see people wandering to and fro with sacks and baskets
across the sulphurous smoke (many slag-heaps are on fire under the
surface), prising out the tiny nuggets of coal which are buried here and
there. You meet men coming away, wheeling strange and wonderful
home-made bicycles--bicycles made of rusty parts picked off refuse-tips,
without saddles, without chains and almost always without tyres--across
which are slung bags containing perhaps half a hundredweight of coal,
fruit of half a day's searching. In times of strikes, when everybody is
short of fuel, the miners turn out with pick and shovel and burrow into
the slag-heaps, whence the hummocky appearance which most slag-heaps
have. During long strikes, in places where there are outcrops of coal,
they have sunk surface mines and carried them scores of yards into the
earth.

In Wigan the competition among unemployed people for the waste coal has
become so fierce that it has led to an extraordinary custom called
'scrambling for the coal,' which is well worth seeing. Indeed I rather
wonder that it has never been filmed. An unemployed miner took me to see
it one afternoon. We got to the place, a mountain range of ancient
slag-heaps with a railway running through the valley below. A couple of
hundred ragged men, each with a sack and coal-hammer strapped under his
coat-tails, were waiting on the 'broo'. When the dirt comes up-from the
pit it is loaded on to trucks and an engine runs these to the top of
another slag-heap a quarter of a mile away and there leaves them. The
process of 'scrambling for the coal' consists in getting on to the train
while it is moving; any truck which you have succeeded in boarding while
it is in motion counts as 'your' truck. Presently the train hove in
sight. With a wild yell a hundred men dashed down the slope to catch her
as she rounded the bend. Even at the bend the train was making twenty
miles an hour. The men hurled themselves upon it, caught hold of the
rings at the rear of the trucks and hoisted themselves up by way of the
bumpers, five or ten of them on each truck. The driver took no notice,
He drove up to the top of the slag-heap, uncoupled the trucks, and ran
the engine back to the pit, presently returning with a fresh string of
trucks. There was the same wild rush of ragged figures as before. In the
end only about fifty men had failed to get on to either train.

We walked up to the top of the slag-heap. The men were shovelling the
dirt out of the trucks, while down below their wives and children were
kneeling, swiftly scrabbling with their hands in the damp dirt and
picking out lumps of coal the size of an egg or smaller. You would see a
woman pounce on a tiny fragment of stuff, wipe it on her apron,
scrutinize it to make sure it was coal, and pop it jealously into her
sack. Of course, when you are boarding a truck you don't know beforehand
what is in it; it may be actual 'dirt' from the roads or it may merely
be shale from the roofing. If it is a shale truck there will be no coal
in it, but there occurs among the shale another inflammable rock called
cannel, which looks very like ordinary shale but is slightly darker and
is known by splitting in parallel lines, like slate. It makes tolerable
fuel, not good enough to be commercially valuable, but good enough to be
eagerly sought after by the unemployed. The miners on the shale trucks
were picking out the cannel and splitting it up with their hammers. Down
at the bottom of the 'broo' the people who had failed to get on to
either train were gleaning the tiny chips of coal that came rolling down
from above--fragments no bigger than a hazel-nut, these, but the people
were glad enough to get them.

We stayed there till the train was empty. In a couple of hours the
people had picked the dirt over to the last grain. They slung their
sacks over shoulder or bicycle, and started on the two-mile trudge back
to Wigan. Most of the families had gathered about half a hundredweight
of coal or cannel, so that between them they must have stolen five or
ten tons of fuel. This business of robbing the dirt trains takes place
every day in Wigan, at any rate in winter, and at more collieries than
one. It is of course extremely dangerous. No one was hurt the afternoon
I was there, but a man had had both his legs cut off a few weeks
earlier, and another man lost several fingers a week later. Technically
it is stealing but, as everybody knows, if the coal were not stolen it
would simply be wasted. Now and again, for form's sake, the colliery
companies prosecute somebody for coal-picking, and in that morning's
issue of the local paper there was a paragraph saying that two men had
been fined ten shillings. But no notice is taken of the prosecutions--in
fact, one of the men named in the paper was there that afternoon--and
the coal-pickers subscribe among themselves to pay the fines. The thing
is taken for granted. Everyone knows that the unemployed have got to get
fuel somehow. So every afternoon several hundred men risk their necks
and several hundred women scrabble in the mud for hours--and all for
half a hundredweight of inferior fuel, value ninepence.

That scene stays in my mind as one of my pictures of Lancashire: the
dumpy, shawled women, with their sacking aprons and their heavy black
clogs, kneeling in the cindery mud and the bitter wind, searching
eagerly for tiny chips of coal. They are glad enough to do it. In winter
they are desperate for fuel; it is more important almost than food.
Meanwhile all round, as far as the eye can see, are the slag-heaps and
hoisting gear of collieries, and not one of those collieries can sell
all the coal it is capable of producing. This ought to appeal to Major
Douglas.




7

As you travel northward your eye, accustomed to the South or East, does
not notice much difference until you are beyond Birmingham. In Coventry
you might as well be in Finsbury Park, and the Bull Ring in Birmingham
is not unlike Norwich Market, and between all the towns of the Midlands
there stretches a villa-civilization indistinguishable from that of the
South. It is only when you get a little further north, to the pottery
towns and beyond, that you begin to encounter the real ugliness of
industrialism--an ugliness so frightful and so arresting that you are
obliged, as it were, to come to terms with it.

A slag-heap is at best a hideous thing, because it is so planless and
functionless. It is something just dumped on the earth, like the
emptying of a giant's dust-bin. On the outskirts of the mining towns
there are frightful landscapes where your horizon is ringed completely
round by jagged grey mountains, and underfoot is mud and ashes and
over-head the steel cables where tubs of dirt travel slowly across miles
of country. Often the slag-heaps are on fire, and at night you can see
the red rivulets of fire winding this way and that, and also the
slow-moving blue flames of sulphur, which always seem on the point of
expiring and always spring out again. Even when a slag-heap sinks, as it
does ultimately, only an evil brown grass grows on it, and it retains
its hummocky surface. One in the slums of Wigan, used as a playground,
looks like a choppy sea suddenly frozen; 'the flock mattress', it is
called locally. Even centuries hence when the plough drives over the
places where coal was once mined, the sites of ancient slag-heaps will
still be distinguishable from an aeroplane.

I remember a winter afternoon in the dreadful environs of Wigan. All
round was the lunar landscape of slag-heaps, and to the north, through
the passes, as it were, between the mountains of slag, you could see the
factory chimneys sending out their plumes of smoke. The canal path was a
mixture of cinders and frozen mud, criss-crossed by the imprints of
innumerable clogs, and all round, as far as the slag-heaps in the
distance, stretched the 'flashes'--pools of stagnant water that had
seeped into the hollows caused by the subsidence of ancient pits. It was
horribly cold. The 'flashes' were covered with ice the colour of raw
umber, the bargemen were muffled to the eyes in sacks, the lock gates
wore beards of ice. It seemed a world from which vegetation had been
banished; nothing existed except smoke, shale, ice, mud, ashes, and foul
water. But even Wigan is beautiful compared with Sheffield. Sheffield, I
suppose, could justly claim to be called the ugliest town in the Old
World: its inhabitants, who want it to be pre-eminent in everything,
very likely do make that claim for it. It has a population of half a
million and it contains fewer decent buildings than the average East
Anglian village of five hundred. And the stench! If at rare moments you
stop smelling sulphur it is because you have begun smelling gas. Even
the shallow river that runs through the town is-usually bright yellow
with some chemical or other. Once I halted in the street and counted the
factory chimneys I could see; there were thirty-three of them, but there
would have been far more if the air had not been obscured by smoke. One
scene especially lingers in my mind. A frightful patch of waste ground
(somehow, up there, a patch of waste ground attains a squalor that would
be impossible even in London) trampled bare of grass and littered with
newspapers and old saucepans. To the right an isolated row of gaunt
four-roomed houses, dark red, blackened by smoke. To the left an
interminable vista of factory chimneys, chimney beyond chimney, fading
away into a dim blackish haze. Behind me a railway embankment made of
the slag from furnaces. In front, across the patch of waste ground, a
cubical building of red and yellow brick, with the sign 'Thomas Grocock,
Haulage Contractor'.

At night, when you cannot see the hideous shapes of the houses and the
blackness of everything, a town like Sheffield assumes a kind of
sinister magnificence. Sometimes the drifts of smoke are rosy with
sulphur, and serrated flames, like circular saws, squeeze themselves out
from beneath the cowls of the foundry chimneys. Through the open doors
of foundries you see fiery serpents of iron being hauled to and fro by
redlit boys, and you hear the whizz and thump of steam hammers and the
scream of the iron under the blow. The pottery towns are almost equally
ugly in a pettier way. Right in among the rows of tiny blackened houses,
part of the street as it were, are the 'pot banks'--conical brick
chimneys like gigantic burgundy bottles buried in the soil and belching
their smoke almost in your face. You come upon monstrous clay chasms
hundreds of feet across and almost as deep, with little rusty tubs
creeping on chain railways up one side, and on the other workmen
clinging like samphire-gatherers and cutting into the face of the cliff
with their picks. I passed that way in snowy weather, and even the snow
was black. The best thing one can say for the pottery towns is that they
are fairly small and stop abruptly. Less than ten miles away you can
stand in un-defiled country, on the almost naked hills, and the pottery
towns are only a smudge in the distance.

When you contemplate such ugliness as this, there are two questions that
strike you. First, is it inevitable? Secondly, does it matter?

I do not believe that there is anything inherently and unavoidably ugly
about industrialism. A factory or even a gasworks is not obliged of its
own nature to be ugly, any more than a palace or a dog-kennel or a
cathedral. It all depends on the architectural tradition of the period.
The industrial towns of the North are ugly because they happen to have
been built at a time when modern methods of steel-construction and
smoke-abatement were unknown, and when everyone was too busy making
money to think about anything else. They go on being ugly largely
because the Northerners have got used to that kind of thing and do not
notice it. Many of the people in Sheffield or Manchester, if they
smelled the air along the Cornish cliffs, would probably declare that it
had no taste in it. But since the war, industry has tended to shift
southward and in doing so has grown almost comely. The typical post-war
factory is not a gaunt barrack or an awful chaos of blackness and
belching chimneys; it is a glittering white structure of concrete,
glass, and steel, surrounded by green lawns and beds of tulips. Look at
the factories you pass as you travel out of London on the G.W.R.; they
may not be aesthetic triumphs but certainly they are not ugly in the
same way as the Sheffield gasworks. But in any case, though the ugliness
of industrialism is the most obvious thing about it and the thing every
newcomer exclaims against, I doubt whether it is centrally important.
And perhaps it is not even desirable, industrialism being what it is,
that it should learn to disguise itself as something else. As Mr Aldous
Huxley has truly remarked, a dark Satanic mill ought to look like a dark
Satanic mill and not like the temple of mysterious and splendid gods.
Moreover, even in the worst of the industrial towns one sees a great
deal that is not ugly in the narrow aesthetic sense. A belching chimney
or a stinking slum is repulsive chiefly because it implies warped lives
and ailing children. Look at it from a purely aesthetic standpoint and
it may, have a certain macabre appeal. I find that anything outrageously
strange generally ends by fascinating me even when I abominate it. The
landscapes of Burma, which, when I was among them, so appalled me as to
assume the qualities of nightmare, afterwards stayed so hauntingly in my
mind that I was obliged to write a novel about them to get rid of them.
(In all novels about the East the scenery is the real subject-matter.)
It would probably be quite easy to extract a sort of beauty, as Arnold
Bennett did, from the blackness of the industrial towns; one can easily
imagine Baudelaire, for instance, writing a poem about a slag-heap. But
the beauty or ugliness of industrialism hardly matters. Its real evil
lies far deeper and is quite uneradicable. It is important to remember
this, because there is always a temptation to think that industrialism
is harmless so long as it is clean and orderly.

But when you go to the industrial North you are conscious, quite apart
from the unfamiliar scenery, of entering a strange country. This is
partly because of certain real differences which do exist, but still
more because of the North-South antithesis which has been rubbed into us
for such a long time past. There exists in England a curious cult of
Northernness, sort of Northern snobbishness. A Yorkshireman in the South
will always take care to let you know that he regards you as an
inferior. If you ask him why, he will explain that it is only in the
North that life is 'real' life, that the industrial work done in the
North is the only 'real' work, that the North is inhabited by 'real'
people, the South merely by rentiers and their parasites. The Northerner
has 'grit', he is grim, 'dour', plucky, warm-hearted, and democratic;
the Southerner is snobbish, effeminate, and lazy--that at any rate is
the theory. Hence the Southerner goes north, at any rate for the first
time, with the vague inferiority-complex of a civilized man venturing
among savages, while the Yorkshireman, like the Scotchman, comes to
London in the spirit of a barbarian out for loot. And feelings of this
kind, which are the result of tradition, are not affected by visible
facts. Just as an Englishman five feet four inches high and twenty-nine
inches round the chest feels that as an Englishman he is the physical
superior of Carnera (Carnera being a Dago), so also with the Northerner
and the Southerner. I remember a weedy little Yorkshireman, who would
almost certainly have run away if a fox-terrier had snapped at him,
telling me that in the South of England he felt 'like a wild invader'.
But the cult is often adopted by people who are not by birth Northerners
themselves. A year or two ago a friend of mine, brought up in the South
but now living in the North, was driving me through Suffolk in a car. We
passed through a rather beautiful village. He glanced disapprovingly at
the cottages and said:


'Of course most of the villages in Yorkshire are hideous; but the
Yorkshiremen are splendid chaps. Down here it's just the other way
about--beautiful villages and rotten people. All the people in those
cottages there are worthless, absolutely worthless.'


I could not help inquiring whether he happened to know anybody in that
village. No, he did not know them; but because this was East Anglia they
were obviously worthless. Another friend of mine, again a Southerner by
birth, loses no opportunity of praising the North to the detriment of
the South. Here is an extract from one of his letters to me:


I am in Clitheroe, Lancs...I think running water is much more
attractive in moor and mountain country than in the fat and sluggish
South. 'The smug and silver Trent,' Shakespeare says; and the South-er
the smugger, I say.


Here you have an interesting example of the Northern cult. Not only are
you and I and everyone else in the South of England written off as 'fat
and sluggish', but even water when it gets north of a certain latitude,
ceases to be H2O and becomes something mystically superior. But the
interest of this passage is that its writer is an extremely intelligent
man of 'advanced' opinions who would have nothing but con-tempt for
nationalism in its ordinary form. Put to him some such proposition as
'One Britisher is worth three foreigners', and he would repudiate it
with horror. But when it is a question of North versus South, he is
quite ready to generalize. _All_ nationalistic distinctions--all claims
to be better than somebody else because you have a different-shaped
skull or speak a different dialect--are entirely spurious, but they are
important so long as people believe in them. There is no doubt about the
Englishman's inbred conviction that those who live to the south of him
are his inferiors; even our foreign policy is governed by it to some
extent. I think, therefore, that it is worth pointing out when and why
it came into being.

When nationalism first became a religion, the English looked at the map,
and, noticing that their island lay very high in the Northern
Hemisphere, evolved the pleasing theory that the further north you live
the more virtuous you become. The histories I was given when I was a
little boy generally started off by explaining in the naivest way that a
cold climate made people energetic while a hot one made them lazy, and
hence the defeat of the Spanish Armada. This nonsense about the superior
energy of the English (actually the laziest people in Europe) has been
current for at least a hundred years. 'Better is it for us', writes a
Quarterly Reviewer of 1827, 'to be condemned to labour for our country's
good than to luxuriate amid olives, vines, and vices.' 'Olives, vines,
and vices' sums up the normal English attitude towards the Latin races.
In the mythology of Carlyle, Creasey, etc., the Northerner ('Teutonic',
later 'Nordic') is pictured as a hefty, vigorous chap with blond
moustaches and pure morals, while the Southerner is sly, cowardly, and
licentious. This theory was never pushed to its logical end, which would
have meant assuming that the finest people in the world were the
Eskimos, but it did involve admitting that the people who lived to the
north of us were superior to ourselves. Hence, partly, the cult of
Scotland and of Scotch things which has so deeply marked English life
during the past fifty years. But it was the industrialization of the
North that gave the North-South antithesis its peculiar slant. Until
comparatively recently the northern part of England was the backward and
feudal part, and such industry as existed was concentrated in London and
the South-East. In the Civil War for instance, roughly speaking a war of
money versus feudalism, the North and West were for the King and the
South and East for the Parliament. But with the increasing use of coal
industry passed to the North, and there grew up a new type of man, the
self-made Northern business man--the Mr Rouncewell and Mr Bounderby of
Dickens. The Northern business man, with his hateful 'get on or get out'
philosophy, was the dominant figure of the nineteenth century, and as a
sort of tyrannical corpse he rules us still. This is the type edified by
Arnold Bennett--the type who starts off with half a crown and ends up
with fifty thousand pounds, and whose chief pride is to be an even
greater boor after he has made his money than before. On analysis his
sole virtue turns out to be a talent for making money. We were bidden to
admire him because though he might be narrow-minded, sordid, ignorant,
grasping, and uncouth, he had 'grit', he 'got on'; in other words, he
knew how to make money.

This kind of cant is nowadays a pure anachronism, for the Northern
business man is no longer prosperous. But traditions are not killed by
facts, and the tradition of Northern' grit' lingers. It is still dimly
felt that a Northerner will 'get on', i.e. make money, where a
Southerner will fail. At the back of the mind of every Yorkshireman and
every Scotchman who comes to London is a sort of Dick Whittington
picture of himself as the boy who starts off by selling newspapers and
ends up as Lord Mayor. And that, really, is at the bottom of his
bumptiousness. But where one can make a great mistake is in imagining
that this feeling extends to the genuine working class. When I first
went to Yorkshire, some years ago, I imagined that I was going to a
country of boors. I was used to the London Yorkshireman with his
interminable harangues and his pride in the sup-posed raciness of his
dialect ('"A stitch in time saves nine", as we say in the West
Riding'), and I expected to meet with a good deal of rudeness. But I met
with nothing of the kind, and least of all among the miners. Indeed the
Lancashire and Yorkshire miners treated me with a kindness and courtesy
that were even embarrassing; for if there is one type of man to whom I
do feel myself inferior, it is a coal-miner. Certainly no one showed any
sign of despising me for coming from a different part of the country.
This has its importance when one remembers that the English regional
snobberies are nationalism in miniature; for it suggests that
place-snobbery is not a working-class characteristic.

There is nevertheless a real difference between North and South, and
there is at least a tinge of truth in that picture of Southern England
as one enormous Brighton inhabited by lounge-lizards. For climatic
reasons the parasitic dividend-drawing class tend to settle in the
South. In a Lancashire cotton-town you could probably go for months on
end without once hearing an 'educated' accent, whereas there can hardly
be a town in the South of England where you could throw a brick without
hitting the niece of a bishop. Consequently, with no petty gentry to set
the pace, the bourgeoisification of the working class, though it is
taking place in the North, is taking place more slowly. All the Northern
accents, for instance, persist strongly, while the Southern ones are
collapsing before the movies and the B.B.C. Hence your 'educated' accent
stamps you rather as a foreigner than as a chunk of the petty gentry;
and this is an immense advantage, for it makes it much easier to get
into contact with the working class.

But is it ever possible to be really intimate with the working class? I
shall have to discuss that later; I will only say here that I do not
think it is possible. But undoubtedly it is easier in the North than it
would be in the South to meet working-class people on approximately
equal terms. It is fairly easy to live in a miner's house and be
accepted as one of the family; with, say, a farm labourer in the
Southern counties it probably would be impossible. I have seen just
enough of the working class to avoid idealizing them, but I do know that
you can learn a great deal in a working-class home, if only you can get
there. The essential point is that your middle-class ideals and
prejudices are tested by contact with others which are not necessarily
better but are certainly different.

Take for instance the different attitude towards the family. A
working-class family hangs together as a middle-class one does, but the
relationship is far less tyrannical. A working man has not that deadly
weight of family prestige hanging round his neck like a millstone. I
have pointed out earlier that a middle-class person goes utterly to
pieces under the influence of poverty; and this is generally due to the
behaviour of his family--to the fact that he has scores of relations
nagging and badgering him night and day for failing to 'get on'. The
fact that the working class know how to combine and the middle class
don't is probably due to their different conceptions of family loyalty.
You cannot have an effective trade union of middle-class workers,
be-cause in times of strikes almost every middle-class wife would be
egging her husband on to blackleg and get the other fellow's job.
Another working-class characteristic, disconcerting at first, is their
plain-spokenness towards anyone they regard as an equal. If you offer a
working man something he doesn't want, he tells you that he doesn't want
it; a middle-class person would accept it to avoid giving offence. And
again, take the working-class attitude towards 'education'. How
different it is from ours, and how immensely sounder! Working people
often have a vague reverence for learning in others, but where
'education' touches their own lives they see through it and reject it by
a healthy instinct. The time was when I used to lament over quite
imaginary pictures of lads of fourteen dragged protesting from their
lessons and set to work at dismal jobs. It seemed to me dreadful that
the doom of a 'job' should descend upon anyone at fourteen. Of course I
know now that there is not one working-class boy in a thousand who does
not pine for the day when he will leave school. He wants to be doing
real work, not wasting his time on ridiculous rubbish like history and
geography. To the working class, the notion of staying at school till
you are nearly grown-up seems merely contemptible and unmanly. The idea
of a great big boy of eighteen, who ought to be bringing a pound a week
home to his parents, going to school in a ridiculous uniform and even
being caned for not doing his lessons! Just fancy a working-class boy of
eighteen allowing himself to be caned! He is a man when the other is
still a baby. Ernest Pontifex, in Samuel Butler's _Way of All Flesh_,
after he had had a few glimpses of real life, looked back on his public
school and university education and found it a 'sickly, debilitating
debauch'. There is much in middle-class life that looks sickly and
debilitating when you see it from a working-class angle.

In a working-class home--I am not thinking at the moment of the
unemployed, but of comparatively prosperous homes--you breathe a warm,
decent, deeply human atmosphere which it is not so easy to find
elsewhere. I should say that a manual worker, if he is in steady work
and drawing good wages--an 'if which gets bigger and bigger--has a
better chance of being happy than an 'educated' man. His home life seems
to fall more naturally into a sane and comely shape. I have often been
struck by the peculiar easy completeness, the perfect symmetry as it
were, of a working-class interior at its best. Especially on winter
evenings after tea, when the fire glows in the open range and dances
mirrored in the steel fender, when Father, in shirt-sleeves, sits in the
rocking chair at one side of the fire reading the racing finals, and
Mother sits on the other with her sewing, and the children are happy
with a pennorth of mint humbugs, and the dog lolls roasting himself on
the rag mat--it is a good place to be in, provided that you can be not
only in it but sufficiently _of_ it to be taken for granted.

This scene is still reduplicated in a majority of English homes, though
not in so many as before the war. Its happiness depends mainly upon one
question--whether Father is in work. But notice that the picture I have
called up, of a working-class family sitting round the coal fire after
kippers and strong tea, belongs only to our own moment of time and could
not belong either to the future or the past. Skip forward two hundred
years into the Utopian future, and the scene is totally different.
Hardly one of the things I have imagined will still be there. In that
age when there is no manual labour and everyone is 'educated', it is
hardly likely that Father will still be a rough man with enlarged hands
who likes to sit in shirt-sleeves and says 'Ah wur coomin' oop street'.
And there won't be a coal fire in the grate, only some kind of invisible
heater. The furniture will be made of rubber, glass, and steel. If there
are still such things as evening papers there will certainly be no
racing news in them, for gambling will be meaningless in a world where
there is no poverty and the horse will have vanished from the face of
the earth. Dogs, too, will have been suppressed on grounds of hygiene.
And there won't be so many children, either, if the birth-controllers
have their way. But move backwards into the Middle Ages and you are in a
world almost equally foreign. A windowless hut, a wood fire which smokes
in your face because there is no chimney, mouldy bread, 'Poor John',
lice, scurvy, a yearly child-birth and a yearly child-death, and the
priest terrifying you with tales of Hell.

Curiously enough it is not the triumphs of modern engineering, nor the
radio, nor the cinematograph, nor the five thousand novels which are
published yearly, nor the crowds at Ascot and the Eton and Harrow match,
but the memory of working-class interiors--especially as I sometimes saw
them in my childhood before the war, when England was still
prosperous--that reminds me that our age has not been altogether a bad
one to live in.




PART TWO


8

The road from Mandalay to Wigan is a long one and the reasons for taking
it are not immediately clear.

In the earlier chapters of this book I have given a rather fragmentary
account of various things I saw in the coal areas of Lancashire and
Yorkshire. I went there partly because I wanted to see what
mass-unemployment is like at its worst, partly in order to see the most
typical section of the English working class at close quarters. This was
necessary to me as part of my approach to Socialism, for before you can
be sure whether you are genuinely in favour of Socialism, you have got
to decide whether things at present are tolerable or not tolerable, and
you have got to take up a definite attitude on the terribly difficult
issue of class. Here I shall have to digress and explain how my own
attitude towards the class question was developed. Obviously this
involves writing a certain amount of autobiography, and I would not do
it if I did not think that I am sufficiently typical of my class, or
rather sub-caste, to have a certain symptomatic importance.

I was born into what you might describe as the lower-upper-middle class.
The upper-middle class, which had its heyday in the eighties and
nineties, with Kipling as its poet laureate, was a sort of mound of
wreckage left behind when the tide of Victorian prosperity receded. Or
perhaps it would be better to change the metaphor and describe it not as
a mound but as a layer--the layer of society lying between £2000 and
£300 a year: my own family was not far from the bottom. You notice that
I define it in terms of money, because that is always the quickest way
of making yourself understood. Nevertheless, the essential point about
the English class-system is that it is not entirely explicable in terms
of money. Roughly speaking it is a money-stratification, but it is also
interpenetrated by a sort of shadowy caste-system; rather like a
jerry-built modern bungalow haunted by medieval ghosts. Hence the fact
that the upper-middle class extends or extended to incomes as low as
£300 a year--to incomes, that is, much lower than those of merely
middle-class people with no social pretensions. Probably there are
countries where you can predict a man's opinions from his income, but it
is never quite safe to do so in England; you have always got to take his
traditions into consideration as well. A naval officer and his grocer
very likely have the same income, but they are not equivalent persons
and they would only be on the same side in very large issues such as a
war or a general strike--possibly not even then.

Of course it is obvious now that the upper-middle class is done for. In
every country town in Southern England, not to mention the dreary wastes
of Kensington and Earl's Court, those who knew it in the days of its
glory are dying, vaguely embittered by a world which has not behaved as
it ought. I never open one of Kipling's books or go into one of the huge
dull shops which were once the favourite haunt of the upper-middle
class, without thinking 'Change and decay in all around I see'. But
before the war the upper-middle class, though already none too
prosperous, still felt sure of itself. Before the war you were either a
gentleman or not a gentleman, and if you were a gentleman you struggled
to behave as such, whatever your income might be. Between those with
£400 a year and those with £2000 or even £1000 a year there was a great
gulf fixed, but it was a gulf which those with £400 a year did their
best to ignore. Probably the distinguishing mark of the upper-middle
class was that its traditions were not to any extent commercial, but
mainly military, official, and professional.

People in this class owned no land, but they felt that they were
landowners in the sight of God and kept up a semi-aristocratic outlook
by going into the professions and the fighting services rather than into
trade. Small boys used to count the plum stones on their plates and
foretell their destiny by chanting, 'Army, Navy, Church, Medicine, Law';
and even of these 'Medicine' was faintly inferior to the others and only
put in for the sake of symmetry. To belong to this class when you were
at the £400 a year level was a queer business, for it meant that your
gentility was almost purely theoretical. You lived, so to speak, at two
levels simultaneously. Theoretically you knew all about servants and how
to tip them, although in practice you had one, at most, two resident
servants. Theoretically you knew how to wear your clothes and how to
order a dinner, although in practice you could never afford to go to a
decent tailor or a decent restaurant. Theoretically you knew how to
shoot and ride, although in practice you had no horses to ride and not
an inch of ground to shoot over. It was this that explained the
attraction of India (more recently Kenya, Nigeria, etc.) for the
lower-upper-middle class. The people who went there as soldiers and
officials did not go there to make money, for a soldier or an official
does not want money; they went there because in India, with cheap
horses, free shooting, and hordes of black servants, it was so easy to
play at being a gentleman.

In the kind of shabby-genteel family that I am talking about there is
far more _consciousness_ of poverty than in any working-class family
above the level of the dole. Rent and clothes and school-bills are an
unending nightmare, and every luxury, even a glass of beer, is an
unwarrantable extravagance. Practically the whole family income goes in
keeping up appearances. It is obvious that people of this kind are in an
anomalous position, and one might 'be tempted to write them off as mere
exceptions and therefore unimportant. Actually, however, they are or
were fairly numerous. Most clergymen and schoolmasters, for instance,
nearly all Anglo-Indian officials, a sprinkling of soldiers and sailors,
and a fair number of professional men and artists, fall into this
category. But the real importance of this class is that they are the
shock-absorbers of the bourgeoisie. The real bourgeoisie, those in the
£2000 a year class and over, have their money as a thick layer of
padding between themselves and the class they plunder; in so far as they
are aware of the Lower Orders at all they are aware of them as
employees, servants, and tradesmen. But it is quite different for the
poor devils lower down who are struggling to live genteel lives on what
are virtually working-class incomes. These last are forced into close
and, in a sense, intimate contact with the working class, and I suspect
it is from them that the traditional upper-class attitude towards
'common' people is derived.

And what is this attitude? An attitude of sniggering superiority
punctuated by bursts of vicious hatred. Look at any number of Punch
during the past thirty years. You will find it everywhere taken for
granted that a working-class person, as such, is a figure of fun, except
at odd moments when he shows signs of being too prosperous, whereupon he
ceases to be a figure of fun and becomes a demon. It is no use wasting
breath in denouncing this attitude. It is better to consider how it has
arisen, and to do that one has got to realize what the working classes
look like to those who live among them but have different habits and
traditions.

A shabby genteel family is in much the same position as a family of
'poor whites' living in a street where everyone else is a Negro. In such
circumstances you have got to cling to your gentility because it is the
only thing you have; and meanwhile you are hated for your stuck-up-ness
and for the accent and manners which stamp you as one of the boss class.
I was very young, not much more than six, when I first became aware of
class-distinctions. Before that age my chief heroes had generally been
working-class people, because they always seemed to do such interesting
things, such as being fishermen and blacksmiths and bricklayers. I
remember the farm hands on a farm in Cornwall who used to let me ride on
the drill when they were sowing turnips and would sometimes catch the
ewes and milk them to give me a drink; and the workmen building the new
house next door, who let me play with the wet mortar and from whom I
first learned the word 'b----'; and the plumber up the road with whose
children I used to go out bird-nesting. But it was not long before I was
forbidden to play with the plumber's children; they were 'common' and I
was told to keep away from them. This was snobbish, if you like, but it
was also necessary, for middle-class people can-not afford to let their
children grow up with vulgar accents. So, very early, the working class
ceased to be a race of friendly and wonderful beings and became a race
of enemies. We realized that they hated us, but we could never
understand why, and naturally we set it down to pure, vicious malignity.
To me in my early boyhood, to nearly all children of families like mine,
'common' people seemed almost sub-human. They had coarse faces, hideous
accents, and gross manners, they hated everyone who was not like
themselves, and if they got half a chance they would insult you in
brutal ways. That was our view of them, and though it was false it was
understandable. For one must remember that before the war there was much
more _overt_ class-hatred in England than there is now. In those days
you were quite likely to be insulted simply for looking like a member of
the upper classes; nowadays, on the other hand, you are more likely to
be fawned upon. Anyone over thirty can remember the time when it was
impossible for a well-dressed person to walk through a slum street
without being hooted at. Whole quarters of big towns were considered
unsafe because of' hooligans' (now almost an extinct type), and the
London gutter-boy everywhere, with his loud voice and lack of
intellectual scruples, could make life a misery for people who
considered it beneath their dignity to answer back. A recurrent terror
of my holidays, when I was a small boy, was the gangs of' cads' who were
liable to set upon you five or ten to one. In term time, on the other
hand, it was we who were in the majority and the 'cads' who were
oppressed; I remember a couple of savage mass-battles in the cold winter
of 1916-17. And this tradition of open hostility between upper and lower
class had apparently been the same for at least a century past. A
typical joke in _Punch_ in the sixties is a picture of a small,
nervous-looking gentleman riding through a slum street and a crowd of
street-boys closing in on him with shouts ''Ere comes a swell! Let's
frighten 'is 'oss!' Just fancy the street boys trying to frighten his
horse now! They would be much likelier to hang round him in vague hopes
of a tip. During the past dozen years the English working class have
grown servile with a rather horrifying rapidity. It was bound to happen,
for the frightful weapon of unemployment has cowed them. Before the war
their economic position was comparatively strong, for though there was
no dole to fall back upon, there was not much unemployment, and the
power of the boss class was not so obvious as it is now. A man did not
see ruin staring him in the face every time he cheeked a 'toff', and
naturally he did cheek a 'toff' whenever it seemed safe to do so. G. J.
Renier, in his book on Oscar Wilde, points out that the strange, obscene
burst of popular fury which followed the Wilde trial was essentially
social in character. The 'London mob had caught a member of the upper
classes on the hop, and they took care to keep him hopping. All this was
natural and even proper. If you treat people as the English working
class have been treated during the past two centuries, you must expect
them to resent it. On the other hand the children of shabby-genteel
families could not be blamed if they grew up with a hatred of the
working class, typified for them by prowling gangs of 'cads'.

But there was another and more serious difficulty. Here you come to the
real secret of class distinctions in the West--the real reason why a
European of bourgeois upbringing, even when he calls himself a
Communist, cannot without a hard effort think of a working man as his
equal. It is summed up in four frightful words which people nowadays are
chary of uttering, but which were bandied about quite freely in my
childhood. The words were: _The lower classes smell_.

That was what we were taught--_the lower classes smell_. And here,
obviously, you are at an impassable barrier. For no feeling of like or
dislike is quite so fundamental as a physical feeling. Race-hatred,
religious hatred, differences of education, of temperament, of
intellect, even differences of moral code, can be got over; but
_physical_ repulsion cannot. You can have an affection for a murderer or
a sodomite, but you cannot have an affection for a man whose breath
stinks--habitually stinks, I mean. However well you may wish him,
however much you may admire his mind and character, if his breath stinks
he is horrible and in your heart of hearts you will hate him. It may not
greatly matter if the average middle-class person is brought up to
believe that the working classes are ignorant, lazy, drunken, boorish,
and dishonest; it is when he is brought up to believe that they are
dirty that the harm is done. And in my childhood we were brought up to
believe that they were dirty. Very early in life you acquired the idea
that there was something subtly repulsive about a working-class body;
you would not get nearer to it than you could help. You watched a great
sweaty navvy walking down the road with his pick over his shoulder; you
looked at his discoloured shirt and his corduroy trousers stiff with the
dirt of a decade; you thought of those nests and layers of greasy rags
below, and, under all, the unwashed body, brown all over (that was how I
used to imagine it), with its strong, bacon-like reek. You watched a
tramp taking off his boots in a ditch--ugh! It did not seriously occur
to you that the tramp might not enjoy having black feet. And even
'lower-class' people whom you knew to be quite clean--servants, for
instance--were faintly unappetizing. The smell of their sweat, the very
texture of their skins, were mysteriously different from yours.

Everyone who has grown up pronouncing his aitches and in a house with a
bathroom and one servant is likely to have grown up with these feelings;
hence the chasmic, impassable quality of class-distinctions in the West.
It is queer how seldom this is admitted. At the moment I can think of
only one book where it is set forth without humbug, and that is Mr
Somerset Maugham's _On a Chinese Screen_. Mr Maugham describes a high
Chinese official arriving at a wayside inn and blustering and calling
everybody names in order to impress upon them that he is a supreme
dignitary and they are only worms. Five minutes later, having asserted
his dignity in the way he thinks proper, he is eating his dinner in
perfect amity with the baggage coolies. As an official he feels that he
has got to make his presence felt, but he has no feeling that the
coolies are of different clay from himself. I have observed countless
similar scenes in Burma. Among Mongolians--among all Asiatics, for all I
know--there is a sort of natural equality, an easy intimacy between man
and man, which is simply unthinkable in the West. Mr Maugham adds:


In the West we are divided from our fellows by our sense of smell. The
working man is our master, inclined to rule us with an iron hand, but it
cannot be denied that he stinks: none can wonder at it, for a bath in
the dawn when you have to hurry to your work before the factory bell
rings is no pleasant thing, nor 'does heavy labour tend to sweetness;
and you do not change your linen more than you can help when the week's
washing must be done by a sharp-tongued wife. I do not blame the working
man because he stinks, but stink he does. It makes social intercourse
difficult to persons of sensitive nostril. The matutinal tub divides the
classes more effectually than birth, wealth, or education.


Meanwhile, _do_ the 'lower classes' smell? Of course, as a whole, they
are dirtier than the upper classes. They are bound to be, considering
the circumstances in which they live, for even at this late date less
than half the houses in England have bathrooms. Besides, the habit of
washing yourself all over every day is a very recent one in Europe, and
the working classes are generally more conservative than the
bourgeoisie. But the English are growing visibly cleaner, and we may
hope that in a hundred years they will be almost as clean as the
Japanese. It is a pity that those who idealize the working class so
often think it necessary to praise every working-class characteristic
and therefore to pretend that dirtiness is somehow meritorious in
itself. Here, curiously enough, the Socialist and the sentimental
democratic Catholic of the type of Chesterton sometimes join hands; both
will tell you that dirtiness is healthy and 'natural' and cleanliness is
a mere fad or at best a luxury.[According to Chesterton, dirtiness is
merely a kind of 'discomfort' and therefore ranks as self-mortification.
Unfortunately, the discomfort of dirtiness is chiefly suffered by other
people. It is not really very uncomfortable to be dirty--not nearly so
uncomfortable as having a cold bath on a winter morning.] They seem not
to see that they are merely giving colour to the notion that
working-class people are dirty from choice and not from necessity.
Actually, people who have access to a bath will generally use it. But
the essential thing is that middle-class people believe that the working
class are dirty--you see from the passage quoted above that Mr Maugham
himself believes it--and, what is worse, that they are some-how
_inherently_ dirty. As a child, one of the most dreadful things I could
imagine was to drink out of a bottle after a navvy. Once when I was
thirteen, I was in a train coming from a market town, and the
third-class carriage was packed full of shepherds and pig-men who had
been selling their beasts. Somebody produced a quart bottle of beer and
passed it round; it travelled from mouth to mouth to mouth, everyone
taking a swig. I cannot describe the horror I felt as that bottle worked
its way towards me. If I drank from it after all those lower-class male
mouths I felt certain I should vomit; on the other hand, if they offered
it to me I dared not refuse for fear of offending them--you see here how
the middle-class squeamishness works both ways. Nowadays, thank God, I
have no feelings of that kind. A working man's body, as such, is no more
repulsive to me than a millionaire's. I still don't like drinking out of
a cup or bottle after another person--another man, I mean; with women I
don't mind--but at least the question of class does not enter. It was
rubbing shoulders with the tramps that cured me of it. Tramps are not
really very dirty as English people go, but they have the name for being
dirty, and when you have shared a bed with a tramp and drunk tea out of
the same snuff-tin, you feel that you have seen the worst and the worst
has no terrors for you.

I have dwelt on these subjects because they are vitally important. To
get rid of class-distinctions you have got to start by understanding how
one class appears when seen through the eyes of another. It is useless
to say that the middle classes are 'snobbish' and leave it at that. You
get no further if you do not realize that snobbishness is bound up with
a species of idealism. It derives from the early training in which a
middle-class child is taught almost simultaneously to wash his neck, to
be ready to die for his country, and to despise the 'lower classes'.

Here I shall be accused of being behind the times, for I was a child
before and during the war and it may be claimed that children nowadays
are brought up with more enlightened notions. It is probably true that
class-feeling is for the moment a very little less bitter than it was.
The working class are submissive where they used to be openly hostile,
and the post-war manufacture of cheap clothes and the general softening
of manners have toned down the surface differences between class and
class. But undoubtedly the essential feeling is still there. Every
middle-class person has a dormant class-prejudice which needs only a
small thing to arouse it; and if he is over forty he probably has a firm
conviction that his own class has been sacrificed to the class below.
Suggest to the average unthinking person of gentle birth who is
struggling to keep up appearances on four or five hundred a year that he
is a member of an exploiting parasite class, and he will think you are
mad. In perfect sincerity he will point out to you a dozen ways in which
he is worse-off than a working man. In his eyes the workers are not a
submerged race of slaves, they are a sinister flood creeping upwards to
engulf himself and his friends and his family and to sweep all culture
and all decency out of existence. Hence that queer watchful anxiety lest
the working class shall grow too prosperous. In a number of _Punch_ soon
after the war, when coal was still fetching high prices, there is a
picture of four or five miners with grim, sinister faces riding in a
cheap motor-car. A friend they are passing calls out and asks them where
they have borrowed it. They answer, 'We've bought the thing!' This, you
see, is 'good enough for _Punch_'; for miners to buy a motor-car, even
one car between four or five of them, is a monstrosity, a sort of crime
against nature. That was the attitude of a dozen years ago, and I see no
evidence of any fundamental change. The notion that the working class
have been absurdly pampered, hopelessly demoralized by doles, old age
pensions, free education, etc., is still widely held; it has merely been
a little shaken, perhaps, by the recent recognition that unemployment
does exist. For quantities of middle-class people, probably for a large
majority of those over fifty, the typical working man still rides to the
Labour Exchange on a motor-bike and keeps coal in his bath-tub: 'And, if
you'll believe it, my dear, they actually _get married_ on the dole!'

The reason why class-hatred seems to be diminishing is that nowadays it
tends not to get into print, partly owing to the mealy-mouthed habits of
our time, partly because newspapers and even books now have to appeal to
a working-class public. As a rule you can best study it in private
conversations. But if you want some printed examples, it is worth having
a look at the _obiter dicta_ of the late Professor Saintsbury.
Saintsbury was a very learned man and along certain lines a judicious
literary critic, but when he talked of political or economic matters he
only differed from the rest of his class by the fact that he was too
thick-skinned and had been born too early to see any reason for
pretending to common decency. According to Saintsbury, unemployment
insurance was simply 'contributing to the support of lazy
ne'er-do-weels', and the whole trade union movement was no more than a
kind of organized mendicancy:


'Pauper' is almost actionable now, is it not, when used as a word?
though to be paupers, in the sense of being wholly or partly supported
at the expense of other people, is the ardent, and to a considerable
extent achieved, aspiration of a large proportion of our population, and
of an entire political party.

(_Second Scrap Book_)


It is to be noticed, however, that Saintsbury recognizes that
unemployment is bound to exist, and, in fact, thinks that it ought
to-.exist, so long as the unemployed are made to suffer as much as
possible:


Is not 'casual' labour the very secret and safety-valve of a safe and
sound labour-system generally?

...In a complicated industrial and commercial state constant employment
at regular wages is impossible; while dole-supported unemployment, at
anything like the wages of employment, is demoralizing to begin with and
ruinous at its more or less quickly arriving end.


(_Last Scrap Book_)


What exactly is to happen to the 'casual labourers' when no casual
labour happens to be available is not made clear. Presumably (Saintsbury
speaks approvingly of 'good Poor Laws') they are to go into the
work-house or sleep in the streets. As to the notion that every human
being ought as a matter of course to have the chance of earning at least
a tolerable livelihood, Saintsbury dismisses it with contempt:


Even the 'right to live'...extends no further than the right to
protection against murder. Charity certainly will, morality possibly
may, and public utility perhaps ought to add to this protection
supererogatory provision for continuance of life; but it is questionable
whether strict justice demands it.

As for the insane doctrine that being born in a country gives some right
to the possession of the soil of that country, it hardly requires
notice.

(_Last Scrap Book_)


It is worth reflecting for a moment upon the beautiful implications of
this last passage. The interest of passages like these (and they are
scattered all through Saintsbury's work) lies in their having been
printed at all. Most people are a little shy of putting that kind of
thing on paper. But what Saintsbury is saying here is what any little
worm with a fairly safe five hundred a year _thinks_, and therefore in a
way one must admire him for saying it. It takes a lot of guts to be
_openly_ such a skunk as that.

This is the outlook of a confessed reactionary. But how about the
middle-class person whose views are not reactionary but 'advanced'?
Beneath his revolutionary mask, is he really so different from the
other?

A middle-class person embraces Socialism and perhaps even joins the
Communist Party. How much real difference does it make? Obviously,
living within the framework of capitalist society, he has got to go on
earning his living, and one cannot blame him if he clings to his
bourgeois economic status. But is there any change in his tastes, his
habits, his manners, his imaginative background--his 'ideology', in
Communist jargon? Is there any change in him except that he now votes
Labour, or, when possible, Communist at the elections? It is noticeable
that he still habitually associates with his own class; he is vastly
more at home with a member of his own class, who thinks him a dangerous
Bolshie, than with a member of the working class who supposedly agrees
with him; his tastes in food, wine, clothes, books, pictures, music,
ballet, are still recognizably bourgeois tastes; most significant of
all, he invariably marries into his own class. Look at any bourgeois
Socialist. Look at Comrade X, member of the C.P.G.B. and author of
_Marxism for Infants_. Comrade X, it so happens, is an old Etonian. He
would be ready to die on the barricades, in theory anyway, but you
notice that he still leaves his bottom waistcoat button undone. He
idealizes the proletariat, but it is remarkable how little his habits
resemble theirs. Perhaps once, out of sheer bravado, he has smoked a
cigar with the band on, but it would be almost physically impossible for
him to put pieces of cheese into his mouth on the point of his knife, or
to sit indoors with his cap on, or even to drink his tea out of the
saucer. I have known numbers of bourgeois Socialists, I have listened by
the hour to their tirades against their own class, and yet never, not
even once, have I met one who had picked up proletarian table-manners.
Yet, after all, why not? Why should a man who thinks all virtue resides
in the proletariat still take such pains to drink his soup silently? It
can only be because in his heart he feels that proletarian manners are
disgusting. So you see he is still responding to the training of his
childhood, when he was taught to hate, fear, and despise the working
class.




9

When I was fourteen or fifteen I was an odious little snob, but no worse
than other boys of my own age and class. I suppose there is no place in
the world where snobbery is quite so ever-present or where it is
cultivated in such refined and subtle forms as in an English public
school. Here at least one cannot say that English 'education' fails to
do its job. You forget your Latin and Greek within a few months of
leaving school--I studied Greek for eight or ten years, and now, at
thirty-three, I cannot even repeat the Greek alphabet--but your
snobbishness, unless you persistently root it out like the bindweed it
is, sticks by you till your grave.

At school I was in a difficult position, for I was among boys who, for
the most part, were much richer than myself, and I only went to an
expensive public school because I happened to win a scholarship. This is
the common experience of boys of the lower-upper-middle class, the sons
of clergymen, Anglo-Indian officials, etc., and the effects it had on me
were probably the usual ones. On the one hand it made me cling tighter
than ever to my gentility; on the other hand it filled me with
resentment against the boys whose parents were richer than mine and who
took care to let me know it. I despised anyone who was not describable
as a 'gentleman', but also I hated the hoggishly rich, especially those
who had grown rich too recently. The correct and elegant thing, I felt,
was to be of gentle birth but to have no money. This is part of the
_credo_ of the lower-upper-middle class. It has a romantic,
Jacobite-in-exile feeling about it which is very comforting.

But those years, during and just after the war, were a queer time to be
at school, for England was nearer revolution than she has been since or
had been for a century earlier. Throughout almost the whole nation there
was running a wave of revolutionary feeling which has since been
reversed and forgotten, but which has left various deposits of sediment
behind. Essentially, though of course one could not then see it in
perspective, it was a revolt of youth against age, resulting directly
from the war. In the war the young had been sacrificed and the old had
behaved in a way which, even at this distance of time, is horrible to
contemplate; they had been sternly patriotic in safe places while their
sons went down like swathes of hay before the German machine guns.
Moreover, the war had been conducted mainly by old men and had been
conducted with supreme incompetence. By 1918 everyone under forty was in
a bad temper with his elders, and the mood of anti-militarism which
followed naturally upon the fighting was extended into a general revolt
against orthodoxy and authority. At that time there was, among the
young, a curious cult of hatred of 'old men'. The dominance of 'old men'
was held to be responsible for every evil known to humanity, and every
accepted institution from Scott's novels to the House of Lords was
derided merely because 'old men' were in favour of it. For several years
it was all the fashion to be a 'Bolshie', as people then called it.
England was full of half-baked antinomian opinions. Pacifism,
internationalism, humanitarianism of all kinds, feminism, free love,
divorce-reform, atheism, birth-control--things like these were getting a
better hearing than they would get in normal times. And of course the
revolutionary mood extended to those who had been too young to fight,
even to public schoolboys. At that time we all thought of ourselves as
enlightened creatures of a new age, casting off the orthodoxy that had
been forced upon us by those detested 'old men'. We retained, basically,
the snobbish outlook of our class, we took it for granted that we could
continue to draw our dividends or tumble into soft jobs, but also it
seemed natural to us to be 'agin the Government'.

We derided the O.T.C., the Christian religion, and perhaps even
compulsory games and the Royal Family, and we did not realize that we
were merely taking part in a world-wide gesture of distaste for war. Two
incidents stick in my mind as examples of the queer revolutionary
feeling of that time. One day the master who taught us English set us a
kind of general knowledge paper of which one of the questions was, 'Whom
do you consider the ten greatest men now living?' Of sixteen boys in the
class (our average age was about seventeen) fifteen included Lenin in
their list. This was at a snobbish expensive public school, and the date
was 1920, when the horrors of the Russian Revolution was still fresh in
everyone's mind. Also there were the so-called peace celebrations in
1919. Our elders had decided for us that we should celebrate peace in
the traditional manner by whooping over the fallen foe. We were to march
into the school-yard, carrying torches, and sing jingo songs of the type
of 'Rule Britannia'. The boys--to their honour, I think--guyed the whole
proceeding and sang blasphemous and seditious words to the tunes
provided. I doubt whether things would happen in quite that manner now.
Certainly the public schoolboys I meet nowadays, even the intelligent
ones, are much more right-wing in their opinions than I and my
contemporaries were fifteen years ago.

Hence, at the age of seventeen or eighteen, I was both a snob and a
revolutionary. I was against all authority. I had read and re-read the
entire published works of Shaw, Wells, and Galsworthy (at that time
still regarded as dangerously 'advanced' writers), and I loosely
described myself as a Socialist. But I had not much grasp of what
Socialism meant, and no notion that the working class were human beings.
At a distance, and through the medium of books--Jack London's _The
People of the Abyss_, for instance--I could agonize over their
sufferings, but I still hated them and despised them when I came
anywhere near them. I was still revolted by their accents and infuriated
by their habitual rudeness. One must remember that just then,
immediately after the war, the English working class were in a fighting
mood. That was the period of the great coal strikes, when a miner was
thought of as a fiend incarnate and old ladies looked under their beds
every night lest Robert Smillie should be concealed there. All through
the war and for a little time afterwards there had been high wages and
abundant employment; things were now returning to something worse than
normal, and naturally the working class resisted. The men who had fought
had been lured into the army by gaudy promises, and now they were coming
home to a world where there were no jobs and not even any houses.
Moreover, they had been at war and were coming home with the soldier's
attitude to life, which is fundamentally, in spite of discipline, a
lawless attitude. There was a turbulent feeling in the air. To that time
belongs the song with the memorable refrain:


  There's nothing sure but
  The rich get richer and the poor get children;
  In the mean time,
  In between time,
  Ain't we got fun?


People had not yet settled down to a lifetime of unemployment mitigated
by endless cups of tea. They still vaguely expected the Utopia for which
they had fought, and even more than before they were openly hostile to
the aitch-pronouncing class. So to the shock-absorbers of the
bourgeoisie, such as myself, 'common people' still appeared brutal and
repulsive. Looking back upon that period, I seem to have spent half the
time in denouncing the capitalist system and the other half in raging
over the insolence of bus-conductors.

When I was not yet twenty I went to Burma, in the Indian Imperial
Police. In an 'outpost of Empire' like Burma the class-question appeared
at first sight to have been shelved. There was no obvious class-friction
here, because the all-important thing was not whether you had been to
one of the right schools but whether your skin was technically white. As
a matter of fact most of the white men in Burma were not of the type who
in England would be called 'gentlemen', but except for the common
soldiers and a few nondescripts they lived lives appropriate to
'gentlemen'--had servants, that is, and called their evening meal
'dinner'--and officially they were regarded as being all of the same
class. They were 'white men', in contradistinction to the other and
inferior class, the 'natives'. But one did not feel towards the
'natives' as one felt to-wards the 'lower classes' at home. The
essential point was that the 'natives', at any rate the Burmese, were
not felt to be physically repulsive. One looked down on them as
'natives', but one was quite ready to be physically intimate with them;
and this, I noticed, was the case even with white men who had the most
vicious colour prejudice. When you have a lot of servants you soon get
into lazy habits, and I habitually allowed myself, for instance, to be
dressed and undressed by my Burmese boy. This was because he was a
Burman and undisgusting; I could not have endured to let an English
manservant handle me in that intimate manner. I felt towards a Burman
almost as I felt towards a woman. Like most other races, the Burmese
have a distinctive smell--I cannot describe it: it is a smell that makes
one's teeth tingle--but this smell never disgusted me. (Incidentally,
Orientals say that we smell. The Chinese, I believe, say that a white
man smells like a corpse. The Burmese say the same--though no Burman was
ever rude enough to say so to me.) And in a way my attitude was
defensible, for if one faces the fact one must admit that most
Mongolians have much nicer bodies than most white men. Compare the
firm-knit silken skin of the Burman, which does not wrinkle at all till
he is past forty, and then merely withers up like a piece of dry
leather, with the coarse-grained, flabby, sagging skin of the white man.
The white man has lank ugly hair growing down his legs and the backs of
his arms and in an ugly patch on his chest. The Burman has only a tuft
or two of stiff black hair at the appropriate places; for the rest he is
quite hairless and is usually beardless as well. The white man almost
always goes bald, the Burman seldom or never. The Burman's teeth are
perfect, though generally discoloured by betel juice, the white man's
teeth invariably decay. The white man is generally ill-shaped, and when
he grows fat he bulges in improbable places; the Mongol has beautiful
bones and in old age he is almost as shapely as in youth. Admittedly the
white races throw up a few individuals who for a few years are supremely
beautiful; but on the whole, say what you will, they are far less comely
than Orientals. But it was not of this that I was thinking when I found
the English 'lower classes' so much more repellent than Burmese
'natives'. I was still thinking in terms of my early-acquired
class-prejudice. When I was not much past twenty I was attached for a
short time to a British regiment. Of course I admired and liked the
private soldiers as any youth of twenty would admire and like hefty,
cheery youths five years older than himself with the medals of the Great
War on their chests. And yet, after all, they faintly repelled me; they
were 'common people' and I did not care to be too close to them. In the
hot mornings when the company marched down the road, myself in the rear
with one of the junior subalterns, the steam of those hundred sweating
bodies in front made my stomach turn. And this, you observe, was pure
prejudice. For a soldier is probably as inoffensive, physically, as it
is possible for a male white person to be. He is generally young, he is
nearly always healthy from fresh air and exercise, and a rigorous
discipline compels him to be clean. But I could not see it like that.
All I knew was that it was _lower-class_ sweat that I was smelling, and
the thought of it made me sick.

When later on I got rid of my class-prejudice, or part of it, it was in
a roundabout way and by a process that took several years. The thing
that changed my attitude to the class-issue was something only
indirectly connected with it--something almost irrelevant.

I was in the Indian Police five years, and by the end of that time I
hated the imperialism I was serving with a bitterness which I probably
cannot make clear. In the free air of England that kind of thing is not
fully intelligible. In order to hate imperialism you have got to be part
of it. Seen from the outside the British rule in India appears--indeed,
it _is_--benevolent and even necessary; and so no doubt are the French
rule in Morocco and the Dutch rule in Borneo, for people usually govern
foreigners better than they govern themselves. But it is not possible to
be a part of such a system without recognizing it as an unjustifiable
tyranny. Even the thickest-skinned Anglo-Indian is aware of this. Every
'native' face he sees in the street brings home to him his monstrous
intrusion. And the majority of Anglo-Indians, intermittently at least,
are not nearly so complacent about their position as people in England
believe. From the most unexpected people, from gin-pickled old
scoundrels high up in the Government service, I have heard some such
remark as: 'Of course we've no right in this blasted country at all.
Only now we're here for God's sake let's stay here.' The truth is that
no modern man, in his heart of hearts, believes that it is right to
invade a foreign country and hold the population down by force. Foreign
oppression is a much more obvious, understandable evil than economic
oppression. Thus in England we tamely admit to being robbed in order to
keep half a million worthless idlers in luxury, but we would fight to
the last man sooner than be ruled by Chinamen; similarly, people who
live on unearned dividends without a single qualm of conscience, see
clearly enough that it is wrong to go and lord it in a foreign country
where you are not wanted. The result is that every Anglo-Indian is
haunted by a sense of guilt which he usually conceals as best he can,
because there is no freedom of speech, and merely to be overheard making
a seditious remark may damage his career. All over India there are
Englishmen who secretly loathe the system of which they are part; and
just occasionally, when they are quite certain of being in the right
company, their hidden bitterness overflows. I remember a night I spent
on the train with a man in the Educational Service, a stranger to myself
whose name I never discovered. It was too hot to sleep and we spent the
night in talking. Half an hour's cautious questioning decided each of us
that the other was 'safe'; and then for hours, while the train jolted
slowly through the pitch-black night, sitting up in our bunks with
bottles of beer handy, we damned the British Empire--damned it from the
inside, intelligently and intimately. It did us both good. But we had
been speaking forbidden things, and in the haggard morning light when
the train crawled into Mandalay, we parted as guiltily as any adulterous
couple.

So far as my observation goes nearly all Anglo-Indian officials have
moments when their conscience troubles them. The exceptions are men who
are doing something which is demonstrably useful and would still have to
be done whether the British were in India or not: forest officers, for
instance, and doctors and engineers. But I was in the police, which is
to say that I was part of the actual machinery of despotism. Moreover,
in the police you see the dirty work of Empire at close quarters, and
there is an appreciable difference between doing dirty work and merely
profiting by it. Most people approve of capital punishment, but most
people wouldn't do the hangman's job. Even the other Europeans in Burma
slightly looked down on the police because of the brutal work they had
to do. I remember once when I was inspecting a police station, an
American missionary whom I knew fairly well came in for some purpose or
other. Like most Nonconformist missionaries he was a complete ass but
quite a good fellow. One of my native sub-inspectors was bullying a
suspect (I described this scene in _Burmese Days_). The American watched
it, and then turning to me said thoughtfully, 'I wouldn't care to have
your job.' It made me horribly ashamed. So _that_ was the kind of job I
had! Even an ass of an American missionary, a teetotal cock-virgin from
the Middle West, had the right to look down on me and pity me! But I
should have felt the same shame even if there had been no one to bring
it home to me. I had begun to have an indescribable loathing of the
whole machinery of so-called justice. Say what you will, our criminal
law (far more humane, by the way, in India than in England) is a
horrible thing. It needs very insensitive people to administer it. The
wretched prisoners squatting in the reeking cages of the lock-ups, the
grey cowed faces of the long-term convicts, the scarred buttocks of the
men who had been flogged with bamboos, the women and children howling
when their menfolk were led away under arrest--things like these are
beyond bearing when you are in any way directly responsible for them. I
watched a man hanged once; it seemed to me worse than a thousand
murders. I never went into a jail without feeling (most visitors to
jails feel the same) that my place was on the other side of the bars. I
thought then--I think now, for that matter--that the worst criminal who
ever walked is morally superior to a hanging judge. But of course I had
to keep these notions to myself, because of the almost utter silence
that is imposed on every Englishman in the East. In the end I worked out
an anarchistic theory that all government is evil, that the punishment
always does more harm than the crime and that people can be trusted to
behave decently if only you will let them alone. This of course was
sentimental nonsense. I see now as I did not see then, that it is always
necessary to protect peaceful people from violence. In any state of
society where crime can be profitable you have got to have a harsh
criminal law and administer it ruthlessly; the alternative is Al Capone.
But the feeling that punishment is evil arises inescapably in those who
have to administer it. I should expect to find that even in England many
policemen, judges, prison warders, and the like are haunted by a secret
horror of what they do. But in Burma it was a double oppression that we
were committing. Not only were we hanging people and putting them in
jail and so forth; we were doing it in the capacity of unwanted foreign
invaders. The Burmese themselves never really recognized our
jurisdiction. The thief whom we put in prison did not think of himself
as a criminal justly punished, he thought of himself as the victim of a
foreign conqueror. The thing that was done to him was merely a wanton
meaningless cruelty. His face, behind the stout teak bars of the lock-up
and the iron bars of the jail, said so clearly. And unfortunately I had
not trained myself to be indifferent to the expression of the human
face.

When I came home on leave in 1927 I was already half determined to throw
up my job, and one sniff of English air decided me. I was not going back
to be a part of that evil despotism. But I wanted much more than merely
to escape from my job. For five years I had been part of an oppressive
system, and it had left me with a bad conscience. Innumerable remembered
faces--faces of prisoners in the dock, of men waiting in the condemned
cells, of subordinates I had bullied and aged peasants I had snubbed, of
servants and coolies I had hit with my fist in moments of rage (nearly
everyone does these things in the East, at any rate occasionally:
Orientals can be very provoking)--haunted me intolerably. I was
conscious of an immense weight of guilt that I had got to expiate. I
suppose that sounds exaggerated; but if you do for five years a job that
you thoroughly disapprove of, you will probably feel the same. I had
reduced everything to the simple theory that the oppressed are always
right and the oppressors are always wrong: a mistaken theory, but the
natural result of being one of the oppressors yourself. I felt that I
had got to escape not merely from imperialism but from every form of
man's dominion over man. I wanted to submerge myself, to get right down
among the oppressed, to be one of them and on their side against their
tyrants. And, chiefly because I had had to think everything out in
solitude, I had carried my hatred of oppression to extraordinary
lengths. At that time failure seemed to me to be the only virtue. Every
suspicion of self-advancement, even to 'succeed' in life to the extent
of making a few hundreds a year, seemed to me spiritually ugly, a
species of bullying.

It was in this way that my thoughts turned towards the English working
class. It was the first time that I had ever been really aware of the
working class, and to begin with it was only because they supplied an
analogy. They were the symbolic victims of injustice, playing the same
part in England as the Burmese played in Burma. In Burma the issue had
been quite simple. The whites were up and the blacks were down, and
therefore as a matter of course one's sympathy was with the blacks. I
now realized that there was no need to go as far as Burma to find
tyranny and exploitation. Here in England, down under one's feet, were
the submerged working class, suffering miseries which in their different
way were as bad as any an Oriental ever knows. The word 'unemployment'
was on everyone's lips. That was more or less new to me, after Burma,
but the drivel which the middle classes were still talking ('These
unemployed are all unemployables', etc., etc.) failed to deceive me. I
often wonder whether that kind of stuff deceives even the fools who
utter it. On the other hand I had at that time no interest in Socialism
or any other economic theory. It seemed to me then--it sometimes seems
to me now, for that matter--that economic injustice will stop the moment
we want it to stop, and no sooner, and if we genuinely want it to stop
the method adopted hardly matters.

But I knew nothing about working-class conditions. I had read the
unemployment figures but I had no notion of what they implied; above
all, I did not know the essential fact that 'respectable' poverty is
always the worst. The frightful doom of a decent working man suddenly
thrown on the streets after a lifetime of steady work, his agonized
struggles against economic laws which he does not under-stand, the
disintegration of families, the corroding sense of shame--all this was
outside the range of my experience. When I thought of poverty I thought
of it in terms of brute starvation. Therefore my mind turned immediately
towards the extreme cases, the social outcasts: tramps, beggars,
criminals, prostitutes. These were 'the lowest of the low', and these
were the people with whom I wanted to get in contact. What I profoundly
wanted, at that time, was to find some way of getting out of the
respectable world altogether. I meditated upon it a great deal, I even
planned parts of it in detail; how one could sell everything, give
everything away, change one's name and start out with no money and
nothing but the clothes one stood up in. But in real life nobody ever
does that kind of thing; apart from the relatives and friends who have
to be considered, it is doubtful whether an educated man _could_ do it
if there were any other course open to him. But at least I could go
among these people, see what their lives were like and feel myself
temporarily part of their world. Once I had been among them and accepted
by them, I should have touched bottom, and--this is what I felt: I was
aware even then that it was irrational--part of my guilt would drop from
me.

I thought it over and decided what I would do. I would go suitably
disguised to Limehouse and Whitechapel and such places and sleep in
common lodging-houses and pal up with dock labourers, street hawkers,
derelict people, beggars, and, if possible, criminals. And I would find
out about tramps and how you got in touch with them and what was the
proper procedure for entering the casual ward; and then, when I felt
that I knew the ropes well enough, I would go on the road myself.

At the start it was not easy. It meant masquerading and I have no talent
for acting. I cannot, for instance, disguise my accent, at any rate not
for more than a very few minutes. I imagined--notice the frightful
class-consciousness of the Englishman--that I should be spotted as a
'gentleman' the moment I opened my mouth; so I had a hard luck story
ready in case I should be questioned, I got hold of the right kind of
clothes and dirtied them in appropriate places. I am a difficult person
to disguise, being abnormally tall, but I did at least know what a tramp
looks like. (How few people do know this, by the way! Look at any
picture of a tramp in _Punch_. They are always twenty years out of
date.) One evening, having made ready at a friend's house, I set out and
wandered eastward till I landed up at a common lodging-house in
Limehouse Causeway. It was a dark, dirty-looking place. I knew it was a
common lodging-house by the sign 'Good Beds for Single Men' in the
window. Heavens, how I had to screw up my courage before I went in! It
seems ridiculous now. But you see I was still half afraid of the working
class. I wanted to get in touch with them, I even wanted to become one
of them, but I still thought of them as alien and dangerous; going into
the dark doorway of that common lodging-house seemed to me like going
down into some dreadful subterranean place--a sewer full of rats, for
instance. I went in fully expecting a fight. The people would spot that
I was not one of themselves and immediately infer that I had come to spy
on them; and then they would set upon me and throw me out--that was what
I expected. I felt that I had got to do it, but I did not enjoy the
prospect.

Inside the door a man in shirt-sleeves appeared from somewhere or other.
This was the 'deputy', and I told him that I wanted a bed for the night.
My accent did not make him stare, I noticed; he merely demanded
ninepence and then showed me the way to a frowsy firelit kitchen
underground. There were stevedores and navvies and a few sailors sitting
about and playing draughts and drinking tea. They barely glanced at me
as I entered. But this was Saturday night and a hefty young stevedore
was drunk and was reeling about the room. He turned, saw me, and lurched
towards me with broad red face thrust out and a dangerous-looking fishy
gleam in his eyes. I stiffened myself. So the fight was coming already!
The next moment the stevedore collapsed on my chest and flung his arms
round my neck. ''Ave a cup of tea, chum!' he cried tear-fully; ''ave a
cup of tea!'

I had a cup of tea. It was a kind of baptism. After that my fears
vanished. Nobody questioned me, nobody showed offensive curiosity;
everybody was polite and gentle and took me utterly for granted. I
stayed two or three days in that common lodging-house, and a few weeks
later, having picked up a certain amount of information about the habits
of destitute people, I went on the road for the first time.

I have described all this in _Down and Out in Paris and London_ (nearly
all the incidents described there actually happened, though they have
been rearranged) and I do not want to repeat it. Later I went on the
road for much longer periods, sometimes from choice, sometimes from
necessity. I have lived in common lodging-houses for months together.
But it is that first expedition that sticks most vividly in my mind,
because of the strangeness of it--the strangeness of being at last down
there among 'the lowest of the low', and on terms of utter equality with
working-class people. A tramp, it is true, is not a typical
working-class person; still, when you are among tramps you are at any
rate merged in one section--one sub-caste--of the working class, a thing
which so far as I know can happen to you in no other way. For several
days I wandered through the northern outskirts of London with an Irish
tramp. I was his mate, temporarily. We shared the same cell at night,
and he told me the history of his life and I told him a fictitious
history of mine, and we took it in turns to beg at likely-looking houses
and divided up the proceeds. I was very happy. Here I was; among 'the
lowest of the low', at the bedrock of the Western world! The class-bar
was down, or seemed to be down. And down there in the squalid and, as a
matter of fact, horribly boring sub-world of the tramp I had a feeling
of release, of adventure, which seems absurd when I look back, but which
was sufficiently vivid at the time.




10

But unfortunately you do not solve the class problem by making friends
with tramps. At most you get rid of some of your own class-prejudice by
doing so.

Tramps, beggars, criminals, and social outcasts generally are very
exceptional beings and no more typical of the working class as a whole
than, say, the literary intelligentsia are typical of the bourgeoisie.
It is quite easy to be on terms of intimacy with a foreign
'intellectual', but it is not at all easy to be on terms of intimacy
with an ordinary respectable foreigner of the middle class. How many
Englishmen have seen the inside of an ordinary French bourgeois family,
for instance? Probably it would be quite impossible to do so, short of
marrying into it. And it is rather similar with the English working
class. Nothing is easier than to be bosom pals with a pickpocket, if you
know where to look for him; but it is very difficult to be bosom pals
with a bricklayer.

But why is it so easy to be on equal terms with social outcasts? People
have often said to me, 'Surely when you are with the tramps they don't
really accept you as one of themselves? Surely they notice that you are
different--notice the difference of accent?' etc., etc. As a matter of
fact, a fair proportion of tramps, well over a quarter I should say,
notice nothing of the kind. To begin with, many people have no ear for
accent and judge you entirely by your clothes. I was often struck by
this fact when I was begging at back doors. Some people were obviously
surprised by my 'educated' accent, others completely failed to notice
it; I was dirty and ragged and that was all they saw. Again, tramps come
from all parts of the British Isles and the variation in English accents
is enormous. A tramp is used to hearing all kinds of accents among his
mates, some of them so strange to him that he can hardly understand
them, and a man from, say, Cardiff or Durham or Dublin does not
necessarily know which of the south English accents is an 'educated'
one. In any case men with 'educated' accents, though rare among tramps,
are not unknown. But even when tramps are aware that you are of
different origin from themselves, it does not necessarily alter their
attitude. From their point of view all that matters is that you, like
themselves, are 'on the bum'. And in that world it is not done to ask
too many questions. You can tell people the history of your life if you
choose, and most tramps do so on the smallest provocation, but you are
under no compulsion to tell it and whatever story you tell will be
accepted without question. Even a bishop could be at home among tramps
if he wore the right clothes; and even if they knew he was a bishop it
might not make any difference, provided that they also knew or believed
that he was genuinely destitute. Once you are in that world and
seemingly _of_ it, it hardly matters what you have been in the past. It
is a sort of world-within-a-world where everyone is equal, a small
squalid democracy--perhaps the nearest thing to a democracy that exists
in England.

But when you come to the normal working class the position is totally
different. To begin with, there is no short cut into their midst. You
can become a tramp simply by putting on the right clothes and going to
the nearest casual ward, but you can't become a navvy or a coal-miner.
You couldn't get a job as a navvy or a coal-miner even if you were equal
to the work. Via Socialist politics you can get in touch with the
working-class intelligentsia, but they are hardly more typical than
tramps or burglars. For the rest you can only mingle with the working
class by staying in their houses as a lodger, which always has a
dangerous resemblance to 'slumming'. For some months I lived entirely in
coal-miners' houses. I ate my meals with the family, I washed at the
kitchen sink, I shared bedrooms with miners, drank beer with them,
played darts with them, talked to them by the hour together. But though
I was among them, and I hope and trust they did not find me a nuisance,
I was not one of them, and they knew it even better than I did. However
much you like them, however interesting you find their conversation,
there is always that accursed itch of class-difference, like the pea
under the princess's mattress. It is not a question of dislike or
distaste, only of _difference_, but it is enough to make real intimacy
impossible. Even with miners who described themselves as Communists I
found that it needed tactful manoeuvrings to prevent them from calling
me 'sir'; and all of them, except in moments of great animation,
softened their northern accents for my benefit. I liked them and hoped
they liked me; but I went among them as a foreigner, and both of us were
aware of it. Whichever way you turn this curse of class-difference
confronts you like a wall of stone. Or rather it is not so much like a
stone wall as the plate-glass pane of an aquarium; it is so easy to
pretend that it isn't there, and so impossible to get through it.

Unfortunately it is nowadays the fashion to pretend that the glass is
penetrable. Of course everyone knows that class-prejudice exists, but at
the same time everyone claims that _he_, in some mysterious way, is
exempt from it. Snobbishness is one of those vices which we can discern
in everyone else but' never in ourselves. Not only the _croyant et
pratiquant_ Socialist, but every 'intellectual' takes it as a matter of
course that _he_ at least is outside the class-racket; he, unlike his
neighbours, can see through the absurdity of wealth, ranks, titles,
etc., etc. 'I'm not a snob' is nowadays a kind of universal _credo_. Who
is there who has not jeered at the House of Lords, the military caste,
the Royal Family, the public schools, the huntin' and shootin' people,
the old ladies in Cheltenham boarding-houses, the horrors of 'county'
society, and the social hierarchy generally? To do so has become an
automatic gesture. You notice this particularly in novels. Every
novelist of serious pretensions adopts an ironic attitude towards his
upper-class characters. Indeed when a novelist has to put a definitely
upper-class person--a duke or a baronet or whatnot--into one of his
stories he guys him more or less instinctively. There is an important
subsidiary cause of this in the poverty of the modern upper-class
dialect. The speech of 'educated' people is now so lifeless and
characterless that a novelist can do nothing with it. By far the easiest
way of making it amusing is to burlesque it, which means pretending that
every upper-class person is an ineffectual ass. The trick is imitated
from novelist to novelist, and in the end becomes almost a reflex
action.

And yet all the while, at the bottom of his heart, every-one knows that
this is humbug. We all rail against class-distinctions, but very few
people seriously want to abolish them. Here you come upon the important
fact that every revolutionary opinion draws part of its strength from a
secret conviction that nothing can be changed.

If you want a good illustration of this, it is worth studying the novels
and plays of John Galsworthy, keeping one eye on their chronology.
Galsworthy is a very fine specimen of the thin-skinned, tear-in-the-eye,
pre-war humanitarian. He starts out with a morbid pity-complex which
extends even to thinking that every married woman is an angel chained to
a satyr. He is in a perpetual quiver of indignation over the sufferings
of overworked clerks, of under-paid farm hands, of fallen women, of
criminals, of prostitutes, of animals. The world, as he sees it in his
earlier books (_The Man of Property_, _Justice_, etc.), is divided into
oppressors and oppressed, with the oppressors sitting on top like some
monstrous stone idol which all the dynamite in the world cannot
overthrow. But is it so certain that he really wants it overthrown? On
the contrary, in his fight against an immovable tyranny he is upheld by
the consciousness that it is immovable. When things happen unexpectedly
and the world-order which he has known begins to crumble, he feels
somewhat differently about it. So, having set out to be the champion of
the underdog against tyranny and injustice, he ends by advocating (_vide
The Silver Spoon_) that the English working class, to cure their
economic ills, shall be deported to the colonies like batches of cattle.
If he had lived ten years longer he would quite probably have arrived at
some genteel version of Fascism. This is the inevitable fate of the
sentimentalist. All his opinions change into their opposites at the
first brush of reality.

The same streak of soggy half-baked insincerity runs through all
'advanced' opinion. Take the question of imperialism, for instance.
Every left-wing 'intellectual' is, as a matter of course, an
anti-imperialist. He claims to be outside the empire-racket as
automatically and self-righteously as he claims to be outside the
class-racket. Even the right-wing 'intellectual', who is not definitely
in revolt against British imperialism, pretends to regard it with a sort
of amused detachment. It is so easy to be witty about the British
Empire. The White Man's Burden and 'Rule, Britannia' and Kipling's
novels and Anglo-Indian bores--who could even mention such things
without a snigger? And is there any cultured person who has not at least
once in his life made a joke about that old Indian havildar who said
that if the British left India there would not be a rupee or a virgin
left between Peshawar and Delhi (or wherever it was)? That is the
attitude of the typical left-winger towards imperialism, and a
thoroughly flabby, boneless attitude it is. For in the last resort, the
only important question is. Do you want the British Empire to hold
together or do you want it to disintegrate? And at the bottom of his
heart no Englishman, least of all the kind of person who is witty about
Anglo-Indian colonels, does want it to disintegrate. For, apart from any
other consideration, the high standard of life we enjoy in England
depends upon our keeping a tight hold on the Empire, particularly the
tropical portions of it such as India and Africa. Under the capitalist
system, in order that England may live in comparative comfort, a hundred
million Indians must live on the verge of starvation--an evil state of
affairs, but you acquiesce in it every time you step into a taxi or eat
a plate of strawberries and cream. The alternative is to throw the
Empire overboard and reduce England to a cold and unimportant little
island where we should all have to work very hard and live mainly on
herrings and potatoes. That is the very last thing that any left-winger
wants. Yet the left-winger continues to feel that he has no moral
responsibility for imperialism. He is perfectly ready to accept the
products of Empire and to save his soul by sneering at the people who
hold the Empire together.

It is at this point that one begins to grasp the unreality of most
people's attitude towards the class question. So long as it is merely a
question of ameliorating the worker's lot, every decent person is
agreed. Take a coal-miner, for example. Everyone, barring fools and
scoundrels, would like to see the miner better off. If, for instance,
the miner could ride to the coal face in a comfortable trolley instead
of crawling on his hands and knees, if he could work a three-hour shift
instead of seven and a half hours, if he could live in a decent house
with five bedrooms and a bath-room and have ten pounds a week
wages--splendid! Moreover, anyone who uses his brain knows perfectly
well that this is within the range of possibility. The world,
potentially at least, is immensely rich; develop it as it might be
developed, and we could all live like princes, supposing that we wanted
to. And to a very superficial glance the social side of the question
looks equally simple. In a sense it is true that almost everyone would
like to see class-distinctions abolished. Obviously this perpetual
uneasiness between man and man, from which we suffer in modern England,
is a curse and a nuisance. Hence the temptation few scoutmasterish
bellows of good-will. Stop calling me 'sir', you chaps! Surely we're all
men? Let's pal up and get our shoulders to the wheel and remember that
we're all equal, and what the devil does it matter if I know what kind
of ties to wear and you don't, and I drink my soup comparatively quietly
and you drink yours with the noise of water going down a waste-pipe--and
so on and so on and so on; all of it the most pernicious rubbish, but
quite alluring when it is suitably expressed.

But unfortunately you get no further by merely wishing
class-distinctions away. More exactly, it is necessary to wish them
away, but your wish has no efficacy unless you grasp what it involves.
The fact that has got to be faced is that to abolish class-distinctions
means abolishing a part of yourself. Here am I, a typical member of the
middle class. It is easy for me to say that I want to get rid of
class-distinctions, but nearly everything I think and do is a result of
class-distinctions. All my notions--notions of good and evil, of
pleasant and unpleasant, of funny and serious, of ugly and
beautiful--are essentially _middle-class_ notions; my taste in books and
food and clothes, my sense of honour, my table manners, my turns of
speech, my accent, even the characteristic movements of my body, are the
products of a special kind of upbringing and a special niche about
half-way up the social hierarchy. When I grasp this I grasp that it is
no use clapping a proletarian on the back and telling him that he is as
good a man as I am; if I want real contact with him, I have got to make
an effort for which very likely I am unprepared. For to get outside the
class-racket I have got to suppress not merely my private snobbishness,
but most of my other tastes and prejudices as well. I have got to alter
myself so completely that at the end I should hardly be recognizable as
the same person. What is involved is not merely the amelioration of
working-class conditions, nor an avoidance of the more stupid forms of
snobbery, but a complete abandonment of the upper-class and middle-class
attitude to life. And whether I say Yes or No probably depends upon the
extent to which I grasp what is demanded of me.

Many people, however, imagine that they can abolish class-distinctions
without making any uncomfortable change in their own habits and
'ideology'. Hence the eager class-breaking activities which one can see
in progress on all sides. Everywhere there are people of goodwill who
quite honestly believe that they are working for the overthrow of
class-distinctions. The middle-class Socialist enthuses over the
proletariat and runs 'summer schools' where the proletarian and the
repentant bourgeois are supposed to fall upon one another's necks and be
brothers for ever; and the bourgeois visitors come away saying how
wonderful and inspiring it has all been (the proletarian ones come away
saying something different). And then there is the outer-suburban
creeping Jesus, a hangover from the William Morris period, but still
surprisingly common, who goes about saying 'Why must we level _down_?
Why not level up?' and proposes to level the working class 'up' (up to
his own standard) by means of hygiene, fruit-juice, birth-control,
poetry, etc. Even the Duke of York (now King George VI) runs a yearly
camp where public-school boys and boys from the slums are supposed to
mix on exactly equal terms, and _do_ mix for the time being, rather like
the animals in one of those 'Happy Family' cages where a dog, a cat, two
ferrets, a rabbit, and three canaries preserve an armed truce while the
showman's eye is on them.

All such deliberate, conscious efforts at class-breaking are, I am
convinced, a very serious mistake. Sometimes they are merely futile, but
where they do show a definite result it is usually to _intensify_
class-prejudice. This, if you come to think of it, is only what might be
expected. You have forced the pace and set up an uneasy, unnatural
equality between class and class; the resultant friction brings to the
surface all kinds of feelings that might other-wise have remained
buried, perhaps for ever. As I said apropos of Galsworthy, the opinions
of the sentimentalist change into their opposites at the first touch of
reality. Scratch the average pacifist and you find a jingo. The
middle-class I.L.P.'er and the bearded fruit-juice drinker are all for a
classless society so long as they see the proletariat through the wrong
end of the telescope; force them into any _real_ contact with a
proletarian--let them get into a fight with a drunken fish-porter on
Saturday night, for instance--and they are capable of swinging back to
the most ordinary middle-class snobbishness. Most middle-class
Socialists, however, are very unlikely to get into fights with drunken
fish-porters; when they do make a genuine contact with the working
class, it is usually with the working-class intelligentsia. But the
working-class intelligentsia is sharply divisible into two different
types. There is the type who remains working-class--who goes on working
as a mechanic or a dock-labourer or whatever it may be and does not
bother to change his working-class accent and habits, but who 'improves
his mind' in his spare time and works for the I.L.P. or the Communist
Party; and there is the type who does alter his way of life, at least
externally, and who by means of State scholarships succeeds in climbing
into the middle class. The first is one of the finest types of man we
have. I can think of some I have met whom not even the most hidebound
Tory could help liking and admiring. The other type, with exceptions--D.
H. Lawrence, for example--is less admirable.

To begin with, it is a pity, though it is a natural result of the
scholarship system, that the proletariat should tend to interpenetrate
the middle class via the literary intelligentsia. For it is not easy to
crash your way into the literary intelligentsia if you happen to be a
decent human being. The modern English literary world, at any rate the
high-brow section of it, is a sort of poisonous jungle where only weeds
can flourish. It is just possible to be a literary gent and to keep your
decency if you are a definitely _popular_ writer--a writer of detective
stories, for instance; but to be a highbrow, with a footing in the
snootier magazines, means delivering yourself over to horrible campaigns
of wire-pulling and backstairs-crawling. In the highbrow world you 'get
on', if you 'get on' at all, not so much by your literary ability as by
being the life and soul of cocktail parties and kissing the bums of
verminous little lions. This, then, is the world that most readily opens
its doors to the proletarian who is climbing out of his own class. The
'clever' boy of a working-class family, the sort of boy who wins
scholarships and is obviously not fitted for a life of manual labour,
may find other ways of rising into the class above--a slightly different
type, for instance, rises via Labour Party politics--but the literary
way is by far the most usual. Literary London now teems with young men
who are of proletarian origin and have been educated by means of
scholarships. Many of them are very disagreeable people, quite
unrepresentative of their class, and it is most unfortunate that when a
person of bourgeois origin does succeed in meeting a proletarian face to
face on equal terms, this is the type he most commonly meets. For the
result is to drive the bourgeois, who has idealized the proletariat so
long as he knew nothing about them, back into frenzies of snobbishness.
The process is sometimes very comic to watch, if you happen to be
watching it from the outside. The poor well-meaning bourgeois, eager to
embrace his proletarian brother, leaps forward with open arms; and only
a little while later he is in retreat, minus a borrowed five pounds and
exclaiming dolefully, 'But, dash it, the fellow's not a gentleman!'

The thing that disconcerts the bourgeois in a contact of this kind is to
find certain of his own professions being taken seriously. I have
pointed out that the left-wing opinions of the average 'intellectual'
are mainly spurious. From pure imitativeness he jeers at things which in
fact he believes in. As one example out of many, take the public-school
code of honour, with its 'team spirit' and 'Don't hit a man when he's
down', and all the rest of that familiar bunkum. Who has not laughed at
it? Who, calling himself an 'intellectual', would dare _not_ to laugh at
it? But it is a bit different when you meet somebody who laughs at it
_from the outside_; just as we spend our lives in abusing England but
grow very angry when we hear a foreigner saying exactly the same things.
No one has been more amusing about the public schools than 'Beachcomber'
of the _Express_. He laughs, quite rightly, at the ridiculous code which
makes cheating at cards the worst of all sins. But would 'Beachcomber'
like it if one of his own friends was caught cheating at cards? I doubt
it. It is only when you meet someone of a different culture from
yourself that you begin to realize what your own beliefs really are. If
you are a bourgeois 'intellectual' you too readily imagine that you have
somehow become unbourgeois because you find it easy to laugh at
patriotism and the G. of E. and the Old School Tie and Colonel Blimp and
all the rest of it. But from the point of view of the proletarian
'intellectual', who at least by origin is genuinely outside the
bourgeois culture, your resemblances to Colonel Blimp may be more
important than your differences. Very likely he looks upon you and
Colonel Blimp as practically equivalent persons; and in a way he is
right, though neither you nor Colonel Blimp would admit it. So that the
meeting of proletarian and bourgeois, when they do succeed in meeting,
is not always the embrace of long-lost brothers; too often it is the
clash of alien cultures which can only meet in war.

I have been looking at this from the point of view of the bourgeois who
finds his secret beliefs challenged and is driven back to a frightened
conservatism. But one has also got to consider the antagonism that is
aroused in the proletarian 'intellectual'. By his own efforts and
sometimes with frightful agonies he has struggled out of his own class
into another where he expects to find a wider freedom and a greater
intellectual refinement; and all he finds, very often, is a sort of
hollowness, a deadness, a lack of any warm human feeling--of any real
life whatever. Sometimes the bourgeoisie seem to him just dummies with
money and water in their veins instead of blood. This at any rate is
what he _says_, and almost any young highbrow of proletarian origin will
spin you this line of talk. Hence the 'proletarian' cant from which we
now suffer. Everyone knows, or ought to know by this time, how it runs:
the bourgeoisie are 'dead' (a favourite word of abuse nowadays and very
effective be-cause meaningless), bourgeois culture is bankrupt,
bourgeois 'values' are despicable, and so on and so forth; if you want
examples, see any number of the _Left Review_ or any of the younger
Communist writers such as Alee Brown, Philip Henderson, etc. The
sincerity of much of this is suspect, but D. H. Lawrence, who was
sincere, whatever else he may not have been, expresses the same thought
over and over again. It is curious how he harps upon that idea that the
English bourgeoisie are all _dead_, or at least gelded. Mellors, the
gamekeeper in _Lady Chatterley's Lover_ (really Lawrence himself), has
had the opportunity to get out of his own class and does not
particularly want to return to it, because English working people have
various 'disagree-able habits'; on the other hand the bourgeoisie, with
whom he has also mixed to some extent, seem to him half dead, a race of
eunuchs. Lady Chatterley's husband, symbolically, is impotent in the
actual physical sense. And then there is the poem about the young man
(once again Lawrence himself) who 'got up to the top of the tree' but
came down saying:


  Oh you've got to be like a monkey
  if you climb up the tree!
  You've no more use for the solid earth
  and the lad you used to be.
  You sit in the boughs and gibber
  with superiority.

  They all gibber and gibber and chatter,
  and never a word they say
  comes really out of their guts, lad,
  they make it up half-way...

  I tell you something's been done to 'em,
  to the pullets up above;
  there's not a cock bird among 'em, etc., etc.


You could hardly have it in plainer terms than that. Possibly by the
people at 'the top of the tree' Lawrence only means the real
bourgeoisie, those in the £2000 a year class and over, but I doubt it.
More probably he means everyone who is more or less within the bourgeois
culture--everyone who was brought up with a mincing accent and in a
house where there were one or two servants. And at this point you
realize the danger of the 'proletarian' cant--realize, I mean, the
terrible antagonism that it is capable of arousing. For when you come to
such an accusation as this, you are up against a blank wall. Lawrence
tells me that because I have been to a public school I am a eunuch.
Well, what about it? I can produce medical evidence to the contrary, but
what good will that do? Lawrence's condemnation remains. If you tell me
I am a scoundrel I may mend my ways, but if you tell me I am a eunuch
you are tempting me to hit back in any way that seems feasible. If you
want to make an enemy of a man, tell him that his ills are incurable.

This then is the net result of most meetings between proletarian and
bourgeois: they lay bare a real antagonism which is intensified by the
'proletarian' cant, itself the product of forced contacts between class
and class. The only sensible procedure is to go slow and not force the
pace. If you secretly think of yourself as a gentleman and as such the
superior of the greengrocer's errand boy, it is far better to say so
than to tell lies about it. Ultimately you have got to drop your
snobbishness, but it is fatal to pretend to drop it before you are
really ready to do so.

Meanwhile one can observe on every side that dreary phenomenon, the
middle-class person who is an ardent Socialist at twenty-five and a
sniffish Conservative at thirty-five. In a way his recoil is natural
enough--at any rate, one can see how his thoughts run. Perhaps a
classless society doesn't mean a beatific state of affairs in which we
shall all go on behaving exactly as before except that there will be no
class-hatred and no snobbishness; perhaps it means a bleak world in
which all our ideals, our codes, our tastes--our 'ideology', in
fact--will have no meaning. Perhaps this class-breaking business isn't
so simple as it looked! On the contrary, it is a wild ride into the
darkness, and it may be that at the end of it the smile will be on the
face of the tiger. With loving though slightly patronizing smiles we set
out to greet our proletarian brothers, and behold! our proletarian
brothers--in so far as we understand them--are not asking for our
greetings, they are asking us to commit suicide. When the bourgeois sees
it in that form he takes to flight, and if his flight is rapid enough it
may carry him to Fascism.




11

Meanwhile what about Socialism?

It hardly needs pointing out that at this moment we are in a very
serious mess, so serious that even the dullest-witted people find it
difficult to remain unaware of it. We are living in a world in which
nobody is free, in which hardly anybody is secure, in which it is almost
impossible to be honest and to remain alive. For enormous blocks of the
working class the conditions of life are such as I have described in the
opening chapters of this book, and there is no chance of those
conditions showing any fundamental improvement. The very best the
English-working class can hope for is an occasional temporary decrease
in unemployment when this or that industry is artificially stimulated
by, for instance, rearmament. Even the middle classes, for the first
time in their history, are feeling the pinch. They have not known actual
hunger yet, but more and more of them find themselves floundering in a
sort of deadly net of frustration in which it is harder and harder to
persuade yourself that you are either happy, active, or useful. Even the
lucky ones at the top, the real bourgeoisie, are haunted periodically by
a consciousness of the miseries below, and still more by fears of the
menacing future. And this is merely a preliminary stage, in a country
still rich with the loot of a hundred years. Presently there may be
coining God knows what horrors--horrors of which, in this sheltered
island, we have not even a traditional knowledge.

And all the while everyone who uses his brain knows that Socialism, as a
world-system and wholeheartedly applied, is a way out. It would at least
ensure our getting enough to eat even if it deprived us of everything
else. Indeed, from one point of view, Socialism is such elementary
common sense that I am sometimes amazed that it has not established
itself already. The world is a raft sailing through space with,
potentially, plenty of provisions for everybody; the idea that we must
all cooperate and see to it that every-one does his fair share of the
work and gets his fair share of the provisions seems so blatantly
obvious that one would say that no one could possibly fail to accept it
unless he had some corrupt motive for clinging to the present system.
Yet the fact that we have got to face is that Socialism is not
establishing itself. Instead of going forward, the cause of Socialism is
visibly going back. At this moment Socialists almost everywhere are in
retreat before the onslaught of Fascism, and events are moving at
terrible speed. As I write this the Spanish Fascist forces are
bombarding Madrid, and it is quite likely that before the book is
printed we shall have another Fascist country to add to the list, not to
mention a Fascist control of the Mediterranean which may have the effect
of delivering British foreign policy into the hands of Mussolini. I do
not, however, want here to discuss the wider political issues. What I am
concerned with is the fact that Socialism is losing ground exactly where
it ought to be gaining it. With so much in its favour--for every empty
belly is an argument for Socialism--the _idea_ of Socialism is less
widely accepted than it was ten years ago. The average thinking person
nowadays is not merely not a Socialist, he is actively hostile to
Socialism. This must be due chiefly to mistaken methods of propaganda.
It means that Socialism, in the form of which it is now presented to us,
has about it something inherently distasteful--something that drives
away the very people who ought to be nocking to its support.

A few years ago this might have seemed unimportant. It seems only
yesterday that Socialists, especially orthodox Marxists, were telling me
with superior smiles that Socialism was going to arrive of its own
accord by some mysterious process called 'historic necessity'. Possibly
that belief still lingers, but it has been shaken, to say the least of
it. Hence the sudden attempts of Communists in various countries to ally
themselves with democratic forces which they have been sabotaging for
years past. At a moment like this it is desperately necessary to
discover just _why_ Socialism has failed in its appeal. And it is no use
writing off the current distaste for Socialism as the product of
stupidity or corrupt motives. If you want to remove that distaste you
have got to understand it, which means getting inside the mind of the
ordinary objector to Socialism, or at least regarding his viewpoint
sympathetically. No case is really answered until it has had a fair
hearing. Therefore, rather paradoxically, in order to defend Socialism
it is necessary to start by attacking it.

In the last three chapters I tried to analyse the difficulties that are
raised by our anachronistic class-system; I shall have to touch on that
subject again, because I believe that the present intensely stupid
handling of the class-issue may stampede quantities of potential
Socialists into Fascism. In the chapter following this one I want to
discuss certain underlying assumptions that alienate sensitive minds
from Socialism. But in the present chapter I am merely dealing with the
obvious, preliminary objections--the kind of thing that the person who
is not a Socialist (I don't mean the 'Where's the money to come from?'
type) always starts by saying when you tax him on the subject. Some of
these objections may appear frivolous or self-contradictory, but that is
beside the point; I am merely discussing symptoms. Anything is relevant
which helps to make clear why Socialism is not accepted. And please
notice that I am arguing _for_ Socialism, not _against_ it. But for the
moment I am _advocatus diaboli_. I am making out a case for the sort of
person who is in sympathy with the fundamental aims of Socialism, who
has the brains to see that Socialism would 'work', but who in practice
always takes to flight when Socialism is mentioned.

Question a person of this type, and you will often get the
semi-frivolous answer: 'I don't object to Socialism, but I do object to
Socialists.' Logically it is a poor argument, but it carries weight with
many people. As with the Christian religion, the worst advertisement for
Socialism is its adherents.

The first thing that must strike any outside observer is that Socialism,
in its developed form is a theory confined entirely to the middle
classes. The typical Socialist is not, as tremulous old ladies imagine,
a ferocious-looking working man with greasy overalls and a raucous
voice. He is either a youthful snob-Bolshevik who in five years' time
will quite probably have made a wealthy marriage and been converted to
Roman Catholicism; or, still more typically, a prim little man with a
white-collar job, usually a secret teetotaller and often with vegetarian
leanings, with a history of Nonconformity behind him, and, above all,
with a social position which he has no intention of forfeiting. This
last type is surprisingly common in Socialist parties of every shade; it
has perhaps been taken over _en bloc_ from the old Liberal
Party. In addition to this there is the horrible--the really
disquieting--prevalence of cranks wherever Socialists are gathered
together. One sometimes gets the impression that the mere words
'Socialism' and 'Communism' draw towards them with magnetic force every
fruit-juice drinker, nudist, sandal-wearer, sex-maniac, Quaker, 'Nature
Cure' quack, pacifist, and feminist in England. One day this summer I
was riding through Letchworth when the bus stopped and two
dreadful-looking old men got on to it. They were both about sixty, both
very short, pink, and chubby, and both hatless. One of them was
obscenely bald, the other had long grey hair bobbed in the Lloyd George
style. They were dressed in pistachio-coloured shirts and khaki shorts
into which their huge bottoms were crammed so tightly that you could
study every dimple. Their appearance created a mild stir of horror on
top of the bus. The man next to me, a commercial traveller I should say,
glanced at me, at them, and back again at me, and murmured 'Socialists',
as who should say, 'Red Indians'. He was probably right--the I.L.P. were
holding their summer school at Letchworth. But the point is that to him,
as an ordinary man, a crank meant a Socialist and a Socialist meant a
crank. Any Socialist, he probably felt, could be counted on to have
_something_ eccentric about him. And some such notion seems to exist
even among Socialists themselves. For instance, I have here a prospectus
from another summer school which states its terms per week and then asks
me to say 'whether my diet is ordinary or vegetarian'. They take it for
granted, you see, that it is necessary to ask this question. This kind
of thing is by itself sufficient to alienate plenty of decent people.
And their instinct is perfectly sound, for the food-crank is by
definition a person willing to cut himself off from human society in
hopes of adding five years on to the life of his carcase; that is, a
person but of touch with common humanity.

To this you have got to add the ugly fact that most middle-class
Socialists, while theoretically pining for a class-less society, cling
like glue to their miserable fragments of social prestige. I remember my
sensations of horror on first attending an I.L.P. branch meeting in
London. (It might have been rather different in the North, where the
bourgeoisie are less thickly scattered.) Are _these_ mingy little
beasts, I thought, the champions of the working class? For every person
there, male and female, bore the worst stigmata of sniffish middle-class
superiority. If a real working man, a miner dirty from the pit, for
instance, had suddenly walked into their midst, they would have been
embarrassed, angry, and disgusted; some, I should think, would have fled
holding their noses. You can see the same tendency in Socialist
literature, which, even when it is not openly written _de haut en bas_,
is always completely removed from the working class in idiom and manner
of thought. The Coles, Webbs, Stracheys, etc., are not _exactly_
proletarian writers. It is doubtful whether anything describable as
proletarian literature now exists--even the _Daily Worker_ is written in
standard South English--but a good music-hall comedian comes nearer to
producing it than any Socialist writer I can think of. As for the
technical jargon of the Communists, it is as far removed from the common
speech as the language of a mathematical textbook. I remember hearing a
professional Communist speaker address a working-class audience. His
speech was the usual bookish stuff, full of long sentences and
parentheses and 'Notwithstanding' and 'Be that as it may', besides the
usual jargon of 'ideology' and 'class-consciousness' and 'proletarian
solidarity' and all the rest of it. After him a Lancashire working man
got up and spoke to the crowd in their own broad lingo. There was not
much doubt which of the two was nearer to his audience, but I do not
suppose for a moment that the Lancashire working man was an orthodox
Communist.

For it must be remembered that a working man, so long as he remains a
genuine working man, is seldom or never a Socialist in the complete,
logically consistent sense. Very likely he votes Labour, or even
Communist if he gets the chance, but his conception of Socialism is
quite different from that of the, book-trained Socialist higher up. To
the ordinary working man, the sort you would meet in any pub on Saturday
night, Socialism does not mean much more than better wages and shorter'
hours and nobody bossing you about. To the more revolutionary type, the
type who is a hunger-marcher and is blacklisted by employers, the word
is a sort of rallying-cry against the forces of oppression, a vague
threat of future violence. But, so far as my experience goes, no genuine
working man grasps the deeper implications of Socialism. Often, in my
opinion, he is a truer Socialist than the orthodox Marxist, because he
does remember, what the other so often forgets, that Socialism means
justice and common decency. But what he does not grasp is that Socialism
cannot be narrowed down to mere economic justice' and that a reform of
that magnitude is bound to work immense changes in our civilization and
his own way of life. His vision of the Socialist future is a vision of
present society with the worst abuses left out, and with interest
centring round the same things as at present--family life, the pub,
football, and local politics. As for the philosophic side of Marxism,
the pea-and-thimble trick with those three mysterious entities, thesis,
antithesis, and synthesis, I have never met a working man who had the
faintest interest in it. It is of course true that plenty of people of
working-class _origin_ are Socialists of the theoretical bookish type.
But they are never people who have _remained_ working men; they don't
work with their hands, that is. They belong either to the type I
mentioned in the last chapter, the type who squirms into the middle
class via the literary intelligentsia, or the type who becomes a Labour
M.P. or a high-up trade union official. This last type is one of the
most desolating spectacles the world contains. He has been picked out to
fight for his mates, and all it means to him is a soft job and the
chance of 'bettering' himself. Not merely while but _by_ fighting the
bourgeoisie he becomes a bourgeois himself. And meanwhile it is quite
possible that he has remained an orthodox Marxist. But I have yet to
meet a _working_ miner, steel-worker, cotton-weaver, docker, navvy, or
whatnot who was 'ideologically' sound.

One of the analogies between Communism and Roman Catholicism is that
only the 'educated' are completely orthodox. The most immediately
striking thing about the English Roman Catholics--I don't mean the real
Catholics, I mean the converts: Ronald Knox, Arnold Lunn _et hoc
genus_--is their intense self-consciousness. Apparently they never
think, certainly they never write, about anything but the fact that they
are Roman Catholics; this single fact and the self-praise resulting from
it form the entire stock-in-trade of the Catholic literary man. But the
really interesting thing about these people is the way in which they
have worked out the supposed implications of orthodoxy until the tiniest
details of life are involved. Even the liquids you drink, apparently,
can be orthodox or heretical; hence the campaigns of Chesterton,
'Beachcomber', etc., against tea and in favour of beer. According to
Chesterton, tea-drinking' is 'pagan', while beer-drinking is
'Christian', and coffee is 'the puritan's opium'. It is unfortunate for
this theory that Catholics abound in the 'Temperance' movement and the
greatest tea-boozers in the world are the Catholic Irish; but what I am
interested in here is the attitude of mind that can make even food and
drink an occasion for religious intolerance. A working-class Catholic
would never be so absurdly consistent as that. He does not spend his
time in brooding on the fact that he is a Roman Catholic, and he is not
particularly conscious of being different from his non-Catholic
neighbours. Tell an Irish dock-labourer in the slums of Liverpool that
his cup of tea is 'pagan', and he will call you a fool. And even in more
serious matters he I does not always grasp the implications of his
faith. In the I Roman Catholic homes of Lancashire you see the crucifix
I on the wall and the _Daily Worker_ on the table. It is only the
'educated' man, especially the literary man, who knows how to be a
bigot. And, _mutatis mutandis_, it is the same with Communism. The creed
is never found in its pure form in a genuine proletarian.

It may be said, however, that even if the theoretical book-trained
Socialist is not a working man himself, at least he is actuated by a
love of the working class. He is endeavouring to shed his bourgeois
status and fight on the side of the proletariat--that, obviously, must
be his motive.

But is it? Sometimes I look at a Socialist--the intellectual,
tract-writing type of Socialist, with his pullover, his fuzzy hair, and
his Marxian quotation--and wonder what the devil his motive really is.
It is often difficult to believe that it is a love of anybody,
especially of the working class, from whom he is of all people the
furthest removed. The underlying motive of many Socialists, I believe,
is simply a hypertrophied sense of order. The present state of affairs
offends them not because it causes misery, still less because it makes
freedom impossible, but because it is untidy; what they desire,
basically, is to reduce the world to something resembling a chessboard.
Take the plays of a lifelong Socialist like Shaw. How much understanding
or even awareness of working-class life do they display? Shaw himself
declares that you can only bring a working man on the stage 'as an
object of compassion'; in practice he doesn't bring him on even as that,
but merely as a sort of W. W. Jacobs figure of fun--the ready-made comic
East Ender, like those in _Major Barbara_ and _Captain Brassbound's
Conversion_. At best his attitude to the working class is the sniggering
_Punch_ attitude, in more serious moments (consider, for instance, the
young man who symbolizes the dispossessed classes in _Misalliance_) he
finds them merely contemptible and disgusting. Poverty and, what is
more, the habits of mind created by poverty, are something to be
abolished _from above_, by violence if necessary; perhaps even
preferably by violence. Hence his worship of 'great' men and appetite
for dictatorships, Fascist or Communist; for to him, apparently (_vide_
his remarks apropos of the Italo-Abyssinian war and the Stalin-Wells
conversations), Stalin and Mussolini are almost equivalent persons. You
get the same thing in a more mealy-mouthed form in Mrs Sidney Webb's
autobiography, which gives, unconsciously, a most revealing picture of
the high-minded Socialist slum-visitor. The truth is that, to many
people calling themselves Socialists, revolution does not mean a
movement of the masses with which they hope to associate themselves; it
means a set of reforms which 'we', the clever ones, are going to impose
upon 'them', the Lower Orders. On the other hand, it would be a mistake
to regard the book-trained Socialist as a bloodless creature entirely
incapable of emotion. Though seldom giving much evidence of affection
for the exploited, he is perfectly capable of displaying hatred--a sort
of queer, theoretical, _in vacuo_ hatred--against the exploiters. Hence
the grand old Socialist sport of denouncing the bourgeoisie. It is
strange how easily almost any Socialist writer can lash himself into
frenzies of rage against the class to which, by birth or by adoption, he
himself invariably belongs. Sometimes the hatred of bourgeois habits and
'ideology' is so far-reaching that it extends even to bourgeois
characters in books. According to Henri Barbusse, the characters in the
novels of Proust, Gide, etc., are 'characters whom one would dearly love
to have at the other side of a barricade'. 'A barricade', you observe.
Judging from _Le Feu_, I should have thought Barbusse's experience of
barricades had left him with a distaste for them. But the imaginary
bayoneting of 'bourgeois', who presumably don't hit back, is a bit
different from the real article.

The best example of bourgeois-baiting literature that I have yet come
across is Mirsky's _Intelligentsia of Great Britain_. This is a very
interesting and ably-written book, and it should be read by everyone who
wants to understand the rise of Fascism. Mirsky (formerly Prince Mirsky)
was a White Russian _émigré_ who came to England and was for some years
a lecturer in Russian literature at London University. Later he was
converted to Communism, returned to Russia, and produced his book as a
sort of 'show-up' of the British intelligentsia from a Marxist
standpoint. It is a viciously malignant book, with an unmistakable note
of 'Now I'm out of your reach I can say what I like about you' running
all through it, and apart from a general distortion it contains some
quite definite and probably intentional misrepresentation: as, for
instance, when Conrad is declared to be 'no less imperialist than
Kipling', and D. H. Lawrence is described as writing 'bare-bodied
pornography' and as having 'succeeded in erasing all clues to his
proletarian origin'--as though Lawrence had been a pork-butcher climbing
into the House of Lords! This kind of thing is very disquieting when one
remembers that it is addressed to a Russian audience who have no means
of checking its accuracy. But what I am thinking of at the moment is the
effect of such a book on the English public. Here you have a literary
man of aristocratic extraction, a man who had probably never in his life
spoken to a working man on any-thing approaching equal terms, uttering
venomous screams of libel against his 'bourgeois' colleagues. Why? So
far as appearances go, from pure malignity. He is battling _against_ the
British intelligentsia, but what is he battling _for_? Within the book
itself there is no indication. Hence the net effect of books like this
is to give outsiders the impression that there is nothing in Communism
except _hatred_. And here once again you come upon that queer
resemblance between Communism and (convert) Roman Catholicism. If you
want to find a book as evil-spirited as _The Intelligentsia of Great
Britain_, the likeliest place to look is among the popular Roman
Catholic apologists. You will find there the same venom and the same
dishonesty, though, to do the Catholic justice, you will not usually
find the same bad manners. Queer that Comrade Mirsky's spiritual brother
should be Father---! The Communist and the Catholic are not saying the
same thing, in a sense they are even saying opposite things, and each
would gladly boil the other in oil if circumstances permitted; but from
the point of view of an outsider they are very much alike.

The fact is that Socialism, _in the form in which it is now presented_,
appeals chiefly to unsatisfactory or even inhuman types. On the one hand
you have the warm-hearted un-thinking Socialist, the typical
working-class Socialist, who only wants to abolish poverty and does not
always grasp what this implies. On the other hand, you have the
intellectual, book-trained Socialist, who understands that it is
necessary to throw our present civilization down the sink and is quite
willing to do so. And this type is drawn, to begin with, entirely from
the middle class, and from a rootless town-bred section of the middle
class at that. Still more unfortunately, it includes--so much so that to
an outsider it even appears to be composed of--the kind of people I have
been discussing; the foaming denouncers of the bourgeoisie, and the
more-water-in-your-beer reformers of whom Shaw is the prototype, and the
astute young social-literary climbers who are Communists now, as they
will be Fascists five years hence, because it is all the go, and all
that dreary tribe of high-minded' women and sandal-wearers and bearded
fruit-juice drinkers who come nocking towards the smell of 'progress'
like bluebottles to a dead cat. The ordinary decent person, who is in
sympathy with the _essential_ aims of Socialism, is given the impression
that there is no room for his kind in any Socialist party that means
business. Worse, he is driven to the cynical conclusion that Socialism
is a kind of doom which is probably coming but must be staved off as
long as possible. Of course, as I have suggested already, it is not
strictly fair to judge a movement by its adherents; but the point is
that people invariably do so, and that the popular conception of
Socialism is coloured by the conception of a Socialist as a dull or
disagreeable person. 'Socialism' is pictured as a state of affairs in
which our more vocal Socialists would feel thoroughly at home. This does
great harm to the cause. The ordinary man may not flinch from a
dictatorship of the proletariat, if you offer it tactfully; offer him a
dictatorship of the prigs, and he gets ready to fight.

There is a widespread feeling that any civilization in which Socialism
was a reality would bear the same relation to our own as a brand-new
bottle of colonial burgundy, bears to a few spoonfuls of first-class
Beaujolais. We live, admittedly, amid the wreck of a civilization, but
it has been a great civilization in its day, and in patches it still
flourishes almost undisturbed. It still has its bouquet, so to speak;
whereas the imagined Socialist future, like the colonial burgundy,
tastes only of iron and water. Hence the fact, which is really a
disastrous one, that artists of any consequence can never be persuaded
into the Socialist fold. This is particularly the case with the writer
whose political opinions are more directly and obviously connected with
his work than those of, say, a painter. If one faces facts one must
admit that nearly everything describable as Socialist literature is
dull, tasteless, and bad. Consider the situation in England at the
present moment. A whole generation has grown up more or less in
familiarity with the idea of Socialism; and yet the higher-water mark,
so to speak, of Socialist literature is W. H. Auden, a sort of gutless
Kipling,[Orwell somewhat retracted this remark later. See 'Inside the
Whale', _England Your England_, p. 120 (Seeker & Warburg Collected
Edition).] and the even feebler poets who are associated with him. Every
writer of consequence and every book worth reading is on the other side.
I am willing to believe that it is otherwise in Russia--about which I
know nothing, however--for presumably in post-revolutionary Russia the
mere violence of events would tend to throw up a vigorous literature of
sorts. But it is certain that in Western Europe Socialism has produced
no literature worth having. A little while ago, when the issues were
less clear, there were writers of some vitality who called themselves
Socialists, but they were using the word as a vague label. Thus, if
Ibsen and Zola described themselves as Socialists, it did not mean much
more than that they were 'progressives', while in the case of Anatole
France it meant merely that he was an anticlerical. The real Socialist
writers, the propagandist writers, have always been dull, empty
windbags--Shaw, Barbusse, Upton Sinclair, William Morris, Waldo Frank,
etc., etc. I am not, of course, suggesting that Socialism is to be
condemned because literary gents don't like it; I am not even suggesting
that it ought necessarily to produce literature on its own account,
though I do think it a bad sign that it has produced no songs worth
singing. I am merely pointing to the fact that writers of genuine
talent are usually indifferent to Socialism, and sometimes actively and
mischievously hostile. And this is a disaster, not only for the writers
themselves, but for the cause of Socialism, which has great need of
them.

This, then, is the superficial aspect of the ordinary man's recoil from
Socialism. I know the whole dreary argument very thoroughly, because I
know it from both sides. Every-thing that I say here I have both said to
ardent Socialists who were trying to convert me, and had said to me by
bored non-Socialists whom I was trying to convert. The whole thing
amounts to a kind of _malaise_ produced by dislike of individual
Socialists, especially of the cocksure Marx-quoting type. Is it childish
to be influenced by that kind of thing? Is it silly? Is it even
contemptible? It is all that, but the point is that _it happens_, and
therefore it is important to keep it in mind.




12

However, there is a much more serious difficulty than the local and
temporary objections which I discussed in the last chapter.

Faced by the fact that intelligent people are so often on the other
side, the Socialist is apt to set it down to corrupt motives (conscious
or unconscious), or to an ignorant belief that Socialism would not
'work', or to a mere dread of the horrors and discomforts of the
revolutionary period before Socialism is established. Undoubtedly all
these are important, but there are plenty of people who are influenced
by none of them and are nevertheless hostile to Socialism. Their reason
for recoiling from Socialism is spiritual, or 'ideological'. They object
to it not on the ground that it would not 'work', but precisely because
it would 'work' too well. What they are afraid of is not the things that
are going to happen in their own lifetime, but the things that are going
to happen in a remote future when Socialism is a reality.

I have very seldom met a convinced Socialist who could grasp that
thinking people may be repelled by the _objective_ towards which
Socialism appears to be moving. The Marxist, especially, dismisses this
kind of thing as bourgeois sentimentality. Marxists as a rule are not
very good at reading the minds of their adversaries; if they were, the
situation in Europe might be less desperate than it is at present.
Possessing a technique which seems to explain everything, they do not
often bother to discover what is going on inside other people's heads.
Here, for instance, is an illustration of the kind of thing I mean.
Discussing the widely held theory--which in one sense is certainly
true--that Fascism is a product of Communism, Mr N. A. Holdaway, one of
the ablest Marxist writers we possess, writes as follows:


The hoary legend of Communism leading to Fascism...The element of
truth in it is this: that the appearance of Communist activity warns the
ruling class that democratic Labour Parties are no longer capable of
holding the working class in check, and that capitalist dictatorship
must assume another form if it is to survive.


You see here the defects of the method. Because he has detected the
underlying economic cause of Fascism, he tacitly assumes that the
spiritual side of it is of no importance. Fascism is written off as a
manoeuvre of the 'ruling class', which at bottom it is. But this in
itself would only explain why Fascism appeals to capitalists. What about
the millions who are not capitalists, who in a material sense have
nothing to gain from Fascism and are often aware of it, and who,
nevertheless, are Fascists? Obviously their approach has been purely
along the ideological line. They could only be stampeded into Fascism
because Communism attacked or seemed to attack certain things
(patriotism, religion, etc.) which lay deeper than the economic motive;
and in _that_ sense it is perfectly true that Communism leads to
Fascism. It is a pity that Marxists nearly always concentrate on letting
economic cats out of ideological bags; it does in one sense reveal the
truth, but with this penalty, that most of their propaganda misses its
mark. It is the spiritual recoil from Socialism, especially as it
manifests itself in sensitive people, that I want to discuss in this
chapter. I shall have to analyse it at some length, because it is very
widespread, very powerful, and, among Socialists, almost completely
ignored.

The first thing to notice is that the idea of Socialism is bound up,
more or less inextricably, with the idea of machine-production.
Socialism is essentially an _urban_ creed. It grew up more or less
concurrently with industrialism, it has always had its roots in the town
proletariat and the town intellectual, and it is doubtful whether it
could ever have arisen in any but an industrial society. Granted
industrialism, the idea of Socialism presents itself naturally, because
private ownership is only tolerable when every individual (or family or
other unit) is at least moderately self-supporting; but the effect of
industrialism is to make it impossible for anyone to be self-supporting
even for a moment. Industrialism, once it rises above a fairly low
level, must lead to some form of collectivism. Not necessarily to
Socialism, of course; conceivably it might lead to the Slave-State of
which Fascism is a kind of prophecy. And the converse is also true.
Machine-production suggests Socialism, but Socialism as a world-system
implies machine-production, because it demands certain things not
compatible with a primitive way of life. It demands, for instance,
constant intercommunication and exchange of goods between all parts of
the earth; it demands some degree of centralized control; it demands an
approximately equal standard of life for all human beings and probably a
certain uniformity of education. We may take it, therefore, that any
world in which Socialism was a reality would be at least as highly
mechanized as the United States at this moment, probably much more so.
In any case, no Socialist would think of denying this. The Socialist
world is always pictured as a completely mechanized, immensely organized
world, depending on the machine as the civilizations of antiquity depend
on the slave.

So far so good, or so bad. Many, perhaps a majority, of thinking people
are not in love with machine-civilization, but everyone who is not a
fool knows that it is nonsense to talk at this moment about scrapping
the machine. But the unfortunate thing is that Socialism, as usually
presented, is bound up with the idea of mechanical progress, not merely
as a necessary development but as an end in itself, almost as a kind of
religion. This idea is implicit in, for instance, most of the
propagandist stuff that is written about the rapid mechanical advance in
Soviet Russia (the Dneiper dam, tractors, etc., etc.). Karel Capek hits
it off well enough in the horrible ending of _R.U.R._, when the Robots,
having slaughtered the last human being, announce their intention to
'build many houses' (just for the sake of building houses, you see). The
kind of person who most readily accepts Socialism is also the kind of
person who views mechanical progress, _as such_, with enthusiasm. And
this is so much the case that Socialists are often unable to grasp that
the opposite opinion exists. As a rule the most persuasive argument they
can think of is to tell you that the present mechanization of the world
is as nothing to what we shall see when Socialism is established. Where
there is one aeroplane now, in those days there will be fifty! All the
work that is now done by hand will then be done by machinery: everything
that is now made of leather, wood, or stone will be made of rubber,
glass, or steel; there will be no disorder, no loose ends, no
wildernesses, no wild animals, no weeds, no disease, no poverty, no
pain--and so on and so forth. The Socialist world is to be above all
things an _ordered_ world, an _efficient_ world. But it is precisely
from that vision of the future as a sort of glittering Wells-world that
sensitive minds recoil. Please notice that this essentially fat-bellied
version of 'progress' is not an integral part of Socialist doctrine; but
it has come to be thought of as one, with the result that the
temperamental conservatism which is latent in all kinds of people is
easily mobilized against Socialism.

Every sensitive person has moments when he is suspicious of machinery
and to some extent of physical science. But it is important to sort out
the various motives, which have differed greatly at different times, for
hostility to science and machinery, and to disregard the jealousy of the
modern literary gent who hates science because science has stolen
literature's thunder. The earliest full-length attack on science and
machinery that I am acquainted with is in the third part of _Gulliver's
Travels_. But Swift's attack, though brilliant as a _tour de force_, is
irrelevant and even silly, because it is written from the
standpoint--perhaps this seems a queer thing to say of the author of
_Gulliver's Travels_--of a man who lacked imagination. To Swift, science
was merely a kind of futile muckraking and the machines were nonsensical
contraptions that would never work. His standard was that of practical
usefulness, and he lacked the vision to see that an experiment which is
not demonstrably useful at the moment may yield results in the future.
Elsewhere in the book he names it as the best of all achievements 'to
make two blades of grass grow where one grew before'; not 'seeing,
apparently, that this is just what the machine can do. A little later
the despised machines began working, physical science increased its
scope, and there came the celebrated conflict between religion and
science which agitated our grandfathers. That conflict is over and both
sides have retreated and claimed a victory, but an anti-scientific bias
still lingers in the minds of most religious believers. All through the
nineteenth century protesting voices were raised against science and
machinery (see Dickens's _Hard Times_, for instance), but usually for
the rather shallow reason that industrialism in its first stages was
cruel and ugly. Samuel Butler's attack on the machine in the well-known
chapter of _Erewhon_ is a different matter. But Butler himself lives in
'a less desperate age than our own, an age in which it was still
possible for a first-rate man to be a dilettante part of the time, and
therefore the whole thing appeared to him as a kind of intellectual
exercise. He saw clearly enough our abject dependence on the machine,
but instead of bothering to work out its consequences he preferred to
exaggerate it for the sake of what was not much more than a joke. It is
only in our own age, when mechanization has finally triumphed, that we
can actually _feel_ the tendency of the machine to make a fully human
life impossible. There is probably no one capable of thinking and
feeling who has not occasionally looked at a gas-pipe chair and
reflected that the machine is the enemy of life. As a rule, however,
this feeling is instinctive rather than reasoned.

People know that in some way or another 'progress' is a swindle, but
they reach this conclusion by a kind of mental shorthand; my job here is
to supply the logical steps that are usually left out. But first one
must ask, what is the function of the machine? Obviously its primary
function is to save work, and the type of person to whom
machine-civilization is entirely acceptable seldom sees any reason for
looking further. Here for instance is a person who claims, or rather
screams, that he is thoroughly at home in the modern mechanized world. I
am quoting from _World Without Faith_, by Mr John Beevers. This is what
he says:


It is plain lunacy to say that the average £2 10s. to £4 a week man of
today is a lower type than an eighteenth-century farm labourer. Or than
the labourer or peasant of any exclusively agricultural community now or
in the past. It just isn't true. It is so damn silly to cry out about
the civilizing effects of work in the fields and farmyards as against
that done in a big locomotive works or an automobile factory. Work is a
nuisance. We work because we have to and all work is done to provide us
with leisure and the means of spending that leisure as enjoyably as
possible.


And again:


Man is going to have time enough and power enough to hunt for his own
heaven on earth without worrying about the super-natural one. The earth
will be so pleasant a place that the priest and the parson won't be left
with much of a tale to tell. Half the stuffing is knocked out of them by
one neat blow. Etc., etc., etc.


There is a whole chapter to this effect (Chapter 4 of Mr Beevers's
book), and it is of some interest as an exhibition of machine-worship in
its most completely vulgar, ignorant, and half-baked form. It is the
authentic voice of a large section of the modern world. Every
aspirin-eater in the outer suburbs would echo it fervently. Notice the
shrill wail of anger ('It just isn't troo-o-o!', etc.) with which Mr
Beevers meets the suggestion that his grandfather may have been a better
man than himself; and the still more horrible suggestion that if we
returned to a simpler way of life he might have to toughen his muscles
with a job of work. Work, you see, is done 'to provide us with leisure'.
Leisure for what? Leisure to become more like Mr Beevers, presumably.
Though as a matter of fact, from that line of talk about 'heaven on
earth', you can make a fairly good guess at what he would like
civilization to be; a sort of Lyons Comer House lasting in _saecula
saeculorum_ and getting bigger and noisier all the time. And in any book
by anyone who feels at home in the machine-world--in any book by H. G.
Wells, for instance--you will find passages of the same kind. How often
have we not heard it, that glutinously uplifting stuff about 'the
machines, our new race of slaves, which will set humanity free', etc.,
etc., etc. To these people, apparently, the only danger of the machine
is its possible use for destructive purposes; as, for instance,
aero-planes are used in war. Barring wars and unforeseen disasters, the
future is envisaged as an ever more rapid march of mechanical progress;
machines to save work, machines to save thought, machines to save pain,
hygiene, efficiency, organization, more hygiene, more efficiency, more
organization, more machines--until finally you land up in the by now
familiar Wellsian Utopia, aptly caricatured by Huxley in _Brave New
World_, the paradise of little fat men. Of course in their day-dreams of
the future the little fat men are neither fat nor little; they are Men
Like Gods. But why should they be? All mechanical progress is towards
greater and greater efficiency; ultimately, therefore, towards a world
in which _nothing goes wrong_. But in a world in which nothing went
wrong, many of the qualities which Mr Wells regards as 'godlike' would
be no more valuable than the animal faculty of moving the ears. The
beings in _Men Like Gods_ and _The Dream_ are represented, for example,
as brave, generous, and physically strong. But in a world from which
physical danger had been banished--and obviously mechanical progress
tends to eliminate danger--would physical courage be likely to survive?
_Could_ it survive? And why should physical strength survive in a world
where there was never the need for physical labour? As for such
qualities as loyalty, generosity, etc., in a world where nothing went
wrong, they would be not only irrelevant but probably unimaginable. The
truth is that many of the qualities we admire in human beings can only
function in opposition to some kind of disaster, pain, or difficulty;
but the tendency of mechanical progress is to eliminate disaster, pain,
and difficulty. In books like _The Dream_ and _Men Like Gods_ it is
assumed that such qualities as strength, courage, generosity, etc., will
be kept alive because they are comely qualities and necessary attributes
of a full human being. Presumably, for instance, the inhabitants of
Utopia would create artificial dangers in order to exercise their
courage, and do dumb-bell exercises to harden muscles which they would
never be obliged to use. And here you observe the huge contradiction
which is usually present in the idea of progress. The tendency of
mechanical progress is to make your environment safe and soft; and yet
you are striving to keep yourself brave and hard. You are at the same
moment furiously pressing forward and desperately holding back. It is as
though a London stockbroker should go to his office in a suit of chain
mail and insist on talking medieval Latin. So in the last analysis the
champion of progress is also the champion of anachronisms.

Meanwhile I am assuming that the tendency of mechanical progress _is_ to
make life safe and soft. This may be disputed, because at any given
moment the effect of some recent mechanical invention may appear to be
the opposite. Take for instance the transition from horses to motor
vehicles. At a first glance one might say, considering the enormous toll
of road deaths, that the motor-car does not exactly tend to make life
safer. Moreover it probably needs as much toughness to be a first-rate
dirt-track rider as to be a broncho-buster or to ride in the Grand
National. Nevertheless the _tendency_ of all machinery is to become
safer and easier to handle. The danger of accidents would disappear if
we chose to tackle our road-planning problem seriously, as we shall do
sooner or later; and meanwhile the motor-car has evolved to a point at
which anyone who is not blind or paralytic can drive it after a few
lessons. Even now it needs far less nerve and skill to drive a car
ordinarily well than to ride a horse ordinarily well; in twenty years'
time it may need no nerve or skill at all. Therefore, one must say that,
taking society as a whole, the result of the transition from horses to
cars has been an increase in human softness. Presently somebody comes
along with another invention, the aeroplane for instance, which does not
at first sight appear to make life safer. The first men who went up in
aeroplanes were superlatively brave, and even today it must need an
exceptionally good nerve to be a pilot. But the same tendency as before
is at work. The aeroplane, like the motor-car, will be made foolproof; a
million engineers are working, almost unconsciously, in that direction.
Finally--this is the objective, though it may never quite be
reached--you will get an aeroplane whose pilot needs no more skill or
courage than a baby needs in its perambulator. And all mechanical
progress is and must be in this direction. A machine evolves by becoming
more efficient, that is, more foolproof; hence the objective of
mechanical progress is a foolproof world--which may or may not mean a
world inhabited by fools. Mr Wells would probably retort that the world
can never become fool-proof, because, however high a standard of
efficiency you have reached, there is always some greater difficulty
ahead. For example (this is Mr Wells's favourite idea--he has used it in
goodness knows how many perorations), when you have got this planet of
ours perfectly into trim, you start upon the enormous task of reaching
and colonizing another. But this is merely to push the objective further
into the future; the objective itself remains the same. Colonize another
planet, and the game of mechanical progress begins anew; for the
foolproof world you have substituted the foolproof solar system--the
foolproof universe. In tying yourself to the ideal of mechanical
efficiency, you tie yourself to the ideal of softness. But softness is
repulsive; and thus all progress is seen to be a frantic struggle
towards an objective which you hope and pray will never be reached. Now
and again, but not often, you meet somebody who grasps that what is
usually called progress also entails what is usually called degeneracy,
and who is nevertheless in favour of progress. Hence the fact that in Mr
Shaw's Utopia a statue was erected to Falstaff, as the first man who
ever made a speech in favour of cowardice.

But the trouble goes immensely deeper than this. Hitherto I have only
pointed out the absurdity of aiming at mechanical progress and also at
the preservation of qualities which mechanical progress makes
unnecessary. The question one has got to consider is whether there is
_any_ human activity which would not be maimed by the dominance of the
machine.

The function of the machine is to save work. In a fully mechanized world
all the dull drudgery will be done by machinery, leaving us free for
more interesting pursuits. So expressed, this sounds splendid. It makes
one sick to see half a dozen men sweating their guts out to dig a trench
for a water-pipe, when some easily devised machine would scoop the earth
out in a couple of minutes. Why not let the machine do the work and the
men go and do something else. But presently the question arises, what
else are they to do? Supposedly they are set free from 'work' in order
that they may do something which is not 'work'. But what is work and
what is not work? Is it work to dig, to carpenter, to plant trees, to
fell trees, to ride, to fish, to hunt, to feed chickens, to play the
piano, to take photographs, to build a house, to cook, to sew, to trim
hats, to mend motor bicycles? All of these things are work to somebody,
and all of them are play to somebody. There are in fact very few
activities which cannot be classed either as work or play according as
you choose to regard them. The labourer set free from digging may want
to spend his leisure, or part of it, in playing the piano, while the
professional pianist may be only too glad to get out and dig at the
potato patch. Hence the antithesis between work, as something
intolerably tedious, and not-work, as something desirable, is false. The
truth is that when a human being is riot eating, drinking, sleeping,
making love, talking, playing games, or merely lounging about--and these
things will not fill up a lifetime--he needs work and usually looks for
it, though he may not call it work. Above the level of a third- or
fourth-grade moron, life has got to be lived largely in terms of effort.
For man is not, as the vulgarer hedonists seem to suppose, a kind of
walking stomach; he has also got a hand, an eye, and a brain. Cease to
use your hands, and you have lopped off a huge chunk of your
consciousness. And now consider again those half-dozen men who were
digging the trench for the water-pipe. A machine has set them free from
digging, and they are going to amuse themselves with something
else--carpentering, for instance. But whatever they want to do, they
will find that another machine has set them free from _that_. For in a
fully mechanized world there would be no more need to carpenter, to
cook, to mend motor bicycles, etc., than there would be to dig. There is
scarcely anything, from catching a whale to carving a cherry stone, that
could not conceivably be done by machinery. The machine would even
encroach upon the activities we now class as 'art'; it is doing so
already, via the camera and the radio. Mechanize the world as fully as
it might be mechanized, and whichever way you turn there will be some
machine cutting you off from the chance of working--that is, of living.

At a first glance this might not seem to matter. Why should you not get
on with your 'creative work' and disregard the machines that would do it
for you? But it is not so simple as it sounds. Here am I, working eight
hours a day in an insurance office; in my spare time I want to do
something 'creative', so I choose to do a bit of carpentering--to make
myself a table, for instance. Notice that from the very start there is a
touch of artificiality about the whole business, for the factories can
turn me out a far better table than I can make for myself. But even when
I get to work on my table, it is not possible for me to feel towards it
as the cabinet-maker of a hundred years ago felt towards his table,
still less as Robinson Crusoe felt towards his. For before I start, most
of the work has already been done for me by machinery. The tools I use
demand the minimum of skill. I can get, for instance, planes which will
cut out any moulding; the cabinet-maker of a hundred years ago would
have had to do the work with chisel and gouge, which demanded real skill
of eye and hand. The boards I buy are ready planed and the legs are
ready turned by the lathe. I can even go to the wood-shop and buy all
the parts of the table ready-made and only needing to be fitted
together; my work being reduced to driving in a few pegs and using a
piece of sandpaper. And if this is so at present, in the mechanized
future it will be enormously more so. With the tools and materials
available _then_, there will be no possibility of mistake, hence no room
for skill. Making a table will be easier and duller than peeling a
potato. In such circumstances it is nonsense to talk of 'creative work'.
In any case the arts of the hand (which have got to be transmitted by
apprenticeship) would long since have disappeared. Some of them have
disappeared already, under the competition of the machine. Look round
any country churchyard and see whether you can find a decently-cut
tombstone later than 1820. The art, or rather the craft, of stonework
has died out so completely that it would take centuries to revive it.

But it may be said, why not retain the machine and retain 'creative
work'? Why not cultivate anachronisms as a spare-time hobby? Many people
have played with this idea; it seems to solve with such beautiful ease
the problems set by the machine. The citizen of Utopia, we are told,
coming home from his daily two hours of turning a handle in the
tomato-canning factory, will deliberately revert to a more primitive way
of life and solace his creative instincts with a bit of fretwork,
pottery-glazing, or handloom-weaving. And why is this picture an
absurdity--as it is, of course? Because of a principle that is not
always recognized, though always acted upon: that so long as the machine
is _there_, one is under an obligation to use it. No one draws water
from the well when he can turn on the tap. One sees a good illustration
of this in the matter of travel. Everyone who has travelled by primitive
methods in an undeveloped country knows that the difference between that
kind of travel and modern travel in trains, cars, etc., is the
difference between life and death. The nomad who walks or rides, with
his baggage stowed on a camel or an ox-cart, may suffer every kind of
discomfort, but at least he is living while he is travelling; whereas
for the passenger in an express train or a luxury liner his journey is
an interregnum, a kind of temporary death. And yet so long as the
railways exist, one has got to travel by train--or by car or aeroplane.
Here am I, forty miles from London. When I want to go up to London why
do I not pack my luggage on to a mule and set out on foot, making a two
days of it? Because, with the Green Line buses whizzing past me every
ten minutes, such a journey would be intolerably irksome. In order that
one may enjoy primitive methods of travel, it is necessary that no other
method should be available. No human being ever wants to do anything in
a more cumbrous way than is necessary. Hence the absurdity of that
picture of Utopians saving their souls with fretwork. In a world where
every-thing could be done by machinery, everything would be done by
machinery. Deliberately to revert to primitive methods to use archaic
took, to put silly little difficulties in your own way, would be a piece
of dilettantism, of pretty-pretty arty and craftiness. It would be like
solemnly sitting down to eat your dinner with stone implements. Revert
to handwork in a machine age, and you are back in Ye Olde Tea Shoppe or
the Tudor villa with the sham beams tacked to the wall.

The tendency of mechanical progress, then, is to frustrate the human
need for effort and creation. It makes unnecessary and even impossible
the activities of the eye and the hand. The apostle of 'progress' will
sometimes declare that this does not matter, but you can usually drive
him into a comer by pointing out the horrible lengths to which the
process can be carried. Why, for instance, use your hands at all--why
use them even for blowing your nose or sharpening a pencil? Surely you
could fix some kind of steel and rubber contraption to your shoulders
and let your arms wither into stumps of skin and bone? And so with every
organ and every faculty. There is really no reason why a human being
should do more than eat, drink, sleep, breathe, and procreate;
_everything_ else could be done for him by machinery. Therefore the
logical end of mechanical progress is to reduce the human being to
something resembling a brain in a bottle. That is the goal towards which
we are already moving, though, of course, we have no intention of
getting there; just as a man who drinks a bottle of whisky a day does
not actually intend to get cirrhosis of the liver. The implied objective
of 'progress' is--not _exactly_, perhaps, the brain in the bottle, but
at any rate some frightful subhuman depth of softness and helplessness.
And the unfortunate thing is that at present the word 'progress' and the
word 'Socialism' are linked in-separably in almost everyone's mind. The
kind of person who hates machinery also takes it for granted to hate
Socialism; the Socialist is always in favour of mechanization,
rationalization, modernization--or at least thinks that he ought to be
in favour of them. Quite recently, for instance, a prominent I.L.P.'er
confessed to me with a sort of wistful shame--as though it were
something faintly improper--that he was 'fond of horses'. Horses, you
see, belong to the vanished agricultural past, and all sentiment for the
past carries with it a vague smell of heresy. I do not believe that this
need necessarily be so, but undoubtedly it is so. And in itself it is
quite enough to explain the alienation of decent minds from Socialism.

A generation ago every intelligent person was in some sense a
revolutionary; nowadays it would be nearer the mark to say that every
intelligent person is a reactionary. In this connexion it is worth
comparing H. G. Wells's The Sleeper Awakes with Aldous Huxley's _Brave
New World_, written thirty years later. Each is a pessimistic Utopia, a
vision of a sort of prig's paradise in which all the dreams of the
'progressive' person come true. Considered merely as a piece of
imaginative construction _The Sleeper Awakes_ is, I think, much
superior, but it suffers from vast contradictions because of the fact
that Wells, as the arch-priest of 'progress', cannot write with any
conviction against 'progress'. He draws a picture of a glittering,
strangely sinister world in which the privileged classes live a life of
shallow gutless hedonism, and the workers, reduced to a state of utter
slavery and sub-human ignorance, toil like troglodytes in caverns
underground. As soon as one examines this idea--it is further developed
in a splendid short story in _Stories of Space and Time_--one sees its
inconsistency. For in the immensely mechanized world that Wells is
imagining, why should the workers have to work harder than at present?
Obviously the tendency of the machine is to eliminate work, not to
increase it. In the machine-world the workers might be enslaved,
ill-treated, and even under-fed, but they certainly would not be
condemned to ceaseless manual toil; because in that case what would be
the function of the machine? You can have machines doing all the work or
human beings doing all the work, but you can't have both. Those armies
of underground workers, with their blue uniforms and their debased,
half-human language, are only put in 'to make your flesh creep'. Wells
wants to suggest that 'progress' might take a wrong turning; but the
only evil he cares to imagine is inequality--one class grabbing all the
wealth and power and oppressing the others, apparently out of pure
spite. Give it quite a small twist, he seems to suggest, overthrow the
privileged class--change over from world-capitalism to Socialism, in
fact--and all will be well. The machine-civilization is to continue, but
its products are to be shared out equally. The thought he dare not face
is that the machine itself may be the enemy. So in his more
characteristic Utopias (_The Dream_, _Men Like Gods_, etc.), he returns
to optimism and to a vision of humanity, 'liberated' by the machine, as
a race of enlightened sunbathers whose sole topic of conversation is
their own superiority to their ancestors. _Brave New World_ belongs to a
later time and to a generation which has seen through the swindle of
'progress'. It contains its own contradictions (the most important of
them is pointed out in Mr John Strachey's _The Coming Struggle for
Power_), but it is at least a memorable assault on the more fat-bellied
type of perfectionism. Allowing for the exaggerations of caricature, it
probably expresses what a majority of thinking people feel about
machine-civilization.

The sensitive person's hostility to the machine is in one sense
unrealistic, because of the obvious fact that the machine has come to
stay. But as an attitude of mind there is a great deal to be said for
it. The machine has got to be accepted, but it is probably better to
accept it rather as one accepts a drug--that is, grudgingly and
suspiciously. Like a drug, the machine is useful, dangerous, and
habit-forming. The oftener one surrenders to it the tighter its grip
becomes. You have only to look about you at this moment to realize with
what sinister speed the machine is getting us into its power. To begin
with, there is the frightful debauchery of taste that has already been
effected by a century of mechanization. This is almost too obvious and
too generally admitted to need pointing out. But as a single instance,
take taste in its narrowest sense--the taste for decent food. In the
highly mechanized countries, thanks to tinned food, cold storage,
synthetic flavouring matters, etc., the palate is almost a dead organ.
As you can see by looking at any greengrocer's shop, what the majority
of English people mean by an apple is a lump of highly-coloured cotton
wool from America or Australia; they will devour these things,
apparently with pleasure, and let the English apples rot under the
trees. It is the shiny, standardized, machine-made look of the American
apple that appeals to them; the superior taste of the English apple is
something they simply do not notice. Or look at the factory-made,
foil-wrapped cheese and 'blended' butter in any grocer's; look at the
hideous rows of tins which usurp more and more of the space in any
food-shop, even a dairy; look at a sixpenny Swiss roll or a twopenny
ice-cream; look at the filthy chemical by-product that people will pour
down their throats under the name of beer. Wherever you look you will
see some slick machine-made article triumphing over the old-fashioned
article that still tastes of something other than sawdust. And what
applies to food applies also to furniture, houses, clothes, books,
amusements, and everything else that makes up our environment. There are
now millions of people, and they are increasing every year, to whom the
blaring of a radio is not only a more accept-able but a more _normal_
background to their thoughts than the lowing of cattle or the song of
birds. The mechanization of the world could never proceed very far while
taste, even the taste-buds of the tongue, remained uncorrupted, be-cause
in that case most of the products of the machine would be simply
unwanted. In a healthy world there would be no demand for tinned foods,
aspirins, gramophones, gaspipe chairs, machine guns, daily newspapers,
telephones, motor-cars, etc., etc.; and on the other hand there would be
a constant demand for the things the machine cannot produce. But
meanwhile the machine is here, and its corrupting effects are almost
irresistible. One inveighs against it, but one goes on using it. Even a
bare-arse savage, given the chance, will learn the vices of civilization
within a few months. Mechanization leads to the decay of taste, the
decay of taste leads to the demand for machine-made articles and hence
to more mechanization, and so a vicious circle is established.

But in addition to this there is a tendency for the mechanization of the
world to proceed as it were automatically, whether we want it or not.
This is due to the fact that in modern Western man the faculty of
mechanical invention has been fed and stimulated till it has reached
almost the status of an instinct. People invent new machines and improve
existing ones almost unconsciously, rather as a somnambulist will go on
working in his sleep. In the past, when it was taken for granted that
life on this planet is harsh or at any rate laborious, it Seemed the
natural fate to go on using the clumsy implements of your forefathers,
and only a few eccentric persons, centuries apart, proposed innovations;
hence throughout enormous ages such things as the ox-cart, the plough,
the sickle, etc., remained radically unchanged. It is on record that
screws have been in use since remote antiquity and yet that it was not
till the middle of the nineteenth century that anyone thought of making
screws with points on them, for several thousand years they remained
flat-ended and holes had to be drilled for them before they could be
inserted. In our own epoch such a thing would be unthinkable. For almost
every modern Western man has his inventive faculty to some extent
developed; the Western man invents machines as naturally as the
Polynesian islander swims. Give a Western man a job of work and he
immediately begins devising a machine that would do it for him; give him
a machine and he thinks of ways of improving it. I understand this
tendency well enough, for in an ineffectual sort of way I have that type
of mind myself. I have not either the patience or the mechanical skill
to devise any machine that would work, but I am perpetually seeing, as
it were, the ghosts of possible machines that might save me the trouble
of using my brain or muscles. A person with a more definite mechanical
turn would probably construct some of them and put them into operation.
But under our present economic system, whether he constructed them--or
rather, whether anyone else had the benefit of them--would depend upon
whether they were commercially valuable. The Socialists are right,
therefore, when they claim that the rate of mechanical progress will be
much more rapid once Socialism is established. Given a mechanical
civilization the process of invention and improvement will always
continue, but the tendency of capitalism is to slow it down, because
under capitalism any invention which does not promise fairly immediate
profits is neglected; some, indeed, which threaten to reduce profits are
suppressed almost as ruthlessly as the flexible glass mentioned by
Petronius.[For example: Some years ago someone invented a gramophone
needle that would last for decades. One of the big gramophone companies
bought up the patent rights, and that was the last that was ever beard
of it.] Establish Socialism--remove the profit principle--and the
inventor will have a free hand. The mechanization of the world, already
rapid enough, would be or at any rate could be enormously accelerated.

And this prospect is a slightly sinister one, because it is obvious even
now that the process of mechanization is out of control. It is happening
merely because humanity has got the habit. A chemist perfects a new
method of synthesizing rubber, or a mechanic devises a new pattern of
gudgeon-pin. Why? Not for any clearly understood purpose, but simply
from the impulse to invent and improve, which has now become
instinctive. Put a pacifist to work in a bomb-factory and in two months
he will be devising a new type of bomb. Hence the appearance of such
diabolical things as poison gases, which are not expected even by their
inventors to be beneficial to humanity. Our attitude towards such things
as poison gases _ought_ to be the attitude of the king of Brobdingnag
towards gunpowder; but because we live in a mechanical and scientific
age we are infected with the notion that, whatever else happens,
'progress' must continue and knowledge must never be suppressed.
Verbally, no doubt, we would agree that machinery is made for man and
not man for machinery; in practice any attempt to check the development
of the machine appears to us an attack on knowledge and therefore a kind
of blasphemy. And even if the whole of humanity suddenly revolted
against the machine and decided to escape to a simpler way of life, the
escape would still be immensely difficult. It would not do, as in
Butler's _Erewhon_, to smash every machine invented after a certain
date; we should also have to smash the habit of mind that would, almost
involuntarily, devise fresh machines as soon as the old ones were
smashed. And in all of us there is at least a tinge of that habit of
mind. In every country in the world the large army of scientists and
technicians, with the rest of us panting at their heels, are marching
along the road of 'progress' with the blind persistence of a column of
ants. Comparatively few people want it to happen, plenty of people
actively want it not to happen, and yet it is happening. The process of
mechanization has itself become a machine, a huge glittering vehicle
whirling us we are not certain where, but probably towards the padded
Wells-world and the brain in the bottle.

This, then, is the case against the machine. Whether it is a sound or
unsound case hardly matters. The point is that these or very Similar
arguments would be echoed by every person who is hostile to
machine-civilization. And unfortunately, because of that nexus of thought,
'Socialism-progress-machinery-Russia-tractor-hygiene-machinery-progress',
which exists in almost everyone's mind, it is usually the _same_ person
who is hostile to Socialism. The kind of person who hates central
heating and gaspipe chairs is also the kind of person who, when you
mention Socialism, murmurs something about' beehive state' and moves
away with a pained expression. So far as my observation goes, very few
Socialists grasp why this _is_ so, or even that it is so. Get the more
vocal type of Socialist into a comer, repeat to him the substance of
what I have said in this chapter, and see what kind of answer you get.
As a matter of fact you will get several answers; I am so familiar with
them that I know them almost by heart.

In the first place he will tell you that it is impossible to 'go back'
(or to 'put back the hand of progress'--as though the hand of progress
hadn't been pretty violently put back several times in human history!),
and will then accuse you of being a medievalist and begin to descant
upon the horrors of the Middle Ages, leprosy, the Inquisition, etc. As a
matter of fact, most attacks upon the Middle Ages and the past generally
by apologists of modernity are beside the point, because their essential
trick is to project a modern man, with his squeamishness and his high
standards of comfort, into an age when such things were unheard of. But
notice that in any case this is not an answer. For a dislike of the
mechanized future does not imply the smallest reverence for any period
of the past. D. H. Lawrence, wiser than the medievalist, chose to
idealize the Etruscans about whom we know conveniently little. But there
is no need to idealize even the Etruscans or the Pelasgians, or the
Aztecs, or the Sumerians, or any other vanished and romantic people.
When one pictures a desirable civilization, one pictures it merely as an
objective; there is no need to pretend that it has ever existed in space
and time. Press this point home, explain that you wish to aim at making
life simpler and harder instead of softer and more complex, and the
Socialist will usually assume that you want to revert to a 'state of
nature'--meaning some stinking palaeolithic cave: as though there were
nothing between a flint scraper and the steel mills of Sheffield, or
between a skin coracle and the _Queen Mary_.

Finally, however, you will get an answer which is rather more to the
point and which runs roughly as follows: 'Yes, what you are saying is
all very well in its way. No doubt it would be very noble to harden
ourselves and do without aspirins and central heating and so forth. But
the point is, you see, that nobody seriously wants it. It would mean
going back to an agricultural way of life, which means beastly hard work
and isn't at all the same thing as playing at gardening. I don't want
hard work, you don't want hard work--nobody wants it who knows what it
means. You only talk as you do because you've never done a day's work in
your life,' etc., etc.

Now this in a sense is true. It amounts to saying, 'We're soft--for
God's sake let's stay soft!' which at least is realistic. As I have
pointed out already, the machine has got us in its grip and to escape
will be immensely difficult. Nevertheless this answer is really an
evasion, because it fails to make dear what we mean when we say that we
'want' this or that. I am a degenerate modern semi-intellectual who
would die if I did not get my early morning cup of tea and my _New
Statesman_ every Friday. Clearly I do not, in a sense, 'want' to return
to a simpler, harder, probably agricultural way of life. In the same
sense I don't 'want' to cut down my drinking, to pay my debts, to take
enough exercise, to be faithful to my wife, etc., etc. But in another
and more permanent sense I do want these things, and perhaps in the same
sense I want a civilization in which 'progress' is not definable as
making the world safe for little fat men. These that I have outlined are
practically the only arguments that I have been able to get from
Socialists--thinking, book-trained Socialists--when I have tried to
explain to them just _how_ they are driving away possible adherents. Of
course there is also the old argument that Socialism is going to arrive
anyway, whether people like it or not, because of that trouble-saving
thing, 'historic necessity'. But 'historic necessity', or rather the
belief in it, has failed to survive Hitler.

Meanwhile the thinking person, by intellect usually left-wing but by
temperament often right-wing, hovers at the gate of the Socialist fold.
He is no doubt aware that he ought to be a Socialist. But he observes
first the dullness of individual Socialists, then the apparent
flabbiness of Socialist ideals, and veers away. Till quite recently it
was natural to veer towards indifferentism. Ten years ago, even five
years ago, the typical literary gent wrote books on baroque architecture
and had a soul above politics. But that attitude is becoming difficult
and even unfashionable. The times are growing harsher, the issues are
clearer, the belief that nothing, will ever change (i.e. that your
dividends will always be safe) is less prevalent. The fence on which the
literary gent sits, once as comfortable as the plush cushion of a
cathedral stall, is now pinching his bottom intolerably; more and more
he shows a disposition to drop off on one side or the other. It is
interesting to notice how many of our leading writers, who a dozen years
ago were art for art's saking for all they were worth and would have
considered it too vulgar for words even to vote at a general election,
are now taking a definite political standpoint; while most of the
younger writers, at least those of them who are not mere footlers, have
been 'political' from the start. I believe that when the pinch comes
there is a terrible danger that the main movement of the intelligentsia
will be towards Fascism. Just how soon the pinch will come it is
difficult to say; it depends, probably, upon events in Europe; but it
may be that within two years or even a year we shall have reached the
decisive moment. That will also be the moment when every person with any
brains or any decency will know in his bones that he ought to be on the
Socialist side. But he will not necessarily come there of his own
accord; there are too many ancient prejudices standing in the way. He
will have to be persuaded, and by methods that imply an understanding of
his viewpoint. Socialists cannot afford to waste any more time in
preaching to the converted. Their job now is to make Socialists as
rapidly as possible; instead of which, all too often, they are making
Fascists.

When I speak of Fascism in England, I am not necessarily thinking of
Mosley and his pimpled followers. English Fascism, when it arrives, is
likely to be of a sedate and subtle kind (presumably, at any rate at
first, it won't be _called_ Fascism), and it is doubtful whether a
Gilbert and Sullivan heavy dragoon of Mosley's stamp would ever be much
more than a joke to the majority of English people; though even Mosley
will bear watching, for experience shows (_vide_ the careers of Hitler,
Napoleon III) that to a political climber it is sometimes an advantage
not to be taken too seriously at the beginning of his career. But what I
am thinking of at this moment is the Fascist attitude of mind, which
beyond any doubt is gaining ground among people who ought to know
better. Fascism as it appears in the intellectual is a sort of
mirror-image--not actually of Socialism but of a plausible travesty of
Socialism. It boils down to a determination to do the _opposite_ of
whatever the mythical Socialist does. If you present Socialism in a bad
and misleading light--if you let people imagine that it does not mean
much more than pouring European civilization down the sink at the
command of Marxist prigs--you risk driving the intellectual into
Fascism. You frighten him into a sort of angry defensive attitude in
which he simply refuses to listen to the Socialist case. Some such
attitude is already quite clearly discernible in writers like Pound,
Wyndham Lewis, Roy Campbell, etc., in most of the Roman Catholic writers
and many of the Douglas Credit group, in certain popular novelists, and
even, if one looks below the surface, in so-superior conservative
highbrows like Eliot and his countless followers. If you want some
unmistakable illustrations of the growth of Fascist feeling in England,
have a look at some of the innumerable letters that were written to the
Press during the Abyssinian war, approving the Italian action, and also
the howl of glee that went up from both Catholic and Anglican pulpits
(see the _Daily Mail_ of 17 August 1936) over the Fascist rising in
Spain.

In order to combat Fascism it is necessary to understand it, which
involves admitting that it contains some good as well as much evil. In
practice, of course, it is merely an infamous tyranny, and its methods
of attaining and holding power are such that even its most ardent
apologists prefer to talk about something else. But the underlying
feeling of Fascism, the feeling that first draws people into the Fascist
camp, may be less contemptible. It is not _always_, as the _Saturday
Review_ would lead one to suppose, a squealing terror of the Bolshevik
bogey-man. Everyone who has given the movement so much as a glance knows
that the rank-and-file Fascist is often quite a well-meaning
person--quite genuinely anxious, for instance, to better the lot of the
unemployed. But more important than this is the fact that Fascism draws
its strength from the good as well as the bad varieties of conservatism.
To anyone with a feeling for tradition and for discipline it comes with
its appeal ready-made. Probably it is very easy, when you have had a
bellyful of the more tactless kind of Socialist propaganda, to see
Fascism as the last line defence of all that is good in European
civilization. Even the Fascist bully at his symbolic worst, with rubber
truncheon in one hand and castor oil bottle in the other, does not
necessarily feel himself a bully; more probably he feels like Roland in
the pass at Roncevaux, defending Christendom against the barbarian. We
have got to admit that if Fascism is everywhere advancing, this is
largely the fault of Socialists themselves. Partly it is due to the
mistaken Communist tactic of sabotaging democracy, i.e. sawing off the
branch you are sitting on; but still more to the fact that Socialists
have, so to speak, presented their case wrong side foremost. They have
never made it sufficiently clear that the essential aims of Socialism
are justice and liberty. With their eyes glued to economic facts, they
have proceeded on the assumption that man has no soul, and explicitly or
implicitly they have set up the goal of a materialistic Utopia. As a
result Fascism has been able to play upon every instinct that revolts
against hedonism and a cheap conception of 'progress'. It has been able
to pose as the upholder of the European tradition, and to appeal to
Christian belief, to patriotism, and to the military virtues. It is far
worse than useless to write Fascism off as 'mass sadism', or some easy
phrase of that kind. If you pretend that it is merely an aberration
which will presently pass off of its own accord, you are dreaming a
dream from which you will awake when somebody coshes you with a rubber
truncheon. The only possible course is to examine the Fascist case,
grasp that there is something to be said for it, and then make it clear
to the world that whatever good Fascism contains is also implicit in
Socialism.

At present the situation is desperate. Even if nothing worse befalls us,
there are the conditions which I described in the earlier part of this
book and which are not going to improve under our present economic
system. Still more urgent is the danger of Fascist domination in Europe.
And unless Socialist doctrine, in an effective form, can be diffused
widely and very quickly, there is no certainty that Fascism will ever be
overthrown. For Socialism is the only real enemy that Fascism has to
face. The capitalist-imperialist governments, even though they
themselves are about to be plundered, will not fight with any conviction
against Fascism as such. Our rulers, those of them who understand the
issue, would probably prefer to hand over every square inch of the
British Empire to Italy, Germany, and Japan than to see Socialism
triumphant. It was easy to laugh at Fascism when we imagined that it was
based on hysterical nationalism, because it seemed obvious that the
Fascist states, each regarding itself as the chosen people and patriotic
_contra mundum_, would clash with one another. But nothing of the kind
is happening. Fascism is now an international movement, which means not
only that the Fascist nations can combine for purposes of loot, but that
they are groping, perhaps only half consciously as yet, towards a
world-system. For the vision of the totalitarian state there is being
substituted the vision of the totalitarian world. As I pointed out
earlier, the advance of machine-technique must lead ultimately to some
form of collectivism, but that form need not necessarily be
equalitarian; that is, it need not be Socialism. _Pace_ the economists,
it is quite easy to imagine a world-society, economically
collectivist--that is, with the profit principle eliminated--but with
all political, military, and educational power in the hands of a small
caste of rulers and their bravos. That or something like it is the
objective of Fascism. And that, of course, is the slave-state, or rather
the slave-world; it would probably be a stable form of society, and the
chances are, considering the enormous wealth of the world if
scientifically exploited, that the slaves would be well-fed and
contented. It is usual to speak of the Fascist objective as the 'beehive
state', which does a grave injustice to bees. A world of rabbits ruled
by stoats would be nearer the mark. It is against this beastly
possibility that we have got to combine.

The only thing _for_ which we can combine is the underlying ideal of
Socialism; justice and liberty. But it is hardly strong enough to call
this ideal 'underlying'. It is almost completely forgotten. It has been
buried beneath layer after layer of doctrinaire priggishness, party
squabbles, and half-baked 'progressivism' until it is like a diamond
hidden under a mountain of dung. The job of the Socialist is to get it
out again. Justice and liberty! _Those_ are the words that have got to
ring like a bugle across the world. For a long time past, certainly for
the last ten years, the devil has had all the best tunes. We have
reached a stage when the very word 'Socialism' calls up, on the one
hand, a picture of aeroplanes, tractors, and huge glittering factories
of glass and concrete; on the other, a picture of vegetarians with
wilting beards, of Bolshevik commissars (half gangster, half
gramophone), of earnest ladies in sandals, shock-headed Marxists chewing
polysyllables, escaped Quakers, birth-control fanatics, and Labour Party
backstairs-crawlers. Socialism, at least in this island, does not smell
any longer of revolution and the overthrow of tyrants; it smells of
crankishness, machine-worship, and the stupid cult of Russia. Unless you
can remove that smell, and very rapidly, Fascism may win.




13

And finally, is there anything one can do about it?

In the first part of this book I illustrated, by a few brief
sidelights, the kind of mess we are in; in this second part I have been
trying to explain why, in my opinion, so many normal decent people are
repelled by the only remedy, namely by Socialism. Obviously the most urgent
need of the next few years is to capture those normal decent ones before
Fascism plays its trump card. I do not want to raise here the question of
parties and political expedients. More important than any party label
(though doubtless the mere menace of Fascism will presently bring some kind
of Popular Front into existence) is the diffusion of Socialist doctrine in
an effective form. People have got to be made ready to act as Socialists.
There are, I believe, countless people who, without being aware of it, are
in sympathy with the essential aims of Socialism, and who could be won over
almost with-out a struggle if only one could find the word that would move
them. Everyone who knows the meaning of poverty, everyone who has a genuine
hatred of tyranny and war, is on the Socialist side, potentially. My job
here, therefore, is to suggest--necessarily in very general terms--how
a  reconciliation might be effected between Socialism and its more
intelligent enemies.

First, as to the enemies themselves--I mean all those people who
grasp that capitalism is evil but who are conscious of a sort of queasy,
shuddering sensation when Socialism is mentioned. As I have pointed out,
this is traceable to two main causes. One is the personal inferiority of
many individual Socialists; the other is the fact that Socialism is too
often coupled with a fat-bellied, godless conception of 'progress' which
revolts anyone with a feeling for tradition or the rudiments of an
aesthetic sense. Let me take the second point first.

The distaste for 'progress' and machine-civilization which is so common
among sensitive people is only defensible as an attitude of mind. It is
not valid as a reason for rejecting Socialism, because it presupposes an
alternative which does not exist. When you say, 'I object to
mechanization and standardization--therefore I object to Socialism', you
are saying in effect, 'I am free to do without the machine if I choose',
which is nonsense. We are all dependent upon the machine, and if the
machines stopped working most of us would die. You may hate the
machine-civilization, probably you are right to hate it, but for the
present there can be no question of accepting or rejecting it. The
machine-civilization _is here_, and it can only be criticized from the
inside, because all of us are inside it. It is only romantic fools who
natter themselves that they have escaped, like the literary gent in his
Tudor cottage with bathroom h. and c., and the he-man who goes off to
live a 'primitive' life in the jungle with a Mannlicher rifle
and four wagon-loads of tinned food. And almost certainly the
machine-civilization will continue to triumph. There is no reason to
think that it will destroy itself or stop functioning of its own accord.
For some time past it has been fashionable to say that war is presently
going to 'wreck civilization' altogether; but, though the next
full-sized war will certainly be horrible enough to make all previous
ones seem a joke, it is immensely unlikely that it will put a stop to
mechanical progress. It is true that a very vulnerable country like
England, and perhaps the whole of western Europe, could be reduced to
chaos by a few thousand well-placed bombs, but no war is at present
thinkable which could wipe out industrialization in all countries
simultaneously. We may take it that the return to a simpler, free, less
mechanized way of life, however desirable it may be, is not going to
happen. This is not fatalism, it is merely acceptance of facts. It is
meaningless to oppose Socialism on the ground that you object to the
beehive State, for the beehive State _is here_. The choice is not, as
yet, between a human and an inhuman world. It is simply between
Socialism and Fascism, which at its very best is Socialism with the
virtues left out.

The job of the thinking person, therefore, is not to reject Socialism
but to make up his mind to humanize it. Once Socialism is in a way to
being established, those who can see through the swindle of 'progress'
will probably find themselves resisting. In fact, it is their special
function to do so. In the machine-world they have got to be a sort of
permanent opposition, which is not the same thing as being an
obstructionist or a traitor. But in this I am speaking of the future.
For the moment the only possible course for any decent person, however
much of a Tory or an anarchist by temperament, is to work for the
establishment of Socialism. Nothing else can save us from the misery of
the present or the nightmare of the future. To oppose Socialism now,
when twenty million Englishmen are underfed and Fascism has conquered
half Europe, is suicidal. It is like starting a civil war when the Goths
are crossing the frontier.

Therefore it is all the more important to get rid of that mere nervous
prejudice against Socialism which is not founded on any serious
objection. As I have pointed out already, many people who are not
repelled by Socialism are repelled by Socialists. Socialism, as now
presented, is unattractive largely because it appears, at any rate from
the outside, to be the plaything of cranks, doctrinaires, parlour
Bolsheviks, and so forth. But it is worth remembering that this is only
so because the cranks, doctrinaires, etc., have been allowed to get
there first J if the movement were invaded by better brains and more
common decency, the objectionable types would cease to dominate it. For
the present one must just set one's teeth and ignore them; they will
loom much smaller when the movement has been humanized. Besides, they
are irrelevant. We have got to fight for justice and liberty, and
Socialism does mean justice and liberty when the nonsense is stripped
off it. It is only the essentials that are worth remembering. To recoil
from Socialism because so many individual Socialists are inferior people
is as absurd as refusing to travel by train because you dislike the
ticket-collector's face.

And secondly, as to the Socialist himself--more especially the vocal,
tract-writing type of Socialist.

We are at a moment when it is desperately necessary for left-wingers of
all complexions to drop their differences and hang together. Indeed this
is already happening to a small extent. Obviously, then, the more
intransigent kind of Socialist has now got to ally himself with people
who are not in perfect agreement with him. As a rule he is rightly
unwilling to do so, because he sees the very real danger of watering the
whole Socialist movement down to some kind of pale-pink humbug even more
ineffectual than the parliamentary Labour Party. At the moment, for
instance, there is great danger that the Popular Front which Fascism
will presumably bring into existence will not be genuinely Socialist in
character, but will simply be a manoeuvre against German and Italian
(not English) Fascism. Thus the need to unite against Fascism might draw
the Socialist into alliance with his very worst enemies. But the
principle to go upon is this: that you are never in danger of allying
yourself with the wrong people provided that you keep the essentials of
your movement in the foreground. And what are the essentials of
Socialism? What is the mark of a real Socialist? I suggest that the real
Socialist is one who wishes--not merely conceives it as desirable, but
actively wishes--to see tyranny overthrown. But I fancy that the
majority of orthodox Marxists would not accept that definition, or would
only accept it very grudgingly. Sometimes, when I listen to these people
talking, and still more when I read their books, I get the impression
that, to them, the whole Socialist movement is no more than a kind of
exciting heresy-hunt--a leaping to and fro of frenzied witch-doctors to
the beat of tom-toms and the tune of 'Fee fi, fo, fum, I smell the blood
of a right-wing deviationist!' It is because of this kind of thing that
it is so much easier to feel yourself a Socialist when you are among
working-class people. The working-class Socialist, like the
working-class Catholic, is weak on doctrine and can hardly open his
mouth without uttering a heresy, but he has the heart of the matter in
him. He does grasp the central fact that Socialism means the overthrow
of tyranny, and the 'Marseillaise', if it were translated for his
benefit, would appeal to him more deeply than any learned treatise on
dialectical materialism. At this moment it is waste of time to insist
that acceptance of Socialism means acceptance of the philosophic side of
Marxism, plus adulation of Russia. The Socialist movement has not time
to be a league of dialectical materialists; it has got to be a league of
the oppressed against the oppressors. You have got to attract the man
who means business, and you have got to drive away the mealy-mouthed
Liberal who wants foreign Fascism destroyed in order that he may go on
drawing his dividends peacefully--the type of hum-bug who passes
resolutions 'against Fascism and Communism', i.e. against rats and
rat-poison. Socialism means the overthrow of tyranny, at home as well as
abroad. So long as you keep _that_ fact well to the front, you will
never be in much doubt as to who are your real supporters. As for minor
differences--and the profoundest philosophical difference is unimportant
compared with saving the twenty million Englishmen whose bones are
rotting from malnutrition--the time to argue about them is afterwards.

I do not think the Socialist need make any sacrifice of essentials, but
certainly he will have to make a great sacrifice of externals. It would
help enormously, for instance, if the smell of crankishness which still
clings to the Socialist movement could be dispelled. If only the sandals
and the pistachio-coloured shirts could be put in a pile and burnt, and
every vegetarian, teetotaller, and creeping Jesus sent home to Welwyn
Garden City to do his yoga exercises quietly! But that, I am afraid, is
not going to happen. What _is_ possible, however, is for the more
intelligent kind of Socialist to stop alienating possible supporters in
silly and quite irrelevant ways. There are so many minor priggishness
which could so easily be dropped. Take for instance the dreary attitude
of the typical Marxist towards literature. Out of the many that come
into my mind, I will give just one example. It sounds trivial, but it
isn't. In the old _Worker's Weekly_ (one of the forerunners of the
_Daily Worker_) there used to be a column of literary chat of the 'Books
on the Editor's Table' type. For several weeks miming there had been a
certain amount of talk about Shakespeare; whereupon an incensed reader
wrote to say, 'Dear Comrade, we don't want to hear about these bourgeois
writers like Shakespeare. Can't you give us something a bit more
proletarian?' etc., etc. The editor's reply was simple. 'If you will
turn to the index of Marx's _Capital_,' he wrote, 'you will find that
Shakespeare is mentioned several times.' And please notice that this was
enough to silence the objector. Once Shakespeare had received the
benediction of Marx, he became respectable. _That_ is the mentality that
drives ordinary sensible people away from the Socialist movement. You do
not need to care about Shakespeare to be repelled by that kind of thing.
Again, there is the horrible jargon that nearly all Socialists think it
necessary to employ. When the ordinary person hears phrases like
'bourgeois ideology' and 'proletarian solidarity' and 'expropriation of
the expropriators', he is not inspired by them, he is merely disgusted.
Even the single word 'Comrade' has done its dirty little bit towards
discrediting the Socialist movement. How many a waverer has halted on
the brink, gone perhaps to some public meeting and watched
self-conscious Socialists dutifully addressing one another as 'Comrade',
and then slid away, disillusioned, into the nearest four-ale bar! And
his instinct is sound; for where is the sense of sticking on to yourself
a ridiculous label which even after long practice can hardly be
mentioned without a gulp of shame? It is fatal to let the ordinary
inquirer get away with the idea that being a Socialist means wearing
sandals and burbling about dialectical materialism. You have got to make
it clear that there is room in the Socialist movement for human beings,
or the game is up.

And this raises a great difficulty. It means that the issue of class, as
distinct from mere economic status, has got to be faced more
realistically than it is being faced at present.

I devoted three chapters to discussing the class-difficulty. The
principal fact that will have emerged, I think, is that though the
English class-system has outlived its usefulness, it _has_ outlived it
and shows no signs of dying. It greatly confuses the issue to assume, as
the orthodox Marxist so often does (see for instance Mr Alee Brown's in
some ways interesting book. _The Fate of the Middle Classes_), that
social status is determined solely by income. Economically, no doubt,
there are only two classes, the rich and the poor, but socially there is
a whole hierarchy of classes, and the manners and traditions learned by
each class in childhood are not only very different but--this is the
essential point--generally persist from birth to death. 'Hence the
anomalous individuals that you find in every class of society. You find
writers like Wells and Bennett who have grown immensely rich and have
yet preserved intact their lower-middle-class Nonconformist prejudices;
you find millionaires who cannot pronounce their aitches; you find petty
shopkeepers whose income is far lower than that of the bricklayer and
who, nevertheless, consider themselves (and are considered) the
bricklayer's social superiors; you find board-school boys ruling Indian
provinces and public-school men touting vacuum cleaners. If social
stratification corresponded precisely to economic stratification, the
public-school man would assume a cockney accent the day his income
dropped below £200 a year. But does he? On the contrary, he immediately
becomes twenty times more Public School than before. He clings to the
Old School Tie as to a life-line. And even the aitchless millionaire,
though sometimes he goes to an elocutionist and learns a B.B.C. accent,
seldom succeeds in disguising himself as completely as he would like to.
It is in fact very difficult to escape, culturally, from the class into
which you have been born.

As prosperity declines, social anomalies grow commoner. You don't get
more aitchless millionaires, but you do get more and more public-school
men touting vacuum cleaners and more and more small shopkeepers driven
into the workhouse. Large sections of the middle class are being
gradually proletarianized; but the important point is that they do not,
at any rate in the first generation, adopt a proletarian outlook. Here
am I, for instance, with a bourgeois upbringing and a working-class
income. Which class do I belong to? Economically I belong to the working
class, but it is almost impossible for me to think of myself as anything
but a member of the bourgeoisie. And supposing I had to take sides, whom
should I side with, the upper class which is trying to squeeze me out of
existence, or the working class whose manners are not my manners? It is
probable that I personally, in any important issue, would side with the
working class. But what about the tens or hundreds of thousands of
others who are in approximately the same position? And what about that
far larger class, running into millions this time--the office-workers
and black-coated employees of all kinds--whose traditions are less
definitely middle class but who would certainly not thank you if you
called them proletarians? All of these people have the same interests
and the same enemies as the working class. All are being robbed and
bullied by the same system. Yet how many of them realize it? When the
pinch came nearly all of them would side with their oppressors and
against those who ought to be their allies. It is quite easy to imagine
a middle class crushed down to the worst depths of poverty and still
remaining bitterly anti-working-class in sentiment; this being, of
course, a ready-made Fascist Party.

Obviously the Socialist movement has got to capture the exploited middle
class before it is too late; above all it must capture the
office-workers, who are so numerous and, if they knew how to combine, so
powerful. Equally obviously it has so far failed to do so. The very last
person in whom you can hope to find revolutionary opinions is a clerk or
a commercial traveller. Why? Very largely, I think, because of the
'proletarian' cant with which Socialist propaganda is mixed up. In order
to symbolize the class war, there has been set up the more or less
mythical figure of a 'proletarian', a muscular but downtrodden man in
greasy overalls, in contradistinction to a 'capitalist', a fat, wicked
man in a top hat and fur coat. It is tacitly assumed that there is no
one in between; the truth being, of course, that in a country like
England about a quarter of the population is in between. If you are
going to harp on the 'dictatorship of the proletariat', it is an
elementary precaution to start by explaining who the proletariat _are_.
But because of the Socialist tendency to idealize the manual worker as
such, this has never been made sufficiently clear. How many of the
wretched shivering army of clerks and shopwalkers, who in some ways are
actually worse off than a miner or a dock-hand, think of themselves as
proletarians? A proletarian--so they have been taught to think--means a
man without a collar. So that when you try to move them by talking about
'class war', you only succeed in scaring them; they forget their incomes
and remember their accents, and fly to the defence of the class that is
exploiting them.

Socialists have a big job ahead of them here. They have got to
demonstrate, beyond possibility of doubt, just where the line of
cleavage between exploiter and exploited comes. Once again it is a
question of sticking to essentials; and the essential point here is that
all people with small, insecure incomes are in the same boat and ought
to be fighting on the same side. Probably we could do with a little less
talk about' capitalist' and 'proletarian' and a little more about the
robbers and the robbed. But at any rate we must drop that misleading
habit of pretending that the only proletarians are manual labourers. It
has got to be brought home to the clerk, the engineer, the commercial
traveller, the middle-class man who has 'come down in the world', the
village grocer, the lower-grade civil servant, and all other doubtful
cases that they are the proletariat, and that Socialism means a fair
deal for them as well as for the navvy and the factory-hand. They must
not be allowed to think that the battle is between those who pronounce
their aitches and those who don't; for if they think that, they will
join in on the side of the aitches.

I am implying that different classes must be persuaded to act together
without, for the moment, being asked to drop their class-differences.
And that sounds dangerous. It sounds rather too like the Duke of York's
summer camp and that dismal line of talk about class-cooperation and
putting our shoulders to the wheel, which is eyewash or Fascism, or
both. There can be no cooperation between classes whose real interests
are opposed. The capitalist cannot cooperate with the proletarian. The
cat cannot cooperate with the mouse; and if the cat does suggest
cooperation and the mouse is fool enough to agree, in a very little
while the mouse will be disappearing down the cat's throat. But it is
always possible to cooperate so long as it is upon a basis of common
interests. The people who have got to act together are all those who
cringe to the boss and all those who shudder when they think of the
rent. This means that the small-holder has got to ally himself with the
factory-hand, the typist with the coal-miner, the schoolmaster with the
garage mechanic. There is some hope of getting them to do so if they can
be made to understand where their interest lies. But this will not
happen if their social prejudices, which in some of them are at least as
strong as any economic consideration, arc needlessly irritated. There
is, after all, a real difference of manners and traditions between a
bank clerk and a dock labourer, and the bank clerk's feeling of
superiority is very deeply rooted. Later on he will have to get rid of
it, but this is not a good moment for asking him to do so. Therefore it
would be a very great advantage if that rather meaningless and
mechanical bourgeois-baiting, which is a part of nearly all Socialist
propaganda, could be dropped for the time being. Throughout left-wing
thought and writing--and the whole way through it, from the leading
articles in the _Daily Worker_ to the comic columns in the _News
Chronicle_--there runs an anti-genteel tradition, a persistent and often
very stupid gibing at genteel mannerisms and genteel loyalties (or, in
Communist jargon, 'bourgeois values'). It is largely hum-bug, coming as
it does from bourgeois-baiters who are bourgeois themselves, but it does
great harm, because it allows a minor issue to block a major one. It
directs attention away from the central fact that poverty is poverty,
whether the tool you work with is a pick-axe or a fountain-pen.

Once again, here am I, with my middle-class origins and my income of
about three pounds a week from all sources. For what I am worth it would
be better to get me in on the Socialist side than to turn me into a
Fascist. But if you are constantly bullying me about my 'bourgeois
ideology', if you give me to understand that in some subtle way I. am an
inferior person because I have never worked with my hands, you will only
succeed in antagonizing me. For you are telling me either that I am
inherently useless or that I ought to alter myself in some way that is
beyond my power. I cannot proletarianize my accent or certain of my
tastes and beliefs, and I would not if I could. Why should I? I don't
ask anybody else to speak my dialect; why should anybody else ask me to
speak his? It would be far better to take those miserable class-stigmata
for granted and emphasize them as little as possible. They are
comparable to a race-difference, and experience shows that one can
cooperate with foreigners, even with foreigners whom one dislikes, when
it is really necessary. Economically, I am in the same boat with the
miner, the navvy, and the farm-hand; remind me of that and I will fight
at their side. But culturally I am different from the miner, the navvy,
and the farm-hand: lay the emphasis on that and you may arm me against
them. If I were a solitary anomaly I should not matter, but what is true
of myself is true of countless others. Every bank clerk dreaming of the
sack, every shop-keeper teetering on the brink of bankruptcy, is in
essentially the same position. These are the sinking middle class, and
most of them are clinging to their gentility under the impression that
it keeps them afloat. It is not good policy to start by telling them to
throw away the life-belt. There is a quite obvious danger that in the
next few years large sections of the middle class will make a sudden and
violent swing to the Right. In doing so they may become formidable. The
weakness of the middle class hitherto has lain in the fact that they
have never learned to combine; but if you frighten them into combining
_against_ you, you may find that you have raised up a devil. We had a
brief glimpse of this possibility in the General Strike.

To sum up: There is no chance of righting the conditions I described in
the earlier chapters of this book, or of saving England from Fascism,
unless we can bring an effective Socialist party into existence. It will
have to be a party with genuinely revolutionary intentions, and it will
have to be numerically strong enough to act. We can only get it if we
offer an objective which fairly ordinary people will recognize as
desirable. Beyond all else, therefore, we need intelligent propaganda.
Less about 'class consciousness', 'expropriation of the expropriators',
'bourgeois ideology', and 'proletarian solidarity', not to mention the
sacred sisters, thesis, antithesis, and synthesis; and more about
justice, liberty, and the plight of the unemployed. And less about
mechanical progress, tractors, the Dnieper dam, and the latest
salmon-canning factory in Moscow; that kind of thing is not an integral
part of Socialist doctrine, and it drives away many people whom the
Socialist cause needs, including most of those who can hold a pen. All
that is needed is to hammer two facts home into the public
consciousness. One, that the interests of all exploited people are the
same; the other, that Socialism is compatible with common decency.

As for the terribly difficult issue of class-distinctions, the only
possible policy for the moment is to go easy and not frighten more
people than can be helped. And above all, no more of those
muscular-curate efforts at class-breaking. If you belong to the
bourgeoisie, don't be too eager to bound forward and embrace your
proletarian brothers; they may not like it, and if they show that they
don't like it you will probably find that your class-prejudices are not
so dead as you imagined. And if you belong to the proletariat, by birth
or in the sight of God, don't sneer too automatically at the Old School
Tie; it covers loyalties which can be useful to you if you know how to
handle them.

Yet I believe there is some hope that when Socialism is a living issue,
a thing that large numbers of Englishmen genuinely care about, the
class-difficulty may solve itself more rapidly than now seems thinkable.
In the next few years we shall either get that effective Socialist party
that we need, or we shall not get it. If we do not get it, then Fascism
is coming; probably a slimy Anglicized form of Fascism, with cultured
policemen instead of Nazi gorillas and the lion and the unicorn instead
of the swastika. But if we do get it there will be a struggle,
conceivably a physical one, for our plutocracy will not sit quiet under
a genuinely revolutionary government. And when the widely separate
classes who, necessarily, would form any real Socialist party have
fought side by side, they may feel differently about one another. And
then perhaps this misery of class-prejudice will fade away, and we of
the sinking middle class--the private schoolmaster, the half-starved
free-lance journalist, the colonel's spinster daughter with £75 a year,
the jobless Cambridge graduate, the ship's officer without a ship, the
clerks, the civil servants, the commercial travellers, and the
thrice-bankrupt drapers in the country towns--may sink without further
struggles into the working class where we belong, and probably when we
get there it will not be so dreadful as we feared, for, after all, we
have nothing to lose but our aitches.

THE END

Project Gutenberg Australia

Title: Homage to Catalonia (1938)
Author: George Orwell

*

Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou be like unto him.

Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit.

--Proverbs XXVI. 5-6

*

Chapter 1


In the Lenin Barracks in Barcelona, the day before I joined the militia,
I saw an Italian militiaman standing in front of the officers' table.

He was a tough-looking youth of twenty-five or six, with reddish-yellow
hair and powerful shoulders. His peaked leather cap was pulled fiercely
over one eye. He was standing in profile to me, his chin on his breast,
gazing with a puzzled frown at a map which one of the officers had open
on the table. Something in his face deeply moved me. It was the face of
a man who would commit murder and throw away his life for a friend--the
kind of face you would expect in an Anarchist, though as likely as not
he was a Communist. There were both candour and ferocity in it; also the
pathetic reverence that illiterate people have for their supposed
superiors. Obviously he could not make head or tail of the map;
obviously he regarded map-reading as a stupendous intellectual feat. I
hardly know why, but I have seldom seen anyone--any man, I mean--to whom
I have taken such an immediate liking. While they were talking round the
table some remark brought it out that I was a foreigner. The Italian
raised his head and said quickly:

'_Italiano?_'

I answered in my bad Spanish: '_No, Inglés. Y tú?_'

'_Italiano_.'

As we went out he stepped across the room and gripped my hand very hard.
Queer, the affection you can feel for a stranger! It was as though his
spirit and mine had momentarily succeeded in bridging the gulf of
language and tradition and meeting in utter intimacy. I hoped he liked
me as well as I liked him. But I also knew that to retain my first
impression of him I must not see him again; and needless to say I never
did see him again. One was always making contacts of that kind in Spain.

I mention this Italian militiaman because he has stuck vividly in my
memory. With his shabby uniform and fierce pathetic face he typifies for
me the special atmosphere of that time. He is bound up with all my
memories of that period of the war--the red flags in Barcelona, the
gaunt trains full of shabby soldiers creeping to the front, the grey
war-stricken towns farther up the line, the muddy, ice-cold trenches in
the mountains.

This was in late December 1936, less than seven months ago as I write,
and yet it is a period that has already receded into enormous distance.
Later events have obliterated it much more completely than they have
obliterated 1935, or 1905, for that matter. I had come to Spain with
some notion of writing newspaper articles, but I had joined the militia
almost immediately, because at that time and in that atmosphere it
seemed the only conceivable thing to do. The Anarchists were still in
virtual control of Catalonia and the revolution was still in full swing.
To anyone who had been there since the beginning it probably seemed even
in December or January that the revolutionary period was ending; but
when one came straight from England the aspect of Barcelona was
something startling and overwhelming. It was the first time that I had
ever been in a town where the working class was in the saddle.

Practically every building of any size had been seized by the workers
and was draped with red flags or with the red and black flag of the
Anarchists; every wall was scrawled with the hammer and sickle and with
the initials of the revolutionary parties; almost every church had been
gutted and its images burnt. Churches here and there were being
systematically demolished by gangs of workmen. Every shop and café had
an inscription saying that it had been collectivized; even the
bootblacks had been collectivized and their boxes painted red and black.
Waiters and shop-walkers looked you in the face and treated you as an
equal. Servile and even ceremonial forms of speech had temporarily
disappeared. Nobody said '_Señor_' or '_Don_' or even '_Usted_'; everyone
called everyone else '_Comrade_' and '_Thou_', and said '_Salud!_' instead
of '_Buenos días_'. Tipping was forbidden by law since the time of Primo
de Rivera; almost my first experience was receiving a lecture from a hotel
manager for trying to tip a lift-boy. There were no private motor-cars,
they had all been commandeered, and all the trams and taxis and much of
the other transport were painted red and black. The revolutionary
posters were everywhere, flaming from the walls in clean reds and blues
that made the few remaining advertisements look like daubs of mud. Down
the Ramblas, the wide central artery of the town where crowds of people
streamed constantly to and fro, the loudspeakers were bellowing
revolutionary songs all day and far into the night. And it was the
aspect of the crowds that was the queerest thing of all. In outward
appearance it was a town in which the wealthy classes had practically
ceased to exist. Except for a small number of women and foreigners there
were no 'well-dressed' people at all. Practically everyone wore rough
working-class clothes, or blue overalls, or some variant of the militia
uniform. All this was queer and moving. There was much in it that I did
not understand, in some ways I did not even like it, but I recognized it
immediately as a state of affairs worth fighting for. Also I believed
that things were as they appeared, that this was really a workers' State
and that the entire bourgeoisie had either fled, been killed, or
voluntarily come over to the workers' side; I did not realize that great
numbers of well-to-do bourgeois were simply lying low and disguising
themselves as proletarians for the time being.

Together with all this there was something of the evil atmosphere of
war. The town had a gaunt untidy look, roads and buildings were in poor
repair, the streets at night were dimly lit for fear of air-raids, the
shops were mostly shabby and half-empty. Meat was scarce and milk
practically unobtainable, there was a shortage of coal, sugar, and
petrol, and a really serious shortage of bread. Even at this period the
bread-queues were often hundreds of yards long. Yet so far as one could
judge the people were contented and hopeful. There was no unemployment,
and the price of living was still extremely low; you saw very few
conspicuously destitute people, and no beggars except the gipsies. Above
all, there was a belief in the revolution and the future, a feeling of
having suddenly emerged into an era of equality and freedom. Human
beings were trying to behave as human beings and not as cogs in the
capitalist machine. In the barbers' shops were Anarchist notices (the
barbers were mostly Anarchists) solemnly explaining that barbers were no
longer slaves. In the streets were coloured posters appealing to
prostitutes to stop being prostitutes. To anyone from the hard-boiled,
sneering civilization of the English-speaking races there was something
rather pathetic in the literalness with which these idealistic Spaniards
took the hackneyed phrases of revolution. At that time revolutionary
ballads of the naivest kind, all about proletarian brotherhood and the
wickedness of Mussolini, were being sold on the streets for a few
centimes each. I have often seen an illiterate militiaman buy one of
these ballads, laboriously spell out the words, and then, when he had
got the hang of it, begin singing it to an appropriate tune.

All this time I was at the Lenin Barracks, ostensibly in training for
the front. When I joined the militia I had been told that I should be
sent to the front the next day, but in fact I had to wait while a fresh
_centuria_ was got ready. The workers' militias, hurriedly raised by the
trade unions at the beginning of the war, had not yet been organized on
an ordinary army basis. The units of command were the 'section', of
about thirty men, the _centuria_, of about a hundred men, and the
'column', which in practice meant any large number of men. The Lenin
Barracks was a block of splendid stone buildings with a riding-school
and enormous cobbled courtyards; it had been a cavalry barracks and had
been captured during the July fighting. My _centuria_ slept in one of the
stables, under the stone mangers where the names of the cavalry chargers
were still inscribed. All the horses had been seized and sent to the
front, but the whole place still smelt of horse-piss and rotten oats. I
was at the barracks about a week. Chiefly I remember the horsy smells,
the quavering bugle-calls (all our buglers were amateurs--I first
learned the Spanish bugle-calls by listening to them outside the Fascist
lines), the tramp-tramp of hobnailed boots in the barrack yard, the long
morning parades in the wintry sunshine, the wild games of football,
fifty a side, in the gravelled riding-school. There were perhaps a
thousand men at the barracks, and a score or so of women, apart from the
militiamen's wives who did the cooking. There were still women serving
in the militias, though not very many. In the early battles they had
fought side by side with the men as a matter of course. It is a thing
that seems natural in time of revolution. Ideas were changing already,
however. The militiamen had to be kept out of the riding-school while
the women were drilling there because they laughed at the women and put
them off. A few months earlier no one would have seen anything comic in
a woman handling a gun.

The whole barracks was in the state of filth and chaos to which the
militia reduced every building they occupied and which seems to be one
of the by-products of revolution. In every corner you came upon piles of
smashed furniture, broken saddles, brass cavalry-helmets, empty
sabre-scabbards, and decaying food. There was frightful wastage of food,
especially bread. From my barrack-room alone a basketful of bread was
thrown away at every meal--a disgraceful thing when the civilian
population was short of it. We ate at long trestle-tables out of
permanently greasy tin pannikins, and drank out of a dreadful thing
called a _porrón_. A _porrón_ is a sort of glass bottle with a pointed
spout from which a thin jet of wine spurts out whenever you tip it up;
you can thus drink from a distance, without touching it with your lips,
and it can be passed from hand to hand. I went on strike and demanded a
drinking-cup as soon as I saw a _porrón_ in use. To my eye the things
were altogether too like bed-bottles, especially when they were filled
with white wine.

By degrees they were issuing the recruits with uniforms, and because
this was Spain everything was issued piecemeal, so that it was never
quite certain who had received what, and various of the things we most
needed, such as belts and cartridge-boxes, were not issued till the last
moment, when the train was actually waiting to take us to the front. I
have spoken of the militia 'uniform', which probably gives a wrong
impression. It was not exactly a uniform. Perhaps a 'multiform' would be
the proper name for it. Everyone's clothes followed the same general
plan, but they were never quite the same in any two cases. Practically
everyone in the army wore corduroy knee-breeches, but there the
uniformity ended. Some wore puttees, others corduroy gaiters, others
leather leggings or high boots. Everyone wore a zipper jacket, but some
of the jackets were of leather, others of wool and of every conceivable
colour. The kinds of cap were about as numerous as their wearers. It was
usual to adorn the front of your cap with a party badge, and in addition
nearly every man wore a red or red and black handkerchief round his
throat. A militia column at that time was an extraordinary-looking
rabble. But the clothes had to be issued as this or that factory rushed
them out, and they were not bad clothes considering the circumstances.
The shirts and socks were wretched cotton things, however, quite useless
against cold. I hate to think of what the militiamen must have gone
through in the earlier months before anything was organized. I remember
coming upon a newspaper of only about two months earlier in which one of
the P.O.U.M. leaders, after a visit to the front, said that he would try
to see to it that 'every militiaman had a blanket'. A phrase to make you
shudder if you have ever slept in a trench.

On my second day at the barracks there began what was comically called
'instruction'. At the beginning there were frightful scenes of chaos.
The recruits were mostly boys of sixteen or seventeen from the back
streets of Barcelona, full of revolutionary ardour but completely
ignorant of the meaning of war. It was impossible even to get them to
stand in line. Discipline did not exist; if a man disliked an order he
would step out of the ranks and argue fiercely with the officer. The
lieutenant who instructed us was a stout, fresh-faced, pleasant young
man who had previously been a Regular Army officer, and still looked
like one, with his smart carriage and spick-and-span uniform. Curiously
enough he was a sincere and ardent Socialist. Even more than the men
themselves he insisted upon complete social equality between all ranks.
I remember his pained surprise when an ignorant recruit addressed him as
'_Señor_'. 'What! _Señor_? Who is that calling me _Señor_? Are we not all
comrades?' I doubt whether it made his job any easier. Meanwhile the raw
recruits were getting no military training that could be of the
slightest use to them. I had been told that foreigners were not obliged
to attend 'instruction' (the Spaniards, I noticed, had a pathetic belief
that all foreigners knew more of military matters than themselves), but
naturally I turned out with the others. I was very anxious to learn how
to use a machine-gun; it was a weapon I had never had a chance to
handle. To my dismay I found that we were taught nothing about the use
of weapons. The so-called instruction was simply parade-ground drill of
the most antiquated, stupid kind; right turn, left turn, about turn,
marching at attention in column of threes and all the rest of that
useless nonsense which I had learned when I was fifteen years old. It
was an extraordinary form for the training of a guerilla army to take.
Obviously if you have only a few days in which to train a soldier, you
must teach him the things he will most need; how to take cover, how to
advance across open ground, how to mount guards and build a
parapet--above all, how to use his weapons. Yet this mob of eager
children, who were going to be thrown into the front line in a few days'
time, were not even taught how to fire a rifle or pull the pin out of a
bomb. At the time I did not grasp that this was because there were no
weapons to be had. In the P.O.U.M. militia the shortage of rifles was so
desperate that fresh troops reaching the front always had to take their
rifles from the troops they relieved in the line. In the whole of the
Lenin Barracks there were, I believe, no rifles except those used by the
sentries.

After a few days, though still a complete rabble by any ordinary
standard, we were considered fit to be seen in public, and in the
mornings we were marched out to the public gardens on the hill beyond
the Plaza de España. This was the common drill-ground of all the party
militias, besides the Carabineros and the first contingents of the newly
formed Popular Army. Up in the public gardens it was a strange and
heartening sight. Down every path and alley-way, amid the formal
flower-beds, squads and companies of men marched stiffly to and fro,
throwing out their chests and trying desperately to look like soldiers.
All of them were unarmed and none completely in uniform, though on most
of them the militia uniform was breaking out in patches here and there.
The procedure was always very much the same. For three hours we strutted
to and fro (the Spanish marching step is very short and rapid), then we
halted, broke the ranks, and flocked thirstily to a little grocer's shop
which was half-way down the hill and was doing a roaring trade in cheap
wine. Everyone was very friendly to me. As an Englishman I was something
of a curiosity, and the Carabinero officers made much of me and stood me
drinks. Meanwhile, whenever I could get our lieutenant into a corner, I
was clamouring to be instructed in the use of a machine-gun. I used to
drag my Hugo's dictionary out of my pocket and start on him in my
villainous Spanish:

'_Yo sé manejar fusil. No sé manejar ametralladora. Quiero apprender
ametralladora. Quándo vamos apprender ametralladora?_'

The answer was always a harassed smile and a promise that there should
be machine-gun instruction _mañana_. Needless to say _mañana_ never
came. Several days passed and the recruits learned to march in step and
spring to attention almost smartly, but if they knew which end of a
rifle the bullet came out of, that was all they knew. One day an armed
Carabinero strolled up to us when we were halting and allowed us to
examine his rifle. It turned out that in the whole of my section no one
except myself even knew how to load the rifle, much less how to take
aim.

All this time I was having the usual struggles with the Spanish
language. Apart from myself there was only one Englishman at the
barracks, and nobody even among the officers spoke a word of
French. Things were not made easier for me by the fact that when my
companions spoke to one another they generally spoke in Catalan. The
only way I could get along was to carry everywhere a small dictionary
which I whipped out of my pocket in moments of crisis. But I would
sooner be a foreigner in Spain than in most countries. How easy it is to
make friends in Spain! Within a day or two there was a score of
militiamen who called me by my Christian name, showed me the ropes, and
overwhelmed me with hospitality. I am not writing a book of propaganda
and I do not want to idealize the P.O.U.M. militia. The whole
militia-system had serious faults, and the men themselves were a mixed
lot, for by this time voluntary recruitment was falling off and many of
the best men were already at the front or dead. There was always among
us a certain percentage who were completely useless. Boys of fifteen
were being brought up for enlistment by their parents, quite openly for
the sake of the ten pesetas a day which was the militiaman's wage; also
for the sake of the bread which the militia received in plenty and could
smuggle home to their parents. But I defy anyone to be thrown as I was
among the Spanish working class--I ought perhaps to say the Catalan
working class, for apart from a few Aragónese and Andalusians I mixed
only with Catalans--and not be struck by their essential decency; above
all, their straightforwardness and generosity. A Spaniard's generosity,
in the ordinary sense of the word, is at times almost embarrassing. If
you ask him for a cigarette he will force the whole packet upon you. And
beyond this there is generosity in a deeper sense, a real largeness of
spirit, which I have met with again and again in the most unpromising
circumstances. Some of the journalists and other foreigners who
travelled in Spain during the war have declared that in secret the
Spaniards were bitterly jealous of foreign aid. All I can say is that I
never observed anything of the kind. I remember that a few days before I
left the barracks a group of men returned on leave from the front. They
were talking excitedly about their experiences and were full of
enthusiasm for some French troops who had been next to them at Huesca.
The French were very brave, they said; adding enthusiastically: '_Más
valientes que nosotros_'--'Braver than we are!' Of course I demurred,
whereupon they explained that the French knew more of the art of
war--were more expert with bombs, machine-guns, and so forth. Yet the
remark was significant. An Englishman would cut his hand off sooner than
say a thing like that.

Every foreigner who served in the militia spent his first few weeks in
learning to love the Spaniards and in being exasperated by certain of
their characteristics. In the front line my own exasperation sometimes
reached the pitch of fury. The Spaniards are good at many things, but
not at making war. All foreigners alike are appalled by their
inefficiency, above all their maddening unpunctuality. The one Spanish
word that no foreigner can avoid learning is _mañana_--'tomorrow'
(literally, 'the morning'). Whenever it is conceivably possible, the
business of today is put off until _mañana_. This is so notorious that
even the Spaniards themselves make jokes about it. In Spain nothing,
from a meal to a battle, ever happens at the appointed time. As a
general rule things happen too late, but just occasionally--just so that
you shan't even be able to depend on their happening late--they happen
too early. A train which is due to leave at eight will normally leave at
any time between nine and ten, but perhaps once a week, thanks to some
private whim of the engine-driver, it leaves at half past seven. Such
things can be a little trying. In theory I rather admire the Spaniards
for not sharing our Northern time-neurosis; but unfortunately I share it
myself.

After endless rumours, _mañanas_, and delays we were suddenly ordered
to the front at two hours' notice, when much of our equipment was still
unissued. There were terrible tumults in the quartermaster's store; in
the end numbers of men had to leave without their full equipment. The
barracks had promptly filled with women who seemed to have sprung up
from the ground and were helping their men-folk to roll their blankets
and pack their kit-bags. It was rather humiliating that I had to be
shown how to put on my new leather cartridge-boxes by a Spanish girl,
the wife of Williams, the other English militiaman. She was a gentle,
dark-eyed, intensely feminine creature who looked as though her
life-work was to rock a cradle, but who as a matter of fact had fought
bravely in the street-battles of July. At this time she was carrying a
baby which was born just ten months after the outbreak of war and had
perhaps been begotten behind a barricade.

The train was due to leave at eight, and it was about ten past eight
when the harassed, sweating officers managed to marshal us in the
barrack square. I remember very vividly the torchlit scene--the uproar
and excitement, the red flags flapping in the torchlight, the massed
ranks of militiamen with their knapsacks on their backs and their rolled
blankets worn bandolier-wise across the shoulder; and the shouting and
the clatter of boots and tin pannikins, and then a tremendous and
finally successful hissing for silence; and then some political
commissar standing beneath a huge rolling red banner and making us a
speech in Catalan. Finally they marched us to the station, taking the
longest route, three or four miles, so as to show us to the whole town.
In the Ramblas they halted us while a borrowed band played some
revolutionary tune or other. Once again the conquering-hero
stuff--shouting and enthusiasm, red flags and red and black flags
everywhere, friendly crowds thronging the pavement to have a look at us,
women waving from the windows. How natural it all seemed then; how
remote and improbable now! The train was packed so tight with men that
there was barely room even on the floor, let alone on the seats. At the
last moment Williams's wife came rushing down the platform and gave us a
bottle of wine and a foot of that bright red sausage which tastes of
soap and gives you diarrhoea. The train crawled out of Catalonia and on
to the plateau of Aragón at the normal wartime speed of something under
twenty kilometres an hour.



Chapter 2


Barbastro, though a long way from the front line, looked bleak and
chipped. Swarms of militiamen in shabby uniforms wandered up and down
the streets, trying to keep warm. On a ruinous wall I came upon a poster
dating from the previous year and announcing that 'six handsome bulls'
would be killed in the arena on such and such a date. How forlorn its
faded colours looked! Where were the handsome bulls and the handsome
bull-fighters now? It appeared that even in Barcelona there were hardly
any bullfights nowadays; for some reason all the best matadors were
Fascists.

They sent my company by lorry to Sietamo, then westward to Alcubierre,
which was just behind the line fronting Zaragoza. Sietamo had been
fought over three times before the Anarchists finally took it in
October, and parts of it were smashed to pieces by shell-fire and most
of the houses pockmarked by rifle-bullets. We were 1500 feet above
sea-level now. It was beastly cold, with dense mists that came swirling
up from nowhere. Between Sietamo and Alcubierre the lorry-driver lost
his way (this was one of the regular features of the war) and we were
wandering for hours in the mist. It was late at night when we reached
Alcubierre. Somebody shepherded us through morasses of mud into a
mule-stable where we dug ourselves down into the chaff and promptly fell
asleep. Chaff is not bad to sleep in when it is clean, not so good as
hay but better than straw. It was only in the morning light that I
discovered that the chaff was full of breadcrusts, torn newspapers,
bones, dead rats, and jagged milk tins.

We were near the front line now, near enough to smell the characteristic
smell of war--in my experience a smell of excrement and decaying food.
Alcubierre had never been shelled and was in a better state than most of
the villages immediately behind the line. Yet I believe that even in
peacetime you could not travel in that part of Spain without being
struck by the peculiar squalid misery of the Aragónese villages. They
are built like fortresses, a mass of mean little houses of mud and stone
huddling round the church, and even in spring you see hardly a flower
anywhere; the houses have no gardens, only back-yards where ragged fowls
skate over the beds of mule-dung. It was vile weather, with alternate
mist and rain. The narrow earth roads had been churned into a sea of
mud, in places two feet deep, through which the lorries struggled with
racing wheels and the peasants led their clumsy carts which were pulled
by strings of mules, sometimes as many as six in a string, always
pulling tandem. The constant come-and-go of troops had reduced the
village to a state of unspeakable filth. It did not possess and never
had possessed such a thing as a lavatory or a drain of any kind, and
there was not a square yard anywhere where you could tread without
watching your step. The church had long been used as a latrine; so had
all the fields for a quarter of a mile round. I never think of my first
two months at war without thinking of wintry stubble fields whose edges
are crusted with dung.

Two days passed and no rifles were issued to us. When you had been to
the Comite de Guerra and inspected the row of holes in the wall-holes
made by rifle-volleys, various Fascists having been executed there--you
had seen all the sights that Alcubierre contained. Up in the front line
things were obviously quiet; very few wounded were coming in. The chief
excitement was the arrival of Fascist deserters, who were brought under
guard from the front line. Many of the troops opposite us on this part
of the line were not Fascists at all, merely wretched conscripts who had
been doing their military service at the time when war broke out and
were only too anxious to escape. Occasionally small batches of them took
the risk of slipping across to our lines. No doubt more would have done
so if their relatives had not been in Fascist territory. These deserters
were the first 'real' Fascists I had ever seen. It struck me that they
were indistinguishable from ourselves, except that they wore khaki
overalls. They were always ravenously hungry when they arrived--natural
enough after a day or two of dodging about in no man's land, but it was
always triumphantly pointed to as a proof that the Fascist troops were
starving. I watched one of them being fed in a peasant's house. It was
somehow rather a pitiful sight. A tall boy of twenty, deeply windburnt,
with his clothes in rags, crouched over the fire shovelling a
pannikinful of stew into himself at desperate speed; and all the while
his eyes flitted nervously round the ring of militiamen who stood
watching him. I think he still half-believed that we were bloodthirsty
'Reds' and were going to shoot him as soon as he had finished his meal;
the armed man who guarded him kept stroking his shoulder and making
reassuring noises. On one memorable day fifteen deserters arrived in a
single batch. They were led through the village in triumph with a man
riding in front of them on a white horse. I managed to take a rather
blurry photograph which was stolen from me later.

On our third morning in Alcubierre the rifles arrived. A sergeant with a
coarse dark-yellow face was handing them out in the mule-stable. I got a
shock of dismay when I saw the thing they gave me. It was a German
Mauser dated 1896--more than forty years old! It was rusty, the bolt was
stiff, the wooden barrel-guard was split; one glance down the muzzle
showed that it was corroded and past praying for. Most of the rifles
were equally bad, some of them even worse, and no attempt was made to
give the best weapons to the men who knew how to use them. The best
rifle of the lot, only ten years old, was given to a half-witted little
beast of fifteen, known to everyone as the _maricón_ (Nancy-boy). The
sergeant gave us five minutes' 'instruction', which consisted in
explaining how you loaded a rifle and how you took the bolt to pieces.
Many of the militiamen had never had a gun in their hands before, and
very few, I imagine, knew what the sights were for. Cartridges were
handed out, fifty to a man, and then the ranks were formed and we
strapped our kits on our backs and set out for the front line, about
three miles away.

The _centuria_, eighty men and several dogs, wound raggedly up the road.
Every militia column had at least one dog attached to it as a mascot.
One wretched brute that marched with us had had P.O.U.M. branded on it
in huge letters and slunk along as though conscious that there was
something wrong with its appearance. At the head of the column, beside
the red flag, Georges Kopp, the stout Belgian _commandante_, was riding a
black horse; a little way ahead a youth from the brigand-like militia
cavalry pranced to and fro, galloping up every piece of rising ground
and posing himself in picturesque attitudes at the summit. The splendid
horses of the Spanish cavalry had been captured in large numbers during
the revolution and handed over to the militia, who, of course, were busy
riding them to death.

The road wound between yellow infertile fields, untouched since last
year's harvest. Ahead of us was the low sierra that lies between
Alcubierre and Zaragoza. We were getting near the front line now, near
the bombs, the machine-guns, and the mud. In secret I was frightened. I
knew the line was quiet at present, but unlike most of the men about me
I was old enough to remember the Great War, though not old enough to
have fought in it. War, to me, meant roaring projectiles and skipping
shards of steel; above all it meant mud, lice, hunger, and cold. It is
curious, but I dreaded the cold much more than I dreaded the enemy. The
thought of it had been haunting me all the time I was in Barcelona; I
had even lain awake at nights thinking of the cold in the trenches, the
stand-to's in the grisly dawns, the long hours on sentry-go with a
frosted rifle, the icy mud that would slop over my boot-tops. I admit,
too, that I felt a kind of horror as I looked at the people I was
marching among. You cannot possibly conceive what a rabble we looked. We
straggled along with far less cohesion than a flock of sheep; before we
had gone two miles the rear of the column was out of sight. And quite
half of the so-called men were children--but I mean literally children,
of sixteen years old at the very most. Yet they were all happy and
excited at the prospect of getting to the front at last. As we neared
the line the boys round the red flag in front began to utter shouts of
'_Visca P.O.U.M.!_' '_Fascistas--maricones_!' and so forth--shouts which
were meant to be war-like and menacing, but which, from those childish
throats, sounded as pathetic as the cries of kittens. It seemed dreadful
that the defenders of the Republic should be this mob of ragged children
carrying worn-out rifles which they did not know how to use. I remember
wondering what would happen if a Fascist aeroplane passed our way
whether the airman would even bother to dive down and give us a burst
from his machine-gun. Surely even from the air he could see that we were
not real soldiers?

As the road struck into the sierra we branched off to the right and
climbed a narrow mule-track that wound round the mountain-side. The
hills in that part of Spain are of a queer formation, horseshoe-shaped
with flattish tops and very steep sides running down into immense
ravines. On the higher slopes nothing grows except stunted shrubs and
heath, with the white bones of the limestone sticking out everywhere. The
front line here was not a continuous line of trenches, which would have
been impossible in such mountainous country; it was simply a chain of
fortified posts, always known as 'positions', perched on each hill-top.
In the distance you could see our 'position' at the crown of the
horseshoe; a ragged barricade of sand-bags, a red flag fluttering, the
smoke of dug-out fires. A little nearer, and you could smell a sickening
sweetish stink that lived in my nostrils for weeks afterwards. Into the
cleft immediately behind the position all the refuse of months had been
tipped--a deep festering bed of breadcrusts, excrement, and rusty tins.

The company we were relieving were getting their kits together. They had
been three months in the line; their uniforms were caked with mud, their
boots falling to pieces, their faces mostly bearded. The captain
commanding the position, Levinski by name, but known to everyone as
Benjamin, and by birth a Polish Jew, but speaking French as his native
language, crawled out of his dug-out and greeted us. He was a short
youth of about twenty-five, with stiff black hair and a pale eager face
which at this period of the war was always very dirty. A few stray
bullets were cracking high overhead. The position was a semi-circular
enclosure about fifty yards across, with a parapet that was partly
sand-bags and partly lumps of limestone. There were thirty or forty
dug-outs running into the ground like rat-holes. Williams, myself, and
Williams's Spanish brother-in-law made a swift dive for the nearest
unoccupied dug-out that looked habitable. Somewhere in front an
occasional rifle banged, making queer rolling echoes among the stony
hills. We had just dumped our kits and were crawling out of the dug-out
when there was another bang and one of the children of our company
rushed back from the parapet with his face pouring blood. He had fired
his rifle and had somehow managed to blow out the bolt; his scalp was
torn to ribbons by the splinters of the burst cartridge-case. It was our
first casualty, and, characteristically, self-inflicted.

In the afternoon we did our first guard and Benjamin showed us round the
position. In front of the parapet there ran a system of narrow trenches
hewn out of the rock, with extremely primitive loopholes made of piles
of limestone. There were twelve sentries, placed at various points in
the trench and behind the inner parapet. In front of the trench was the
barbed wire, and then the hillside slid down into a seemingly bottomless
ravine; opposite were naked hills, in places mere cliffs of rock, all
grey and wintry, with no life anywhere, not even a bird. I peered
cautiously through a loophole, trying to find the Fascist trench.

'Where are the enemy?'

Benjamin waved his hand expansively. 'Over zere.' (Benjamin spoke
English--terrible English.)

'But _where?_'

According to my ideas of trench warfare the Fascists would be fifty or a
hundred yards away. I could see nothing--seemingly their trenches were
very well concealed. Then with a shock of dismay I saw where Benjamin
was pointing; on the opposite hill-top, beyond the ravine, seven hundred
metres away at the very least, the tiny outline of a parapet and a
red-and-yellow flag--the Fascist position. I was indescribably
disappointed. We were nowhere near them! At that range our rifles were
completely useless. But at this moment there was a shout of excitement.
Two Fascists, greyish figurines in the distance, were scrambling up the
naked hill-side opposite. Benjamin grabbed the nearest man's rifle, took
aim, and pulled the trigger. Click! A dud cartridge; I thought it a bad
omen.

The new sentries were no sooner in the trench than they began firing a
terrific fusillade at nothing in particular. I could see the Fascists,
tiny as ants, dodging to and fro behind their parapet, and sometimes a
black dot which was a head would pause for a moment, impudently exposed.
It was obviously no use firing. But presently the sentry on my left,
leaving his post in the typical Spanish fashion, sidled up to me and
began urging me to fire. I tried to explain that at that range and with
these rifles you could not hit a man except by accident. But he was only
a child, and he kept motioning with his rifle towards one of the dots,
grinning as eagerly as a dog that expects a pebble to be thrown. Finally
I put my sights up to seven hundred and let fly. The dot disappeared.
I hope it went near enough to make him jump. It was the first time in
my life that I had fired a gun at a human being.

Now that I had seen the front I was profoundly disgusted. They called
this war! And we were hardly even in touch with the enemy! I made no
attempt to keep my head below the level of the trench. A little while
later, however, a bullet shot past my ear with a vicious crack and
banged into the parados behind. Alas! I ducked. All my life I had sworn
that I would not duck the first time a bullet passed over me; but the
movement appears to be instinctive, and almost everybody does it at
least once.



Chapter 3


In trench warfare five things are important: firewood, food, tobacco,
candles, and the enemy. In winter on the Zaragoza front they were
important in that order, with the enemy a bad last. Except at night,
when a surprise-attack was always conceivable, nobody bothered about the
enemy. They were simply remote black insects whom one occasionally saw
hopping to and fro. The real preoccupation of both armies was trying to
keep warm.

I ought to say in passing that all the time I was in Spain I saw very
little fighting. I was on the Aragón front from January to May, and
between January and late March little or nothing happened on that front,
except at Teruel. In March there was heavy fighting round Huesca, but I
personally played only a minor part in it. Later, in June, there was the
disastrous attack on Huesca in which several thousand men were killed in
a single day, but I had been wounded and disabled before that happened.
The things that one normally thinks of as the horrors of war seldom
happened to me. No aeroplane ever dropped a bomb anywhere near me, I do
not think a shell ever exploded within fifty yards of me, and I was only
in hand-to-hand fighting once (once is once too often, I may say). Of
course I was often under heavy machine-gun fire, but usually at longish
ranges. Even at Huesca you were generally safe enough if you took
reasonable precautions.

Up here, in the hills round Zaragoza, it was simply the mingled boredom
and discomfort of stationary warfare. A life as uneventful as a city
clerk's, and almost as regular. Sentry-go, patrols, digging; digging,
patrols, sentry-go. On every hill-top, Fascist or Loyalist, a knot of
ragged, dirty men shivering round their flag and trying to keep warm.
And all day and night the meaningless bullets wandering across the empty
valleys and only by some rare improbable chance getting home on a human
body.

Often I used to gaze round the wintry landscape and marvel at the
futility of it all. The inconclusiveness of such a kind of war! Earlier,
about October, there had been savage fighting for all these hills; then,
because the lack of men and arms, especially artillery, made any
large-scale operation impossible, each army had dug itself in and
settled down on the hill-tops it had won. Over to our right there was a
small outpost, also P.O.U.M., and on the spur to our left, at seven
o'clock of us, a P.S.U.C. position faced a taller spur with several
small Fascist posts dotted on its peaks. The so-called line zigzagged to
and fro in a pattern that would have been quite unintelligible if every
position had not flown a flag. The P.O.U.M. and P.S.U.C. flags were red,
those of the Anarchists red and black; the Fascists generally flew the
monarchist flag (red-yellow-red), but occasionally they flew the flag
of the Republic (red-yellow-purple).* The scenery was stupendous,
if you could forget that every mountain-top was occupied by troops and
was therefore littered with tin cans and crusted with dung. To the right
of us the sierra bent south-eastwards and made way for the wide, veined
valley that stretched across to Huesca. In the middle of the plain a few
tiny cubes sprawled like a throw of dice; this was the town of Robres,
which was in Loyalist possession. Often in the mornings the valley was
hidden under seas of cloud, out of which the hills rose flat and blue,
giving the landscape a strange resemblance to a photographic negative.
Beyond Huesca there were more hills of the same formation as our own,
streaked with a pattern of snow which altered day by day. In the far
distance the monstrous peaks of the Pyrenees, where the snow never
melts, seemed to float upon nothing. Even down in the plain everything
looked dead and bare. The hills opposite us were grey and wrinkled like
the skins of elephants. Almost always the sky was empty of birds. I do
not think I have ever seen a country where there were so few birds. The
only birds one saw at any time were a kind of magpie, and the coveys of
partridges that startled one at night with their sudden whirring, and,
very rarely, the flights of eagles that drifted slowly over, generally
followed by rifle-shots which they did not deign to notice.

[* Footnote: An errata note found in Orwell's papers after his death:
"Am not now completely certain that I ever saw Fascists flying the
republican flag, though I _think_ they sometimes flew it with a small
imposed swastika."]

At night and in misty weather, patrols were sent out in the valley
between ourselves and the Fascists. The job was not popular, it was too
cold and too easy to get lost, and I soon found that I could get leave
to go out on patrol as often as I wished. In the huge jagged ravines
there were no paths or tracks of any kind; you could only find your way
about by making successive journeys and noting fresh landmarks each
time. As the bullet flies the nearest Fascist post was seven hundred
metres from our own, but it was a mile and a half by the only
practicable route. It was rather fun wandering about the dark valleys
with the stray bullets flying high overhead like redshanks whistling.
Better than night-time were the heavy mists, which often lasted all day
and which had a habit of clinging round the hill-tops and leaving the
valleys clear. When you were anywhere near the Fascist lines you had to
creep at a snail's pace; it was very difficult to move quietly on those
hill-sides, among the crackling shrubs and tinkling limestones. It was
only at the third or fourth attempt that I managed to find my way to the
Fascist lines. The mist was very thick, and I crept up to the barbed
wire to listen. I could hear the Fascists talking and singing inside.
Then to my alarm I heard several of them coming down the hill towards
me. I cowered behind a bush that suddenly seemed very small, and tried
to cock my rifle without noise. However, they branched off and did not
come within sight of me. Behind the bush where I was hiding I came upon
various relics of the earlier fighting--a pile of empty cartridge-cases,
a leather cap with a bullet-hole in it, and a red flag, obviously one of
our own. I took it back to the position, where it was unsentimentally
torn up for cleaning-rags.

I had been made a corporal, or _cabo_, as it was called, as soon as we
reached the front, and was in command of a guard of twelve men. It was
no sinecure, especially at first. The _centuria_ was an untrained mob
composed mostly of boys in their teens. Here and there in the militia
you came across children as young as eleven or twelve, usually refugees
from Fascist territory who had been enlisted as militiamen as the
easiest way of providing for them. As a rule they were employed on light
work in the rear, but sometimes they managed to worm their way to the
front line, where they were a public menace. I remember one little brute
throwing a hand-grenade into the dug-out fire 'for a joke'. At Monte
Pocero I do not think there was anyone younger than fifteen, but the
average age must have been well under twenty. Boys of this age ought
never to be used in the front line, because they cannot stand the lack
of sleep which is inseparable from trench warfare. At the beginning it
was almost impossible to keep our position properly guarded at night.
The wretched children of my section could only be roused by dragging
them out of their dug-outs feet foremost, and as soon as your back was
turned they left their posts and slipped into shelter; or they would
even, in spite of the frightful cold, lean up against the wall of the
trench and fall fast asleep. Luckily the enemy were very unenterprising.
There were nights when it seemed to me that our position could be
stormed by twenty Boy Scouts armed with airguns, or twenty Girl Guides
armed with battledores, for that matter.

At this time and until much later the Catalan militias were still on the
same basis as they had been at the beginning of the war. In the early
days of Franco's revolt the militias had been hurriedly raised by the
various trade unions and political parties; each was essentially a
political organization, owing allegiance to its party as much as to the
central Government. When the Popular Army, which was a 'non-political'
army organized on more or less ordinary lines, was raised at the
beginning of 1937, the party militias were theoretically incorporated in
it. But for a long time the only changes that occurred were on paper;
the new Popular Army troops did not reach the Aragón front in any
numbers till June, and until that time the militia-system remained
unchanged. The essential point of the system was social equality between
officers and men. Everyone from general to private drew the same pay,
ate the same food, wore the same clothes, and mingled on terms of
complete equality. If you wanted to slap the general commanding the
division on the back and ask him for a cigarette, you could do so, and
no one thought it curious. In theory at any rate each militia was a
democracy and not a hierarchy. It was understood that orders had to be
obeyed, but it was also understood that when you gave an order you gave
it as comrade to comrade and not as superior to inferior. There were
officers and N.C.O.s but there was no military rank in the ordinary
sense; no titles, no badges, no heel-clicking and saluting. They had
attempted to produce within the militias a sort of temporary working
model of the classless society. Of course there was no perfect equality,
but there was a nearer approach to it than I had ever seen or than I
would have thought conceivable in time of war.

But I admit that at first sight the state of affairs at the front
horrified me. How on earth could the war be won by an army of this type?
It was what everyone was saying at the time, and though it was true it
was also unreasonable. For in the circumstances the militias could not
have been much better than they were. A modern mechanized army does not
spring up out of the ground, and if the Government had waited until it
had trained troops at its disposal, Franco would never have been
resisted. Later it became the fashion to decry the militias, and
therefore to pretend that the faults which were due to lack of training
and weapons were the result of the equalitarian system. Actually, a newly
raised draft of militia was an undisciplined mob not because the
officers called the private 'Comrade' but because raw troops are
_always_ an undisciplined mob. In practice the democratic
'revolutionary' type of discipline is more reliable than might be
expected. In a workers' army discipline is theoretically voluntary. It
is based on class-loyalty, whereas the discipline of a bourgeois
conscript army is based ultimately on fear. (The Popular Army that
replaced the militias was midway between the two types.) In the militias
the bullying and abuse that go on in an ordinary army would never have
been tolerated for a moment. The normal military punishments existed,
but they were only invoked for very serious offences. When a man refused
to obey an order you did not immediately get him punished; you first
appealed to him in the name of comradeship. Cynical people with no
experience of handling men will say instantly that this would never
'work', but as a matter of fact it does 'work' in the long run. The
discipline of even the worst drafts of militia visibly improved as time
went on. In January the job of keeping a dozen raw recruits up to the
mark almost turned my hair grey. In May for a short while I was
acting-lieutenant in command of about thirty men, English and Spanish.
We had all been under fire for months, and I never had the slightest
difficulty in getting an order obeyed or in getting men to volunteer for
a dangerous job. 'Revolutionary' discipline depends on political
consciousness--on an understanding of _why_ orders must be obeyed; it
takes time to diffuse this, but it also takes time to drill a man into
an automaton on the barrack-square. The journalists who sneered at the
militia-system seldom remembered that the militias had to hold the line
while the Popular Army was training in the rear. And it is a tribute to
the strength of 'revolutionary' discipline that the militias stayed in
the field at all. For until about June 1937 there was nothing to keep
them there, except class loyalty. Individual deserters could be
shot--were shot, occasionally--but if a thousand men had decided to walk
out of the line together there was no force to stop them. A conscript
army in the same circumstances--with its battle-police removed--would
have melted away. Yet the militias held the line, though God knows they
won very few victories, and even individual desertions were not common.
In four or five months in the P.O.U.M. militia I only heard of four men
deserting, and two of those were fairly certainly spies who had enlisted
to obtain information. At the beginning the apparent chaos, the general
lack of training, the fact that you often had to argue for five minutes
before you could get an order obeyed, appalled and infuriated me. I had
British Army ideas, and certainly the Spanish militias were very unlike
the British Army. But considering the circumstances they were better
troops than one had any right to expect.

Meanwhile, firewood--always firewood. Throughout that period there is
probably no entry in my diary that does not mention firewood, or rather
the lack of it. We were between two and three thousand feet above
sea-level, it was mid winter and the cold was unspeakable. The
temperature was not exceptionally low, on many nights it did not even
freeze, and the wintry sun often shone for an hour in the middle of the
day; but even if it was not really cold, I assure you that it seemed so.
Sometimes there were shrieking winds that tore your cap off and twisted
your hair in all directions, sometimes there were mists that poured into
the trench like a liquid and seemed to penetrate your bones; frequently
it rained, and even a quarter of an hour's rain was enough to make
conditions intolerable. The thin skin of earth over the limestone turned
promptly into a slippery grease, and as you were always walking on a
slope it was impossible to keep your footing. On dark nights I have
often fallen half a dozen times in twenty yards; and this was dangerous,
because it meant that the lock of one's rifle became jammed with mud.
For days together clothes, boots, blankets, and rifles were more or less
coated with mud. I had brought as many thick clothes as I could carry,
but many of the men were terribly underclad. For the whole garrison,
about a hundred men, there were only twelve great-coats, which had to be
handed from sentry to sentry, and most of the men had only one blanket.
One icy night I made a list in my diary of the clothes I was wearing. It
is of some interest as showing the amount of clothes the human body can
carry. I was wearing a thick vest and pants, a flannel shirt, two
pull-overs, a woollen jacket, a pigskin jacket, corduroy breeches,
puttees, thick socks, boots, a stout trench-coat, a muffler, lined
leather gloves, and a woollen cap. Nevertheless I was shivering like a
jelly. But I admit I am unusually sensitive to cold.

Firewood was the one thing that really mattered. The point about the
firewood was that there was practically no firewood to be had. Our
miserable mountain had not even at its best much vegetation, and for
months it had been ranged over by freezing militiamen, with the result
that everything thicker than one's finger had long since been burnt.
When we were not eating, sleeping, on guard, or on fatigue-duty we were
in the valley behind the position, scrounging for fuel. All my memories
of that time are memories of scrambling up and down the almost
perpendicular slopes, over the jagged limestone that knocked one's boots
to pieces, pouncing eagerly on tiny twigs of wood. Three people
searching for a couple of hours could collect enough fuel to keep the
dug-out fire alight for about an hour. The eagerness of our search for
firewood turned us all into botanists. We classified according to their
burning qualities every plant that grew on the mountainside; the various
heaths and grasses that were good to start a fire with but burnt out in
a few minutes, the wild rosemary and the tiny whin bushes that would
burn when the fire was well alight, the stunted oak tree, smaller than a
gooseberry bush, that was practically unburnable. There was a kind of
dried-up reed that was very good for starting fires with, but these grew
only on the hill-top to the left of the position, and you had to go
under fire to get them. If the Fascist machine-gunners saw you they gave
you a drum of ammunition all to yourself. Generally their aim was high
and the bullets sang overhead like birds, but sometime they crackled and
chipped the limestone uncomfortably close, whereupon you flung yourself
on your face. You went on gathering reeds, however; nothing mattered in
comparison with firewood.

Beside the cold the other discomforts seemed petty. Of course all of us
were permanently dirty. Our water, like our food, came on mule-back from
Alcubierre, and each man's share worked out at about a quart a day. It
was beastly water, hardly more transparent than milk. Theoretically it
was for drinking only, but I always stole a pannikinful for washing in
the mornings. I used to wash one day and shave the next; there was never
enough water for both. The position stank abominably, and outside the
little enclosure of the barricade there was excrement everywhere. Some
of the militiamen habitually defecated in the trench, a disgusting thing
when one had to walk round it in the darkness. But the dirt never
worried me. Dirt is a thing people make too much fuss about.
It is astonishing how quickly you get used to doing without a
handkerchief and to eating out of the tin pannikin in which you also
wash. Nor was sleeping in one's clothes any hardship after a day or two.
It was of course impossible to take one's clothes and especially one's
boots off at night; one had to be ready to turn out instantly in case of
an attack. In eighty nights I only took my clothes off three times,
though I did occasionally manage to get them off in the daytime. It was
too cold for lice as yet, but rats and mice abounded. It is often said
that you don't find rats and mice in the same place, but you do when
there is enough food for them.

In other ways we were not badly off. The food was good enough and there
was plenty of wine. Cigarettes were still being issued at the rate of a
packet a day, matches were issued every other day, and there was even an
issue of candles. They were very thin candles, like those on a Christmas
cake, and were popularly supposed to have been looted from churches.
Every dug-out was issued daily with three inches of candle, which would
bum for about twenty minutes. At that time it was still possible to buy
candles, and I had brought several pounds of them with me. Later on the
famine of matches and candles made life a misery. You do not realize the
importance of these things until you lack them. In a night-alarm, for
instance, when everyone in the dug-out is scrambling for his rifle and
treading on everybody else's face, being able to strike a light may make
the difference between life and death. Every militiaman possessed a
tinder-lighter and several yards of yellow wick. Next to his rifle it
was his most important possession. The tinder-lighters had the great
advantage that they could be struck in a wind, but they would only
smoulder, so that they were no use for lighting a fire. When the match
famine was at its worst our only way of producing a flame was to pull
the bullet out of a cartridge and touch the cordite off with a
tinder-lighter.

It was an extraordinary life that we were living--an extraordinary way
to be at war, if you could call it war. The whole militia chafed against
the inaction and clamoured constantly to know why we were not allowed to
attack. But it was perfectly obvious that there would be no battle for a
long while yet, unless the enemy started it. Georges Kopp, on his
periodical tours of inspection, was quite frank with us. 'This is not a
war,' he used to say, 'it is a comic opera with an occasional death.' As
a matter of fact the stagnation on the Aragón front had political causes
of which I knew nothing at that time; but the purely military
difficulties--quite apart from the lack of reserves of men--were obvious
to anybody.

To begin with, there was the nature of the country. The front line, ours
and the Fascists', lay in positions of immense natural strength, which
as a rule could only be approached from one side. Provided a few
trenches have been dug, such places cannot be taken by infantry, except
in overwhelming numbers. In our own position or most of those round us a
dozen men with two machine-guns could have held off a battalion. Perched
on the hill-tops as we were, we should have made lovely marks for
artillery; but there was no artillery. Sometimes I used to gaze round
the landscape and long--oh, how passionately!--for a couple of batteries
of guns. One could have destroyed the enemy positions one after another
as easily as smashing nuts with a hammer. But on our side the guns
simply did not exist. The Fascists did occasionally manage to bring a
gun or two from Zaragoza and fire a very few shells, so few that they
never even found the range and the shells plunged harmlessly into the
empty ravines. Against machine-guns and without artillery there are only
three things you can do: dig yourself in at a safe distance--four
hundred yards, say--advance across the open and be massacred, or make
small-scale night-attacks that will not alter the general situation.
Practically the alternatives are stagnation or suicide.

And beyond this there was the complete lack of war materials of every
description. It needs an effort to realize how badly the militias were
armed at this time. Any public school O.T.C. in England is far more like
a modern army than we were. The badness of our weapons was so
astonishing that it is worth recording in detail.

For this sector of the front the entire artillery consisted of four
trench-mortars with _fifteen rounds_ for each gun. Of course they were
far too precious to be fired and the mortars were kept in Alcubierre.
There were machine-guns at the rate of approximately one to fifty men;
they were oldish guns, but fairly accurate up to three or four hundred
yards. Beyond this we had only rifles, and the majority of the rifles
were scrap-iron. There were three types of rifle in use. The first was
the long Mauser. These were seldom less than twenty years old, their
sights were about as much use as a broken speedometer, and in most of
them the rifling was hopelessly corroded; about one rifle in ten was not
bad, however. Then there was the short Mauser, or mousqueton, really a
cavalry weapon. These were more popular than the others because they
were lighter to carry and less nuisance in a trench, also because they
were comparatively new and looked efficient. Actually they were almost
useless. They were made out of reassembled parts, no bolt belonged to its
rifle, and three-quarters of them could be counted on to jam after five
shots. There were also a few Winchester rifles. These were nice to shoot
with, but they were wildly inaccurate, and as their cartridges had no
clips they could only be fired one shot at a time. Ammunition was so
scarce that each man entering the line was only issued with fifty
rounds, and most of it was exceedingly bad. The Spanish-made cartridges
were all refills and would jam even the best rifles. The Mexican
cartridges were better and were therefore reserved for the machine-guns.
Best of all was the German-made ammunition, but as this came only from
prisoners and deserters there was not much of it. I always kept a clip
of German or Mexican ammunition in my pocket for use in an emergency.
But in practice when the emergency came I seldom fired my rifle; I was
too frightened of the beastly thing jamming and too anxious to reserve
at any rate one round that would go off.

We had no tin hats, no bayonets, hardly any revolvers or pistols, and
not more than one bomb between five or ten men. The bomb in use at this
time was a frightful object known as the 'F.A.I. bomb', it having been
produced by the Anarchists in the early days of the war. It was on the
principle of a Mills bomb, but the lever was held down not by a pin but
a piece of tape. You broke the tape and then got rid of the bomb with
the utmost possible speed. It was said of these bombs that they were
'impartial'; they killed the man they were thrown at and the man who
threw them. There were several other types, even more primitive but
probably a little less dangerous--to the thrower, I mean. It was not
till late March that I saw a bomb worth throwing.

And apart from weapons there was a shortage of all the minor necessities
of war. We had no maps or charts, for instance. Spain has never been
fully surveyed, and the only detailed maps of this area were the old
military ones, which were almost all in the possession of the Fascists.
We had no range-finders, no telescopes, no periscopes, no field-glasses
except for a few privately-owned pairs, no flares or Very lights, no
wire-cutters, no armourers' tools, hardly even any cleaning materials.
The Spaniards seemed never to have heard of a pull-through and looked on
in surprise when I constructed one. When you wanted your rifle cleaned
you took it to the sergeant, who possessed a long brass ramrod which was
invariably bent and therefore scratched the rifling. There was not even
any gun oil. You greased your rifle with olive oil, when you could get
hold of it; at different times I have greased mine with vaseline, with
cold cream, and even with bacon-fat. Moreover, there were no lanterns or
electric torches--at this time there was not, I believe, such a thing as
an electric torch throughout the whole of our sector of the front, and
you could not buy one nearer than Barcelona, and only with difficulty
even there.

As time went on, and the desultory rifle-fire rattled among the hills, I
began to wonder with increasing scepticism whether anything would ever
happen to bring a bit of life, or rather a bit of death, into this
cock-eyed war. It was pneumonia that we were fighting against, not
against men. When the trenches are more than five hundred yards apart no
one gets hit except by accident. Of course there were casualties, but
the majority of them were self-inflicted. If I remember rightly, the
first five men I saw wounded in Spain were all wounded by our own
weapons--I don't mean intentionally, but owing to accident or
carelessness. Our worn-out rifles were a danger in themselves. Some of
them had a nasty trick of going off if the butt was tapped on the
ground; I saw a man shoot himself through the hand owing to this. And in
the darkness the raw recruits were always firing at one another. One
evening when it was barely even dusk a sentry let fly at me from a
distance of twenty yards; but he missed me by a yard--goodness knows how
many times the Spanish standard of marksmanship has saved my life.
Another time I had gone out on patrol in the mist and had carefully
warned the guard commander beforehand. But in coming back I stumbled
against a bush, the startled sentry called out that the Fascists were
coming, and I had the pleasure of hearing the guard commander order
everyone to open rapid fire in my direction. Of course I lay down and
the bullets went harmlessly over me. Nothing will convince a Spaniard,
at least a young Spaniard, that fire-arms are dangerous. Once, rather
later than this, I was photographing some machine-gunners with their
gun, which was pointed directly towards me.

'Don't fire,' I said half-jokingly as I focused the camera.

'Oh no, we won't fire.'

The next moment there was a frightful roar and a stream of bullets tore
past my face so close that my cheek was stung by grains of cordite. It
was unintentional, but the machine-gunners considered it a great joke.
Yet only a few days earlier they had seen a mule-driver accidentally
shot by a political delegate who was playing the fool with an automatic
pistol and had put five bullets in the mule-driver's lungs.

The difficult passwords which the army was using at this time were a
minor source of danger. They were those tiresome double passwords in
which one word has to be answered by another. Usually they were of an
elevating and revolutionary nature, such as _Cultura--progreso_, or
_Seremos--invencibles_, and it was often impossible to get illiterate
sentries to remember these highfalutin' words. One night, I remember,
the password was _Cataluña--heroica_, and a moonfaced peasant lad named
Jaime Domenech approached me, greatly puzzled, and asked me to explain.

'_Heroica_--what does _hroica_ mean?'

I told him that it meant the same as _valiente_. A little while later he
was stumbling up the trench in the darkness, and the sentry challenged
him:

'_Alto! Cataluña_!'

'_Valiente!_' yelled Jaime, certain that he was saying the right thing.

Bang!

However, the sentry missed him. In this war everyone always did miss
everyone else, when it was humanly possible.



Chapter 4


When I had been about three weeks in the line a contingent of twenty or
thirty men, sent out from England by the I.L.P., arrived at Alcubierre,
and in order to keep the English on this front together Williams and I
were sent to join them. Our new position was at Monte Oscuro, several
miles farther west and within sight of Zaragoza.

The position was perched on a sort of razor-back of limestone with
dug-outs driven horizontally into the cliff like sand-martins'nests. They
went into the ground for prodigious distances, and inside they were
pitch dark and so low that you could not even kneel in them, let alone
stand. On the peaks to the left of us there were two more P.O.U.M.
positions, one of them an object of fascination to every man in the
line, because there were three militiawomen there who did the cooking.
These women were not exactly beautiful, but it was found necessary to
put the position out of bounds to men of other companies. Five hundred
yards to our right there was a P.S.U.C. post at the bend of the
Alcubierre road. It was just here that the road changed hands. At night
you could watch the lamps of our supply-lorries winding out from
Alcubierre and, simultaneously, those of the Fascists coming from
Zaragoza. You could see Zaragoza itself, a thin string of lights like
the lighted portholes of a ship, twelve miles south-westward. The
Government troops had gazed at it from that distance since August 1936,
and they are gazing at it still.

There were about thirty of ourselves, including one Spaniard (Ramon,
Williams's brother-in-law), and there were a dozen Spanish
machine-gunners. Apart from the one or two inevitable nuisances--for, as
everyone knows, war attracts riff-raff--the English were an
exceptionally good crowd, both physically and mentally. Perhaps the best
of the bunch was Bob Smillie--the grandson of the famous miners'
leader--who afterwards died such an evil and meaningless death in
Valencia. It says a lot for the Spanish character that the English and
the Spaniards always got on well together, in spite of the language
difficulty. All Spaniards, we discovered, knew two English expressions.
One was 'O.K., baby', the other was a word used by the Barcelona whores
in their dealings with English sailors, and I am afraid the compositors
would not print it.

Once again there was nothing happening all along the line: only the
random crack of bullets and, very rarely, the crash of a Fascist mortar
that sent everyone running to the top trench to see which hill the
shells were bursting on. The enemy was somewhat closer to us here,
perhaps three or four hundred yards away. Their nearest position was
exactly opposite ours, with a machine-gun nest whose loopholes
constantly tempted one to waste cartridges. The Fascists seldom bothered
with rifle-shots, but sent bursts of accurate machine-gun fire at anyone
who exposed himself. Nevertheless it was ten days or more before we had
our first casualty. The troops opposite us were Spaniards, but according
to the deserters there were a few German N.C.O.S. among them. At some
time in the past there had also been Moors there--poor devils, how they
must have felt the cold!--for out in no man's land there was a dead Moor
who was one of the sights of the locality. A mile or two to the left of
us the line ceased to be continuous and there was a tract of country,
lower-lying and thickly wooded, which belonged neither to the Fascists
nor ourselves. Both we and they used to make daylight patrols there. It
was not bad fun in a Boy Scoutish way, though I never saw a Fascist
patrol nearer than several hundred yards. By a lot of crawling on your
belly you could work your way partly through the Fascist lines and could
even see the farm-house flying the monarchist flag, which was the local
Fascist headquarters. Occasionally we gave it a rifle-volley and then
slipped into cover before the machine-guns could locate us. I hope we
broke a few windows, but it was a good eight hundred metres away, and
with our rifles you could not make sure of hitting even a house at that
range.

The weather was mostly clear and cold; sometimes sunny at midday, but
always cold. Here and there in the soil of the hill-sides you found the
green beaks of wild crocuses or irises poking through; evidently spring
was coming, but coming very slowly. The nights were colder than ever.
Coming off guard in the small hours we used to rake together what was
left of the cook-house fire and then stand in the red-hot embers. It was
bad for your boots, but it was very good for your feet. But there were
mornings when the sight of the dawn among the mountain-tops made it
almost worth while to be out of bed at godless hours. I hate mountains,
even from a spectacular point of view. But sometimes the dawn breaking
behind the hill-tops in our rear, the first narrow streaks of gold, like
swords slitting the darkness, and then the growing light and the seas of
carmine cloud stretching away into inconceivable distances, were worth
watching even when you had been up all night, when your legs were numb
from the knees down, and you were sullenly reflecting that there was no
hope of food for another three hours. I saw the dawn oftener during this
campaign than during the rest of my life put together--or during the
part that is to come, I hope.

We were short-handed here, which meant longer guards and more fatigues.
I was beginning to suffer a little from the lack of sleep which is
inevitable even in the quietest kind of war. Apart from guard-duties and
patrols there were constant night-alarms and stand-to's, and in any case
you can't sleep properly in a beastly hole in the ground with your feet
aching with the cold. In my first three or four months in the line I do
not suppose I had more than a dozen periods of twenty-four hours that
were completely without sleep; on the other hand I certainly did not
have a dozen nights of full sleep. Twenty or thirty hours' sleep in a
week was quite a normal amount. The effects of this were not so bad as
might be expected; one grew very stupid, and the job of climbing up and
down the hills grew harder instead of easier, but one felt well and one
was constantly hungry--heavens, how hungry! All food seemed good, even
the eternal haricot beans which everyone in Spain finally learned to
hate the sight of. Our water, what there was of it, came from miles
away, on the backs of mules or little persecuted donkeys. For some
reason the Aragón peasants treated their mules well but their donkeys
abominably. If a donkey refused to go it was quite usual to kick him in
the testicles. The issue of candles had ceased, and matches were running
short. The Spaniards taught us how to make olive oil lamps out of a
condensed milk tin, a cartridge-clip, and a bit of rag. When you had any
olive oil, which was not often, these things would burn with a smoky
flicker, about a quarter candle power, just enough to find your rifle
by.

There seemed no hope of any real fighting. When we left Monte Pocero I
had counted my cartridges and found that in nearly three weeks I had
fired just three shots at the enemy. They say it takes a thousand
bullets to kill a man, and at this rate it would be twenty years before
I killed my first Fascist. At Monte Oscuro the lines were closer and one
fired oftener, but I am reasonably certain that I never hit anyone. As a
matter of fact, on this front and at this period of the war the real
weapon was not the rifle but the megaphone. Being unable to kill your
enemy you shouted at him instead. This method of warfare is so
extraordinary that it needs explaining.

Wherever the lines were within hailing distance of one another there was
always a good deal of shouting from trench to trench. From ourselves:
'_Fascistas--maricones!_' From the Fascists: '_Viva España! Viva
Franco!_'--or, when they knew that there were English opposite them: 'Go
home, you English! We don't want foreigners here!' On the Government
side, in the party militias, the shouting of propaganda to undermine the
enemy morale had been developed into a regular technique. In every
suitable position men, usually machine-gunners, were told off for
shouting-duty and provided with megaphones. Generally they shouted a
set-piece, full of revolutionary sentiments which explained to the
Fascist soldiers that they were merely the hirelings of international
capitalism, that they were fighting against their own class, etc., etc.,
and urged them to come over to our side. This was repeated over and over
by relays of men; sometimes it continued almost the whole night. There
is very little doubt that it had its effect; everyone agreed that the
trickle of Fascist deserters was partly caused by it. If one comes to
think of it, when some poor devil of a sentry--very likely a Socialist
or Anarchist trade union member who has been conscripted against his
will--is freezing at his post, the slogan 'Don't fight against your own
class!' ringing again and again through the darkness is bound to make an
impression on him. It might make just the difference between deserting
and not deserting. Of course such a proceeding does not fit in with the
English conception of war. I admit I was amazed and scandalized when I
first saw it done. The idea of trying to convert your enemy instead of
shooting him! I now think that from any point of view it was a
legitimate manoeuvre. In ordinary trench warfare, when there is no
artillery, it is extremely difficult to inflict casualties on the enemy
without receiving an equal number yourself. If you can immobilize a
certain number of men by making them desert, so much the better;
deserters are actually more useful to you than corpses, because they can
give information. But at the beginning it dismayed all of us; it made us
fed that the Spaniards were not taking this war of theirs sufficiently
seriously. The man who did the shouting at the P.S.U.C. post down on our
right was an artist at the job. Sometimes, instead of shouting
revolutionary slogans he simply told the Fascists how much better we
were fed than they were. His account of the Government rations was apt
to be a little imaginative. 'Buttered toast!'--you could hear his voice
echoing across the lonely valley--'We're just sitting down to buttered
toast over here! Lovely slices of buttered toast!' I do not doubt that,
like the rest of us, he had not seen butter for weeks or months past,
but in the icy night the news of buttered toast probably set many a
Fascist mouth watering. It even made mine water, though I knew he was
lying.

One day in February we saw a Fascist aeroplane approaching. As usual, a
machine-gun was dragged into the open and its barrel cocked up, and
everyone lay on his back to get a good aim. Our isolated positions were
not worth bombing, and as a rule the few Fascist aeroplanes that passed
our way circled round to avoid machine-gun fire. This time the aeroplane
came straight over, too high up to be worth shooting at, and out of it
came tumbling not bombs but white glittering things that turned over and
over in the air. A few fluttered down into the position. They were
copies of a Fascist newspaper, the _Heraldo de Aragón_, announcing the
fall of Málaga.

That night the Fascists made a sort of abortive attack. I was just
getting down into kip, half dead with sleep, when there was a heavy
stream of bullets overhead and someone shouted into the dug-out:
'They're attacking!' I grabbed my rifle and slithered up to my post,
which was at the top of the position, beside the machine-gun. There was
utter darkness and diabolical noise. The fire of, I think five
machine-guns was pouring upon us, and there was a series of heavy
crashes caused by the Fascists flinging bombs over their own parapet in
the most idiotic manner. It was intensely dark. Down in the valley to
the left of us I could see the greenish flash of rifles where a small
party of Fascists, probably a patrol, were chipping in. The bullets were
flying round us in the darkness, crack-zip-crack. A few shells came
whistling over, but they fell nowhere near us and (as usual in this war)
most of them failed to explode. I had a bad moment when yet another
machine-gun opened fire from the hill-top in our rear--actually a gun
that had been brought up to support us, but at the time it looked as
though we were surrounded. Presently our own machine-gun jammed, as it
always did jam with those vile cartridges, and the ramrod was lost in
the impenetrable darkness. Apparently there was nothing that one could
do except stand still and be shot at. The Spanish machine-gunners
disdained to take cover, in fact exposed themselves deliberately, so I
had to do likewise. Petty though it was, the whole experience was very
interesting. It was the first time that I had been properly speaking
under fire, and to my humiliation I found that I was horribly
frightened. You always, I notice, feel the same when you are under heavy
fire--not so much afraid of being hit as afraid because you don't know
where you will be hit. You are wondering all the while just where the
bullet will nip you, and it gives your whole body a most unpleasant
sensitiveness.

After an hour or two the firing slowed down and died away. Meanwhile we
had had only one casualty. The Fascists had advanced a couple of
machine-guns into no man's land, but they had kept a safe distance and
made no attempt to storm our parapet. They were in fact not attacking,
merely wasting cartridges and making a cheerful noise to celebrate the
fall of Málaga. The chief importance of the affair was that it taught me
to read the war news in the papers with a more disbelieving eye. A day
or two later the newspapers and the radio published reports of a
tremendous attack with cavalry and tanks (up a perpendicular hill-side!)
which had been beaten off by the heroic English.

When the Fascists told us that Málaga had fallen we set it down as a
lie, but next day there were more convincing rumours, and it must have
been a day or two later that it was admitted officially. By degrees the
whole disgraceful story leaked out--how the town had been evacuated
without firing a shot, and how the fury of the Italians had fallen not
upon the troops, who were gone, but upon the wretched civilian
population, some of whom were pursued and machine-gunned for a hundred
miles. The news sent a sort of chill all along the line, for, whatever
the truth may have been, every man in the militia believed that the loss
of Málaga was due to treachery. It was the first talk I had heard of
treachery or divided aims. It set up in my mind the first vague doubts
about this war in which, hitherto, the rights and wrongs had seemed so
beautifully simple.

In mid February we left Monte Oscuro and were sent, together with all
the P.O.U.M. troops in this sector, to make a part of the army besieging
Huesca. It was a fifty-mile lorry journey across the wintry plain, where
the clipped vines were not yet budding and the blades of the winter
barley were just poking through the lumpy soil. Four kilometres from our
new trenches Huesca glittered small and clear like a city of dolls'
houses. Months earlier, when Sietamo was taken, the general commanding
the Government troops had said gaily: 'Tomorrow we'll have coffee in
Huesca.' It turned out that he was mistaken. There had been bloody
attacks, but the town did not fall, and 'Tomorrow we'll have coffee in
Huesca' had become a standing joke throughout the army. If I ever go
back to Spain I shall make a point of having a cup of coffee in Huesca.



Chapter 5


On the eastern side of Huesca, until late March, nothing
happened--almost literally nothing. We were twelve hundred metres from
the enemy. When the Fascists were driven back into Huesca the Republican
Army troops who held this part of the line had not been over-zealous in
their advance, so that the line formed a kind of pocket. Later it would
have to be advanced--a ticklish job under fire--but for the present the
enemy might as well have been nonexistent; our sole preoccupation was
keeping warm and getting enough to eat. As a matter of fact there were
things in this period that interested me greatly, and I will describe
some of them later. But I shall be keeping nearer to the order of events
if I try here to give some account of the internal political situation
on the Government side.

At the beginning I had ignored the political side of the war, and it was
only about this time that it began to force itself upon my attention. If
you are not interested in the horrors of party politics, please skip; I
am trying to keep the political parts of this narrative in separate
chapters for precisely that purpose. But at the same time it would be
quite impossible to write about the Spanish war from a purely military
angle. It was above all things a political war. No event in it, at any
rate during the first year, is intelligible unless one has some grasp of
the inter-party struggle that was going on behind the Government lines.

When I came to Spain, and for some time afterwards, I was not only
uninterested in the political situation but unaware of it. I knew there
was a war on, but I had no notion what kind of a war. If you had asked
me why I had joined the militia I should have answered: 'To fight
against Fascism,' and if you had asked me what I was fighting for, I
should have answered: 'Common decency.' I had accepted the _News
Chronicle-New Statesman_ version of the war as the defence of
civilization against a maniacal outbreak by an army of Colonel Blimps in
the pay of Hitler. The revolutionary atmosphere of Barcelona had
attracted me deeply, but I had made no attempt to understand it. As for
the kaleidoscope of political parties and trade unions, with their
tiresome names--P.S.U.C., P.O.U.M., F.A.I., C.N.T., U.G.T., J.C.I.,
J.S.U., A.I.T.--they merely exasperated me. It looked at first sight as
though Spain were suffering from a plague of initials. I knew that I was
serving in something called the P.O.U.M. (I had only joined the P.O.U.M.
militia rather than any other because I happened to arrive in Barcelona
with I.L.P. papers), but I did not realize that there were serious
differences between the political parties. At Monte Pocero, when they
pointed to the position on our left and said: 'Those are the Socialists'
(meaning the P.S.U.C.), I was puzzled and said: 'Aren't we all
Socialists?' I thought it idiotic that people fighting for their lives
should _have_ separate parties; my attitude always was, 'Why can't we
drop all this political nonsense and get on with the war?' This of
course was the correct 'anti-Fascist' attitude which had been carefully
disseminated by the English newspapers, largely in order to prevent
people from grasping the real nature of the struggle. But in Spain,
especially in Catalonia, it was an attitude that no one could or did
keep up indefinitely. Everyone, however unwillingly, took sides sooner
or later. For even if one cared nothing for the political parties and
their conflicting 'lines', it was too obvious that one's own destiny was
involved. As a militiaman one was a soldier against Franco, but one was
also a pawn in an enormous struggle that was being fought out between
two political theories. When I scrounged for firewood on the
mountainside and wondered whether this was really a war or whether the
News Chronicle had made it up, when I dodged the Communist machine-guns
in the Barcelona riots, when I finally fled from Spain with the police
one jump behind me--all these things happened to me in that particular
way because I was serving in the P.O.U.M. militia and not in the
P.S.U.C. So great is the difference between two sets of initials!

To understand the alignment on the Government side one has got to
remember how the war started. When the fighting broke out on 18 July it
is probable that every anti-Fascist in Europe felt a thrill of hope. For
here at last, apparently, was democracy standing up to Fascism. For
years past the so-called democratic countries had been surrendering to
Fascism at every step. The Japanese had been allowed to do as they liked
in Manchuria. Hitler had walked into power and proceeded to massacre
political opponents of all shades. Mussolini had bombed the Abyssinians
while fifty-three nations (I think it was fifty-three) made pious noises
'off'. But when Franco tried to overthrow a mildly Left-wing Government
the Spanish people, against all expectation, had risen against him. It
seemed--possibly it was--the turning of the tide.

But there were several points that escaped general notice. To begin
with, Franco was not strictly comparable with Hitler or Mussolini. His
rising was a military mutiny backed up by the aristocracy and the
Church, and in the main, especially at the beginning, it was an attempt
not so much to impose Fascism as to restore feudalism. This meant that
Franco had against him not only the working class but also various
sections of the liberal bourgeoisie--the very people who are the
supporters of Fascism when it appears in a more modern form. More
important than this was the fact that the Spanish working class did not,
as we might conceivably do in England, resist Franco in the name of
'democracy' and the _status quo_; their resistance was accompanied
by--one might almost say it consisted of--a definite revolutionary
outbreak. Land was seized by the peasants; many factories and most of
the transport were seized by the trade unions; churches were wrecked and
the priests driven out or killed. The _Daily Mail_, amid the cheers of
the Catholic clergy, was able to represent Franco as a patriot
delivering his country from hordes of fiendish 'Reds'.

For the first few months of the war Franco's real opponent was not so
much the Government as the trade unions. As soon as the rising broke out
the organized town workers replied by calling a general strike and then
by demanding--and, after a struggle, getting--arms from the public
arsenals. If they had not acted spontaneously and more or less
independently it is quite conceivable that Franco would never have been
resisted. There can, of course, be no certainty about this, but there is
at least reason for thinking it. The Government had made little or no
attempt to forestall the rising, which had been foreseen for a long time
past, and when the trouble started its attitude was weak and hesitant,
so much so, indeed, that Spain had three premiers in a single day.*
Moreover, the one step that could save the immediate situation, the
arming of the workers, was only taken unwillingly and in response to
violent popular clamour. However, the arms were distributed, and in the
big towns of eastern Spain the Fascists were defeated by a huge effort,
mainly of the working class, aided by some of the armed forces (Assault
Guards, etc.) who had remained loyal. It was the kind of effort that
could probably only be made by people who were fighting with a
revolutionary intention--i.e. believed that they were fighting for
something better than the status quo. In the various centres of revolt
it is thought that three thousand people died in the streets in a single
day. Men and women armed only with sticks of dynamite rushed across the
open squares and stormed stone buildings held by trained soldiers with
machine-guns. Machine-gun nests that the Fascists had placed at
strategic spots were smashed by rushing taxis at them at sixty miles an
hour. Even if one had heard nothing of the seizure of the land by the
peasants, the setting up of local Soviets, etc., it would be hard to
believe that the Anarchists and Socialists who were the backbone of the
resistance were doing this kind of thing for the preservation of
capitalist democracy, which especially in the Anarchist view was no more
than a centralized swindling machine.

[* Footnote: Quiroga, Barrios, and Giral. The first two refused to
distribute arms to the trade unions.]

Meanwhile the workers had weapons in their hands, and at this stage they
refrained from giving them up. (Even a year later it was computed that
the Anarcho-Syndicalists in Catalonia possessed 30,000 rifles.) The
estates of the big pro-Fascist landlords were in many places seized by
the peasants. Along with the collectivization of industry and transport
there was an attempt to set up the rough beginnings of a workers'
government by means of local committees, workers' patrols to replace the
old pro-capitalist police forces, workers' militias based on the trade
unions, and so forth. Of course the process was not uniform, and it went
further in Catalonia than elsewhere. There were areas where the
institutions of local government remained almost untouched, and others
where they existed side by side with revolutionary committees. In a few
places independent Anarchist communes were set up, and some of them
remained in being till about a year later, when they were forcibly
suppressed by the Government. In Catalonia, for the first few months,
most of the actual power was in the hands of the Anarcho-syndicalists,
who controlled most of the key industries. The thing that had happened
in Spain was, in fact, not merely a civil war, but the beginning of a
revolution. It is this fact that the anti-Fascist press outside Spain
has made it its special business to obscure. The issue has been narrowed
down to 'Fascism versus democracy' and the revolutionary aspect
concealed as much as possible. In England, where the Press is more
centralized and the public more easily deceived than elsewhere, only two
versions of the Spanish war have had any publicity to speak of: the
Right-wing version of Christian patriots versus Bolsheviks dripping with
blood, and the Left-wing version of gentlemanly republicans quelling a
military revolt. The central issue has been successfully covered up.

There were several reasons for this. To begin with, appalling lies about
atrocities were being circulated by the pro-Fascist press, and
well-meaning propagandists undoubtedly thought that they were aiding the
Spanish Government by denying that Spain had 'gone Red'. But the main
reason was this: that, except for the small revolutionary groups which
exist in all countries, the whole world was determined, upon preventing
revolution in Spain. In particular the Communist Party, with Soviet
Russia behind it, had thrown its whole weight against the revolution. It
was the Communist thesis that revolution at this stage would be fatal
and that what was to be aimed at in Spain was not workers' control, but
bourgeois democracy. It hardly needs pointing out why 'liberal'
capitalist opinion took the same line. Foreign capital was heavily
invested in Spain. The Barcelona Traction Company, for instance,
represented ten millions of British capital; and meanwhile the trade
unions had seized all the transport in Catalonia. If the revolution went
forward there would be no compensation, or very little; if the
capitalist republic prevailed, foreign investments would be safe. And
since the revolution had got to be crushed, it greatly simplified things
to pretend that no revolution had happened. In this way the real
significance of every event could be covered up; every shift of power
from the trade unions to the central Government could be represented as
a necessary step in military reorganization. The situation produced was
curious in the extreme. Outside Spain few people grasped that there was
a revolution; inside Spain nobody doubted it. Even the P.S.U.C.
newspapers. Communist-controlled and more or less committed to an
antirevolutionary policy, talked about 'our glorious revolution'. And
meanwhile the Communist press in foreign countries was shouting that
there was no sign of revolution anywhere; the seizure of factories,
setting up of workers' committees, etc., had not happened--or,
alternatively, had happened, but 'had no political significance'.
According to the _Daily Worker_ (6 August 1936) those who said that the
Spanish people were fighting for social revolution, or for anything
other than bourgeois democracy, were' downright lying scoundrels'. On
the other hand, Juan Lopez, a member of the Valencia Government,
declared in February 1937 that 'the Spanish people are shedding their
blood, not for the democratic Republic and its paper Constitution, but
for...a revolution'. So it would appear that the downright lying
scoundrels included members of the Government for which we were bidden
to fight. Some of the foreign anti-Fascist papers even descended to the
pitiful lie of pretending that churches were only attacked when they
were used as Fascist fortresses. Actually churches were pillaged
everywhere and as a matter of course, because it was perfectly well
understood that the Spanish Church was part of the capitalist racket. In
six months in Spain I only saw two undamaged churches, and until about
July 1937 no churches were allowed to reopen and hold services, except
for one or two Protestant churches in Madrid.

But, after all, it was only the beginning of a revolution, not the
complete thing. Even when the workers, certainly in Catalonia and
possibly elsewhere, had the power to do so, they did not overthrow or
completely replace the Government. Obviously they could not do so when
Franco was hammering at the gate and sections of the middle class were
on their side. The country was in a transitional state that was capable
either of developing in the direction of Socialism or of reverting to an
ordinary capitalist republic. The peasants had most of the land, and
they were likely to keep it, unless Franco won; all large industries had
been collectivized, but whether they remained collectivized, or whether
capitalism was reintroduced, would depend finally upon which group
gained control. At the beginning both the Central Government and the
Generalite de Cataluña (the semi-autonomous Catalan Government) could
definitely be said to represent the working class. The Government was
headed by Caballero, a Left-wing Socialist, and contained ministers
representing the U.G.T. (Socialist trade unions) and the C.N.T.
(Syndicalist unions controlled by the Anarchists). The Catalan
Generalite was for a while virtually superseded by an anti-Fascist
Defence Committee* consisting mainly of delegates from the trade unions.
Later the Defence Committee was dissolved and the Generalite was
reconstituted so as to represent the unions and the various Left-wing
parties. But every subsequent reshuffling of the Government was a move
towards the Right. First the P.O.U.M. was expelled from the Generalite;
six months later Caballero was replaced by the Right-wing Socialist
Negrin; shortly afterwards the C.N.T. was eliminated from the
Government; then the U.G.T.; then the C.N.T. was turned out of the
Generalite; finally, a year after the outbreak of war and revolution,
there remained a Government composed entirely of Right-wing Socialists,
Liberals, and Communists.

[* Footnote: Comité Central de Milicias Antifascistas. Delegates were
chosen in proportion to the membership of their organizations. Nine
delegates represented the trade unions, three the Catalan Liberal
parties, and two the various Marxist parties (P.O.U.M., Communists, and
others).]

The general swing to the Right dates from about October-November 1936,
when the U.S.S.R. began to supply arms to the Government and power began
to pass from the Anarchists to the Communists. Except Russia and Mexico
no country had had the decency to come to the rescue of the Government,
and Mexico, for obvious reasons, could not supply arms in large
quantities. Consequently the Russians were in a position to dictate
terms. There is very little doubt that these terms were, in substance,
'Prevent revolution or you get no weapons', and that the first move
against the revolutionary elements, the expulsion of the P.O.U.M. from
the Catalan Generalite, was done under orders from the U.S.S.R. It has
been denied that any direct pressure was exerted by the Russian
Government, but the point is not of great importance, for the Communist
parties of all countries can be taken as carrying out Russian policy,
and it is not denied that the Communist Party was the chief mover first
against the P.O.U.M., later against the Anarchists and against
Caballero's section of the Socialists, and, in general, against a
revolutionary policy. Once the U.S.S.R. had intervened the triumph of
the Communist Party was assured.

To begin with, gratitude to Russia for the arms and the fact that the
Communist Party, especially since the arrival of the International
Brigades, looked capable of winning the war, immensely raised the
Communist prestige. Secondly, the Russian arms were supplied via the
Communist Party and the parties allied to them, who saw to it that as
few as possible got to their political opponents.* Thirdly, by
proclaiming a non-revolutionary policy the Communists were able to
gather in all those whom the extremists had scared. It was easy, for
instance, to rally the wealthier peasants against the collectivization
policy of the Anarchists. There was an enormous growth in the membership
of the party, and the influx was largely from the middle
class-shopkeepers, officials, army officers, well-to-do peasants, etc.,
etc. The war was essentially a triangular struggle. The fight against
Franco had to continue, but the simultaneous aim of the Government was
to recover such power as remained in the hands of the trade unions. It
was done by a series of small moves--a policy of pin-pricks, as somebody
called it--and on the whole very cleverly. There was no general and
obvious counter-revolutionary move, and until May 1937 it was scarcely
necessary to use force. The workers could always be brought to heel by
an argument that is almost too obvious to need stating: 'Unless you do
this, that, and the other we shall lose the war.' In every case,
needless to say, it appeared that the thing demanded by military
necessity was the surrender of something that the workers had won for
themselves in 1936. But the argument could hardly fail, because to lose
the war was the last thing that the revolutionary parties wanted; if the
war was lost democracy and revolution. Socialism and Anarchism, became
meaningless words. The Anarchists, the only revolutionary party that was
big enough to matter, were obliged to give way on point after point. The
process of collectivization was checked, the local committees were got
rid of, the workers patrols were abolished and the pre-war police
forces, largely reinforced and very heavily armed, were restored, and
various key industries which had been under the control of the trade
unions were taken over by the Government (the seizure of the Barcelona
Telephone Exchange, which led to the May fighting, was one incident in
this process); finally, most important of all, the workers' militias,
based on the trade unions, were gradually broken up and redistributed
among the new Popular Army, a 'non-political' army on semi-bourgeois
lines, with a differential pay rate, a privileged officer-caste, etc.,
etc. In the special circumstances this was the really decisive step; it
happened later in Catalonia than elsewhere because it was there that the
revolutionary parties were strongest. Obviously the only guarantee that
the workers could have of retaining their winnings was to keep some of
the armed forces under their own control. As usual, the breaking-up of
the militias was done in the name of military efficiency; and no one
denied that a thorough military reorganization was needed. It would,
however, have been quite possible to reorganize the militias and make
them more efficient while keeping them under direct control of the trade
unions; the main purpose of the change was to make sure that the
Anarchists did not possess an army of their own. Moreover, the
democratic spirit of the militias made them breeding-grounds for
revolutionary ideas. The Communists were well aware of this, and
inveighed ceaselessly and bitterly against the P.O.U.M. and Anarchist
principle of equal pay for all ranks. A general 'bourgeoisification', a
deliberate destruction of the equalitarian spirit of the first few
months of the revolution, was taking place. All happened so swiftly that
people making successive visits to Spain at intervals of a few months
have declared that they seemed scarcely to be visiting the same country;
what had seemed on the surface and for a brief instant to be a workers'
State was changing before one's eyes into an ordinary bourgeois republic
with the normal division into rich and poor. By the autumn of 1937 the
'Socialist' Negrin was declaring in public speeches that 'we respect
private property', and members of the Cortes who at the beginning of the
war had had to fly the country because of their suspected Fascist
sympathies were returning to Spain.

[* Footnote: This is why there were so few Russian arms on the Aragón
front, where the troops were predominantly Anarchist. Until April 1937
the only Russian weapon I saw--with the exception of some aeroplanes
which may or may not have been Russian--was a solitary sub-machinegun.]

The whole process is easy to understand if one
remembers that it proceeds from the temporary alliance that Fascism, in
certain forms, forces upon the bourgeois and the worker. This alliance,
known as the Popular Front, is in essential an alliance of enemies, and
it seems probable that it must always end by one partner swallowing the
other. The only unexpected feature in the Spanish situation--and outside
Spain it has caused an immense amount of misunderstanding--is that among
the parties on the Government side the Communists stood not upon the
extreme Left, but upon the extreme Right. In reality this should cause
no surprise, because the tactics of the Communist Party elsewhere,
especially in France, have made it clear that Official Communism must be
regarded, at any rate for the time being, as an antirevolutionary force.
The whole of Comintern policy is now subordinated (excusably,
considering the world situation) to the defence of U.S.S.R., which
depends upon a system of military alliances. In particular, the U.S.S.R.
is in alliance with France, a capitalist-imperialist country. The
alliance is of little use to Russia unless French capitalism is strong,
therefore Communist policy in France has got to be anti-revolutionary.
This means not only that French Communists now march behind the
tricolour and sing the Marseillaise, but, what is more important, that
they have had to drop all effective agitation in the French colonies. It
is less than three years since Thorez, the Secretary of the French
Communist Party, was declaring that the French workers would never be
bamboozled into fighting against their German comrades;* he is now one
of the loudest-lunged patriots in France. The clue to the behaviour of
the Communist Party in any country is the military relation of that
country, actual or potential, towards the U.S.S.R. In England, for
instance, the position is still uncertain, hence the English Communist
Party is still hostile to the National Government, and, ostensibly,
opposed to rearmament. If, however, Great Britain enters into an
alliance or military understanding with the U.S.S.R., the English
Communist, like the French Communist, will have no choice but to become
a good patriot and imperialist; there are premonitory signs of this
already. In Spain the Communist 'line' was undoubtedly influenced by the
fact that France, Russia's ally, would strongly object to a
revolutionary neighbour and would raise heaven and earth to prevent the
liberation of Spanish Morocco. The Daily Mail, with its tales of red
revolution financed by Moscow, was even more wildly wrong than usual. In
reality it was the Communists above all others who prevented revolution
in Spain. Later, when the Right-wing forces were in full control, the
Communists showed themselves willing to go a great deal further than the
Liberals in hunting down the revolutionary leaders.**

[* Footnote: In the Chamber of Deputies, March 1935.]

[** Footnote: For the best account of the interplay between the parties
on the Government side, see Franz Borkenau's _The Spanish Cockpit_. This
is by a long way the ablest book that has yet appeared on the Spanish
war.]

I have tried to sketch the general course of the Spanish revolution
during its first year, because this makes it easier to understand the
situation at any given moment. But I do not want to suggest that in
February I held all of the opinions that are implied in what I have said
above. To begin with, the things that most enlightened me had not yet
happened, and in any case my sympathies were in some ways different from
what they are now. This was partly because the political side of the war
bored me and I naturally reacted against the viewpoint of which I heard
most--i.e. the P.O.U.M.-I.L.P. viewpoint. The Englishmen I was among
were mostly I.L.P. members, with a few C.P. members among them, and most
of them were much better educated politically than myself. For weeks on
end, during the dull period when nothing was happening round Huesca, I
found myself in the middle of a political discussion that practically
never ended. In the draughty evil-smelling barn of the farm-house where
we were billeted, in the stuffy blackness of dug-outs, behind the
parapet in the freezing midnight hours, the conflicting party 'lines'
were debated over and over. Among the Spaniards it was the same, and
most of the newspapers we saw made the inter-party feud their chief
feature. One would have had to be deaf or an imbecile not to pick up
some idea of what the various parties stood for.

From the point of view of political theory there were only three parties
that mattered, the P.S.U.C., the P.O.U.M., and the C.N.T.-F.A.I.,
loosely described as the Anarchists. I take the P.S.U.C. first, as being
the most important; it was the party that finally triumphed, and even at
this time it was visibly in the ascendant.

It is necessary to explain that when one speaks of the P.S.U.C. 'line'
one really means the Communist Party 'line'. The P.S.U.C. (Partido
Socialista Unificado de Cataluña) was the Socialist Party of Catalonia;
it had been formed at the beginning of the war by the fusion of various
Marxist parties, including the Catalan Communist Party, but it was now
entirely under Communist control and was affiliated to the Third
International. Elsewhere in Spain no formal unification between
Socialists and Communists had taken place, but the Communist viewpoint
and the Right-wing Socialist viewpoint could everywhere be regarded as
identical. Roughly speaking, the P.S.U.C. was the political organ of the
U.G.T. (Union General de Trabajadores), the Socialist trade unions. The
membership of these unions throughout Spain now numbered about a million
and a half. They contained many sections of the manual workers, but
since the outbreak of war they had also been swollen by a large influx
of middle-class members, for in the early 'revolutionary' days people of
all kinds had found it useful to join either the U.G.T. or the C.N.T.
The two blocks of unions overlapped, but of the two the C.N.T. was more
definitely a working-class organization. The P.S.U.C. was therefore a
party partly of the workers and partly of the small bourgeoisie--the
shopkeepers, the officials, and the wealthier peasants.

The P.S.U.C. 'line' which was preached in the Communist and
pro-Communist press throughout the world, was approximately this:

'At present nothing matters except winning the war; without victory in
the war all else is meaningless. Therefore this is not the moment to
talk of pressing forward with the revolution. We can't afford to
alienate the peasants by forcing Collectivization upon them, and we
can't afford to frighten away the middle classes who were fighting on
our side. Above all for the sake of efficiency we must do away with
revolutionary chaos. We must have a strong central government in place
of local committees, and we must have a properly trained and fully
militarized army under a unified command. Clinging on to fragments of
workers' control and parroting revolutionary phrases is worse than
useless; it is not merely obstructive, but even counterrevolutionary,
because it leads to divisions which can be used against us by the
Fascists. At this stage we are not fighting for the dictatorship of the
proletariat, we are fighting for parliamentary democracy. Whoever tries
to turn the civil war into a social revolution is playing into the hands
of the Fascists and is in effect, if not in intention, a traitor.'

The P.O.U.M. 'line' differed from this on every point except, of course,
the importance of winning the war. The P.O.U.M. (Partido Obrero de
Unificación Marxista) was one of those dissident Communist parties which
have appeared in many countries in the last few years as a result of the
opposition to 'Stalinism'; i.e. to the change, real or apparent, in
Communist policy. It was made up partly of ex-Communists and partly of
an earlier party, the Workers' and Peasants' Bloc. Numerically it was a
small party,* with not much influence outside Catalonia, and chiefly
important because it contained an unusually high proportion of
politically conscious members. In Catalonia its chief stronghold was
Lérida. It did not represent any block of trade unions. The P.O.U.M.
militiamen were mostly C.N.T. members, but the actual party-members
generally belonged to the U.G.T. It was, however, only in the C.N.T.
that the P.O.U.M. had any influence.

[* Footnote: The figures for the P.O.U.M. membership are given as: July
1936, 10,000; December 1936, 70,000; June 1937, 40,000. But these are
from P.O.U.M. sources; a hostile estimate would probably divide them by
four. The only thing one can say with any certainty about the membership
of the Spanish political parties is that every party overestimates its
own numbers.]

The P.O.U.M. 'line' was approximately this:

'It is nonsense to talk of opposing Fascism by bourgeois "democracy".
Bourgeois "democracy" is only another name for capitalism, and so is
Fascism; to fight against Fascism on behalf of "democracy" is to fight
against one form of capitalism on behalf of a second which is liable to
turn into the first at any moment. The only real alternative to Fascism
is workers' control. If you set up any less goal than this, you will
either hand the victory to Franco, or, at best, let in Fascism by the
back door. Meanwhile the workers must cling to every scrap of what they
have won; if they yield anything to the semi-bourgeois Government they
can depend upon being cheated. The workers' militias and police-forces
must be preserved in their present form and every effort to
"bourgeoisify" them must be resisted. If the workers do not control the
armed forces, the armed forces will control the workers. The war and the
revolution are inseparable.'

The Anarchist viewpoint is less easily defined. In any case the loose
term 'Anarchists' is used to cover a multitude of people of very varying
opinions. The huge block of unions making up the C.N.T. (Confederacion
Nacional de Trabajadores), with round about two million members in all,
had for its political organ the F.A.I. (Federacion Anarquista Iberica),
an actual Anarchist organization. But even the members of the F.A.I.,
though always tinged, as perhaps most Spaniards are, with the Anarchist
philosophy, were not necessarily Anarchists in the purest sense.
Especially since the beginning of the war they had moved more in the
direction of ordinary Socialism, because circumstances had forced them
to take part in centralized administration and even to break all their
principles by entering the Government. Nevertheless they differed
fundamentally from the Communists in so much that, like the P.O.U.M.,
they aimed at workers' control and not a parliamentary democracy. They
accepted the P.O.U.M. slogan: 'The war and the revolution are
inseparable', though they were less dogmatic about it. Roughly speaking,
the C.N.T.-F.A.I. stood for: (1) Direct control over industry by the
workers engaged in each industry, e.g. transport, the textile factories,
etc.; (2) Government by local committees and resistance to all forms of
centralized authoritarianism; (3) Uncompromising hostility to the
bourgeoisie and the Church. The last point, though the least precise,
was the most important. The Anarchists were the opposite of the majority
of so-called revolutionaries in so much that though their principles
were rather vague their hatred of privilege and injustice was perfectly
genuine. Philosophically, Communism and Anarchism are poles apart.
Practically--i.e. in the form of society aimed at--the difference is
mainly one of emphasis, but it is quite irreconcilable. The Communist's
emphasis is always on centralism and efficiency, the Anarchist's on
liberty and equality. Anarchism is deeply rooted in Spain and is likely
to outlive Communism when the Russian influence is withdrawn. During the
first two months of the war it was the Anarchists more than anyone else
who had saved the situation, and much later than this the Anarchist
militia, in spite of their indiscipline, were notoriously the best
fighters among the purely Spanish forces. From about February 1937
onwards the Anarchists and the P.O.U.M. could to some extent be lumped
together. If the Anarchists, the P.O.U.M., and the Left wing of the
Socialists had had the sense to combine at the start and press a
realistic policy, the history of the war might have been different. But
in the early period, when the revolutionary parties seemed to have the
game in their hands, this was impossible. Between the Anarchists and the
Socialists there were ancient jealousies, the P.O.U.M., as Marxists,
were sceptical of Anarchism, while from the pure Anarchist standpoint
the 'Trotskyism' of the P.O.U.M. was not much preferable to the
'Stalinism' of the Communists. Nevertheless the Communist tactics tended
to drive the two parties together. When the P.O.U.M. joined in the
disastrous fighting in Barcelona in May, it was mainly from an instinct
to stand by the C.N.T., and later, when the P.O.U.M. was suppressed, the
Anarchists were the only people who dared to raise a voice in its
defence.

So, roughly speaking, the alignment of forces was this. On the one side
the C.N.T.-F.A.I., the P.O.U.M., and a section of the Socialists,
standing for workers' control: on the other side the Right-wing
Socialists, Liberals, and Communists, standing for centralized
government and a militarized army.

It is easy to see why, at this time, I preferred the Communist viewpoint
to that of the P.O.U.M. The Communists had a definite practical policy,
an obviously better policy from the point of view of the common sense
which looks only a few months ahead. And certainly the day-to-day policy
of the P.O.U.M., their propaganda and so forth, was unspeakably bad; it
must have been so, or they would have been able to attract a bigger
mass-following. What clinched everything was that the Communists--so it
seemed to me--were getting on with the war while we and the Anarchists
were standing still. This was the general feeling at the time. The
Communists had gained power and a vast increase of membership partly by
appealing to the middle classes against the revolutionaries, but partly
also because they were the only people who looked capable of winning the
war. The Russian arms and the magnificent defence of Madrid by troops
mainly under Communist control had made the Communists the heroes of
Spain. As someone put it, every Russian aeroplane that flew over our
heads was Communist propaganda. The revolutionary purism of the
P.O.U.M., though I saw its logic, seemed to me rather futile. After all,
the one thing that mattered was to win the war.

Meanwhile there was the diabolical inter-party feud that was going on in
the newspapers, in pamphlets, on posters, in books--everywhere. At this
time the newspapers I saw most often were the P.O.U.M. papers _La
Batalla_ and _Adelante_, and their ceaseless carping against the
'counter-revolutionary' P.S.U.C. struck me as priggish and tiresome.
Later, when I studied the P.S.U.C. and Communist press more closely, I
realized that the P.O.U.M. were almost blameless compared with their
adversaries. Apart from anything else, they had much smaller
opportunities. Unlike the Communists, they had no footing in any press
outside their own country, and inside Spain they were at an immense
disadvantage because the press censorship was mainly under Communist
control, which meant that the P.O.U.M. papers were liable to be
suppressed or fined if they said anything damaging. It is also fair to
the P.O.U.M. to say that though they might preach endless sermons on
revolution and quote Lenin _ad nauseam_, they did not usually indulge in
personal libel. Also they kept their polemics mainly to newspaper
articles. Their large coloured posters, designed for a wider public
(posters are important in Spain, with its large illiterate population),
did not attack rival parties, but were simply anti-Fascist or
abstractedly revolutionary; so were the songs the militiamen sang. The
Communist attacks were quite a different matter. I shall have to deal
with some of these later in this book. Here I can only give a brief
indication of the Communist line of attack.

On the surface the quarrel between the Communists and the P.O.U.M. was
one of tactics. The P.O.U.M. was for immediate revolution, the
Communists not. So far so good; there was much to be said on both sides.
Further, the Communists contended that the P.O.U.M. propaganda divided
and weakened the Government forces and thus endangered the war; again,
though finally I do not agree, a good case could be made out for this.
But here the peculiarity of Communist tactics came in. Tentatively at
first, then more loudly, they began to assert that the P.O.U.M. was
splitting the Government forces not by bad judgement but by deliberate
design. The P.O.U.M. was declared to be no more than a gang of disguised
Fascists, in the pay of Franco and Hitler, who were pressing a
pseudo-revolutionary policy as a way of aiding the Fascist cause. The
P.O.U.M. was a 'Trotskyist' organization and 'Franco's Fifth Column'.
This implied that scores of thousands of working-class people, including
eight or ten thousand soldiers who were freezing in the front-line
trenches and hundreds of foreigners who had come to Spain to fight
against Fascism, often sacrificing their livelihood and their
nationality by doing so, were simply traitors in the pay of the enemy.
And this story was spread all over Spain by means of posters, etc., and
repeated over and over in the Communist and pro-Communist press of the
whole world. I could fill half a dozen books with quotations if I chose
to collect them.

This, then, was what they were saying about us: we were Trotskyists,
Fascists, traitors, murderers, cowards, spies, and so forth. I admit it
was not pleasant, especially when one thought of some of the people who
were responsible for it. It is not a nice thing to see a Spanish boy of
fifteen carried down the line on a stretcher, with a dazed white face
looking out from among the blankets, and to think of the sleek persons
in London and Paris who are writing pamphlets to prove that this boy is
a Fascist in disguise. One of the most horrible features of war is that
all the war-propaganda, all the screaming and lies and hatred, comes
invariably from people who are not fighting. The P.S.U.C. militiamen
whom I knew in the line, the Communists from the International Brigade
whom I met from time to time, never called me a Trotskyist or a traitor;
they left that kind of thing to the journalists in the rear. The people
who wrote pamphlets against us and vilified us in the newspapers all
remained safe at home, or at worst in the newspaper offices of Valencia,
hundreds of miles from the bullets and the mud. And apart from the
libels of the inter-party feud, all the usual war-stuff, the
tub-thumping, the heroics, the vilification of the enemy--all these were
done, as usual, by people who were not fighting and who in many cases
would have run a hundred miles sooner than fight. One of the dreariest
effects of this war has been to teach me that the Left-wing press is
every bit as spurious and dishonest as that of the Right.*
I do earnestly feel that on our side--the Government side--this war was
different from ordinary, imperialistic wars; but from the nature of the
war-propaganda you would never have guessed it. The fighting had barely
started when the newspapers of the Right and Left dived simultaneously
into the same cesspool of abuse. We all remember the _Daily Mail's_
poster: 'REDS CRUCIFY NUNS', while to the _Daily Worker_ Franco's
Foreign Legion was 'composed of murderers, white-slavers, dope-fiends,
and the offal of every European country'. As late as October 1937 the
_New Statesman_ was treating us to tales of Fascist barricades made of
the bodies of living children (a most unhandy thing to make barricades
with), and Mr Arthur Bryant was declaring that 'the sawing-off of a
Conservative tradesman's legs' was 'a commonplace' in Loyalist Spain.
The people who write that kind of stuff never fight; possibly they
believe that to write it is a substitute for fighting. It is the same in
all wars; the soldiers do the fighting, the journalists do the shouting,
and no true patriot ever gets near a front-line trench, except on the
briefest of propaganda-tours. Sometimes it is a comfort to me to think
that the aeroplane is altering the conditions of war. Perhaps when the
next great war comes we may see that sight unprecedented in all history,
a jingo with a bullet-hole in him.

[* Footnote: I should like to make an exception of the _Manchester
Guardian_. In connexion with this book I have had to go through the
files of a good many English papers. Of our larger papers, the
_Manchester Guardian_ is the only one that leaves me with an increased
respect for its honesty.]

As far as the journalistic part of it went, this war was a racket like
all other wars. But there was this difference, that whereas the
journalists usually reserve their most murderous invective for the
enemy, in this case, as time went on, the Communists and the P.O.U.M.
came to write more bitterly about one another than about the Fascists.
Nevertheless at the time I could not bring myself to take it very
seriously. The inter-party feud was annoying and even disgusting, but it
appeared to me as a domestic squabble. I did not believe that it would
alter anything or that there was any really irreconcilable difference of
policy. I grasped that the Communists and Liberals had set their faces
against allowing the revolution to go forward; I did not grasp that they
might be capable of swinging it _back_.

There was a good reason for this. All this time I was at the front, and
at the front the social and political atmosphere did not change. I had
left Barcelona in early January and I did not go on leave till late
April; and all this time--indeed, till later--in the strip of Aragón
controlled by Anarchist and P.O.U.M. troops, the same conditions
persisted, at least outwardly. The revolutionary atmosphere remained as
I had first known it. General and private, peasant and militiaman, still
met as equals; everyone drew the same pay, wore the same clothes, ate
the same food, and called everyone else 'thou' and 'comrade'; there was
no boss-class, no menial-class, no beggars, no prostitutes, no lawyers,
no priests, no boot-licking, no cap-touching. I was breathing the air of
equality, and I was simple enough to imagine that it existed all over
Spain. I did not realize that more or less by chance I was isolated
among the most revolutionary section of the Spanish working class.

So, when my more politically educated comrades told me that one could
not take a purely military attitude towards the war, and that the choice
lay between revolution and Fascism, I was inclined to laugh at them. On
the whole I accepted the Communist viewpoint, which boiled down to
saying: 'We can't talk of revolution till we've won the war', and not
the P.O.U.M. viewpoint, which boiled down to saying: 'We must go forward
or we shall go back.' When later on I decided that the P.O.U.M. were
right, or at any rate righter than the Communists, it was not altogether
upon a point of theory. On paper the Communist case was a good one; the
trouble was that their actual behaviour made it difficult to believe
that they were advancing it in good faith. The often-repeated slogan:
'The war first and the revolution afterwards', though devoutly believed
in by the average P.S.U.C. militiaman, who honestly thought that the
revolution could continue when the war had been won, was eyewash. The
thing for which the Communists were working was not to postpone the
Spanish revolution till a more suitable time, but to make sure that it
never happened. This became more and more obvious as time went on, as
power was twisted more and more out of working-class hands, and as more
and more revolutionaries of every shade were flung into jail. Every move
was made in the name of military necessity, because this pretext was, so
to speak, ready-made, but the effect was to drive the workers back from
an advantageous position and into a position in which, when the war was
over, they would find it impossible to resist the reintroduction of
capitalism. Please notice that I am saying nothing against the
rank-and-file Communists, least of all against the thousands of
Communists who died heroically round Madrid. But those were not the men
who were directing party policy. As for the people higher up, it is
inconceivable that they were not acting with their eyes open.

But, finally, the war was worth winning even if the revolution was
lost. And in the end I came to doubt whether, in the long run, the
Communist policy made for victory. Very few people seem to have
reflected that a different policy might be appropriate at different
periods of the war. The Anarchists probably saved the situation in the
first two months, but they were incapable of organizing resistance
beyond a certain point; the Communists probably saved the situation in
October-December, but to win the war outright was a different matter. In
England the Communist war-policy has been accepted without question,
because very few criticisms of it have been allowed to get into print
and because its general line--do away with revolutionary chaos, speed up
production, militarize the army--sounds realistic and efficient. It is
worth pointing out its inherent weakness.

In order to check every revolutionary tendency and make the war as much
like an ordinary war as possible, it became necessary to throw away the
strategic opportunities that actually existed. I have described how we
were armed, or not armed, on the Aragón front. There is very little
doubt that arms were deliberately withheld lest too many of them should
get into the hands of the Anarchists, who would afterwards use them for
a revolutionary purpose; consequently the big Aragón offensive which
would have made Franco draw back from Bilbao, and possibly from Madrid,
never happened. But this was comparatively a small matter. What was more
important was that once the war had been narrowed down to a 'war for
democracy' it became impossible to make any large-scale appeal for
working-class aid abroad. If we face facts we must admit that the
working class of the world has regarded the Spanish war with
detachment. Tens of thousands of individuals came to fight, but the tens
of millions behind them remained apathetic. During the first year of the
war the entire British public is thought to have subscribed to various
'aid Spain' funds about a quarter of a million pounds--probably less
than half of what they spend in a single week on going to the pictures.
The way in which the working class in the democratic countries could
really have helped her Spanish comrades was by industrial
action--strikes and boycotts. No such thing ever even began to happen.
The Labour and Communist leaders everywhere declared that it was
unthinkable; and no doubt they were right, so long as they were also
shouting at the tops of their voices that 'red' Spain was not 'red'.
Since 1914-18 'war for democracy' has had a sinister sound. For years
past the Communists themselves had been teaching the militant workers in
all countries that 'democracy' was a polite name for capitalism. To say
first 'Democracy is a swindle', and then 'Fight for democracy!' is not
good tactics. If, with the huge prestige of Soviet Russia behind them,
they had appealed to the workers of the world in the name not of
'democratic Spain', but of 'revolutionary Spain', it is hard to believe
that they would not have got a response.

But what was most important of all, with a non-revolutionary policy it
was difficult, if not impossible, to strike at Franco's rear. By the
summer of 1937 Franco was controlling a larger population than the
Government--much larger, if one counts in the colonies--with about the
same number of troops. As everyone knows, with a hostile population at
your back it is impossible to keep an army in the field without an
equally large army to guard your communications, suppress sabotage, etc.
Obviously, therefore, there was no real popular movement in Franco's
rear. It was inconceivable that the people in his territory, at any rate
the town-workers and the poorer peasants, liked or wanted Franco, but
with every swing to the Right the Government's superiority became less
apparent. What clinches everything is the case of Morocco. Why was there
no rising in Morocco? Franco was trying to set up an infamous
dictatorship, and the Moors actually preferred him to the Popular Front
Government! The palpable truth is that no attempt was made to foment a
rising in Morocco, because to do so would have meant putting a
revolutionary construction on the war. The first necessity, to convince
the Moors of the Government's good faith, would have been to proclaim
Morocco liberated. And we can imagine how pleased the French would have
been by that! The best strategic opportunity of the war was flung away
in the vain hope of placating French and British capitalism. The whole
tendency of the Communist policy was to reduce the war to an ordinary,
non-revolutionary war in which the Government was heavily handicapped.
For a war of that kind has got to be won by mechanical means, i.e.
ultimately, by limitless supplies of weapons; and the Government's chief
donor of weapons, the U.S.S.R., was at a great disadvantage,
geographically, compared with Italy and Germany. Perhaps the P.O.U.M.
and Anarchist slogan: 'The war and the revolution are inseparable', was
less visionary than it sounds.

I have given my reasons for thinking that the Communist
anti-revolutionary policy was mistaken, but so far as its effect upon
the war goes I do not hope that my judgement is right. A thousand times
I hope that it is wrong. I would wish to see this war won by any means
whatever. And of course we cannot tell yet what may happen. The
Government may swing to the Left again, the Moors may revolt of their
own accord, England may decide to buy Italy out, the war may be won by
straightforward military means--there is no knowing. I let the above
opinions stand, and time will show how far I am right or wrong.

But in February 1937 I did not see things quite in this light. I was
sick of the inaction on the Aragón front and chiefly conscious that I
had not done my fair share of the fighting. I used to think of the
recruiting poster in Barcelona which demanded accusingly of passers-by:
'What have _you_ done for democracy?' and feel that I could only answer:
'I have drawn my rations.' When I joined the militia I had promised
myself to kill one Fascist--after all, if each of us killed one they
would soon be extinct--and I had killed nobody yet, had hardly had the
chance to do so. And of course I wanted to go to Madrid. Everyone in the
army, whatever his political opinions, always wanted to go to Madrid.
This would probably mean exchanging into the International Column, for
the P.O.U.M. had now very few troops at Madrid and the Anarchists not so
many as formerly.

For the present, of course, one had to stay in the line, but I told
everyone that when we went on leave I should, if possible, exchange into
the International Column, which meant putting myself under Communist
control. Various people tried to dissuade me, but no one attempted to
interfere. It is fair to say that there was very little heresy-hunting
in the P.O.U.M., perhaps not enough, considering their special
circumstances; short of being a pro-Fascist no one was penalized for
holding the wrong political opinions. I spent much of my time in the
militia in bitterly criticizing the P.O.U.M. 'line', but I never got
into trouble for it. There was not even any pressure upon one to become
a political member of the party, though I think the majority of the
militiamen did so. I myself never joined the party--for which
afterwards, when the P.O.U.M. was suppressed, I was rather sorry.



Chapter 6


Meanwhile, the daily--more particularly nightly--round, the common task.
Sentry-go, patrols, digging; mud, rain, shrieking winds, and occasional
snow. It was not till well into April that the nights grew noticeably
warmer. Up here on the plateau the March days were mostly like an
English March, with bright blue skies and nagging winds. The winter
barley was a foot high, crimson buds were forming on the cherry trees
(the line here ran through deserted orchards and vegetable gardens), and
if you searched the ditches you could find violets and a kind of wild
hyacinth like a poor specimen of a bluebell. Immediately behind the line
there ran a wonderful, green, bubbling stream, the first transparent
water I had seen since coming to the front. One day I set my teeth and
crawled into the river to have my first bath in six weeks. It was what
you might call a brief bath, for the water was mainly snow-water and not
much above freezing-point.

Meanwhile nothing happened, nothing ever happened. The English had got
into the habit of saying that this wasn't a war, it was a bloody
pantomime. We were hardly under direct fire from the Fascists. The only
danger was from stray bullets, which, as the lines curved forward on
either side, came from several directions. All the casualties at this
time were from strays. Arthur Clinton got a mysterious bullet that
smashed his left shoulder and disabled his arm, permanently, I am
afraid. There was a little shell-fire, but it was extraordinarily
ineffectual. The scream and crash of the shells was actually looked upon
as a mild diversion. The Fascists ever dropped their shells on our
parapet. A few hundred yards behind us there was a country house, called
La Granja, with big farm-buildings, which was used as a store,
headquarters, and cookhouse for this sector of the line. It was this
that the Fascist gunners were trying for, but they were five or six
kilometres away and they never aimed well enough to do more than smash
the windows and chip the walls. You were only in danger if you happened
to be coming up the road when the firing started, and the shells plunged
into the fields on either side of you. One learned almost immediately
the mysterious art of knowing by the sound of a shell how close it will
fall. The shells the Fascists were firing at this period were wretchedly
bad. Although they were 150 mm. they only made a crater about six feet
wide by four deep, and at least one in four failed to explode. There
were the usual romantic tales of sabotage in the Fascist factories and
unexploded shells in which, instead of the charge, there was found a
scrap of paper saying 'Red Front', but I never saw one. The truth was
that the shells were hopelessly old; someone picked up a brass fuse-cap
stamped with the date, and it was 1917. The Fascist guns were of the
same make and calibre as our own, and the unexploded shells were often
reconditioned and fired back. There was said to be one old shell with a
nickname of its own which travelled daily to and fro, never exploding.

At night small patrols used to be sent into no man's land to lie in
ditches near the Fascist lines and listen for sounds (bugle-calls,
motor-horns, and so forth) that indicated activity in Huesca. There was
a constant come-and-go of Fascist troops, and the numbers could be
checked to some extent from listeners' reports. We always had special
orders to report the ringing of church bells. It seemed that the
Fascists always heard mass before going into action. In among the fields
and orchards there were deserted mud-walled huts which it was safe to
explore with a lighted match when you had plugged up the windows.
Sometimes you came on valuable pieces of loot such as a hatchet or a
Fascist water-bottle (better than ours and greatly sought after). You
could explore in the daytime as well, but mostly it had to be done
crawling on all fours. It was queer to creep about in those empty,
fertile fields where everything had been arrested just at the
harvest-moment. Last year's crops had never been touched. The unpruned
vines were snaking across the ground, the cobs on the standing maize had
gone as hard as stone, the mangels and sugar-beets were hyper-trophied
into huge woody lumps. How the peasants must have cursed both armies!
Sometimes parties of men went spud-gathering in no man's land. About a
mile to the right of us, where the lines were closer together, there was
a patch of potatoes that was frequented both by the Fascists and
ourselves. We went there in the daytime, they only at night, as it was
commanded by our machine-guns. One night to our annoyance they turned
out _en masse_ and cleared up the whole patch. We discovered another patch
farther on, where there was practically no cover and you had to lift the
potatoes lying on your belly--a fatiguing job. If their machine-gunners
spotted you, you had to flatten yourself out like a rat when it squirms
under a door, with the bullets cutting up the clods a few yards behind
you. It seemed worth it at the time. Potatoes were getting very scarce.
If you got a sackful you could take them down to the cook-house and swap
them for a water-bottleful of coffee.

And still nothing happened, nothing ever looked like happening. 'When
are we going to attack? Why don't we attack?' were the questions you
heard night and day from Spaniard and Englishman alike. When you think
what fighting means it is queer that soldiers want to fight, and yet
undoubtedly they do. In stationary warfare there are three things that
all soldiers long for: a battle, more cigarettes, and a week's leave. We
were somewhat better armed now than before. Each man had a hundred and
fifty rounds of ammunition instead of fifty, and by degrees we were
being issued with bayonets, steel helmets, and a few bombs. There were
constant rumours of forthcoming battles, which I have since thought were
deliberately circulated to keep up the spirits of the troops. It did not
need much military knowledge to see that there would be no major action
on this side of Huesca, at any rate for the time being. The strategic
point was the road to Jaca, over on the other side. Later, when the
Anarchists made their attacks on the Jaca road, our job was to make
'holding attacks' and force the Fascists to divert troops from the other
side.

During all this time, about six weeks, there was only one action on our
part of the front. This was when our Shock Troopers attacked the
Manicomio, a disused lunatic asylum which the Fascists had converted
into a fortress. There were several hundred refugee Germans serving with
the P.O.U.M. They were organized in a special battalion called the
Batallon de Cheque, and from a military point of view they were on quite
a different level from the rest of the militia--indeed, were more like
soldiers than anyone I saw in Spain, except the Assault Guards and some
of the International Column. The attack was mucked up, as usual. How
many operations in this war, on the Government side, were _not_ mucked
up, I wonder? The Shock Troops took the Manicomio by storm, but the
troops, of I forget which militia, who were to support them by seizing
the neighbouring hill that commanded the Manicomio, were badly let down.
The captain who led them was one of those Regular Army officers of
doubtful loyalty whom the Government persisted in employing. Either from
fright or treachery he warned the Fascists by flinging a bomb when they
were two hundred yards away. I am glad to say his men shot him dead on
the spot. But the surprise-attack was no surprise, and the militiamen
were mown down by heavy fire and driven off the hill, and at nightfall
the Shock Troops had to abandon the Manicomio. Through the night the
ambulances filed down the abominable road to Sietamo, killing the badly
wounded with their joltings.

All of us were lousy by this time; though still cold it was warm enough
for that. I have had a big experience of body vermin of various kinds,
and for sheer beastliness the louse beats everything I have encountered.
Other insects, mosquitoes for instance, make you suffer more, but at
least they aren't _resident_ vermin. The human louse somewhat resembles a
tiny lobster, and he lives chiefly in your trousers. Short of burning
all your clothes there is no known way of getting rid of him. Down the
seams of your trousers he lays his glittering white eggs, like tiny
grains of rice, which hatch out and breed families of their own at
horrible speed. I think the pacifists might find it helpful to
illustrate their pamphlets with enlarged photographs of lice. Glory of
war, indeed! In war _all_ soldiers are lousy, at least when it is warm
enough. The men who fought at Verdun, at Waterloo, at Flodden, at
Senlac, at Thermopylae--every one of them had lice crawling over his
testicles. We kept the brutes down to some extent by burning out the
eggs and by bathing as often as we could face it. Nothing short of lice
could have driven me into that ice-cold river.

Everything was running short--boots, clothes, tobacco, soap, candles,
matches, olive oil. Our uniforms were dropping to pieces, and many of
the men had no boots, only rope-soled sandals. You came on piles of
worn-out boots everywhere. Once we kept a dug-out fire burning for two
days mainly with boots, which are not bad fuel. By this time my wife was
in Barcelona and used to send me tea, chocolate, and even cigars when
such things were procurable, but even in Barcelona everything was
running short, especially tobacco. The tea was a godsend, though we had
no milk and seldom any sugar. Parcels were constantly being sent from
England to men in the contingent but they never arrived; food, clothes,
cigarettes--everything was either refused by the Post Office or seized
in France. Curiously enough, the only firm that succeeded in sending
packets of tea--even, on one memorable occasion, a tin of biscuits--to
my wife was the Army and Navy Stores. Poor old Army and Navy! They did
their duty nobly, but perhaps they might have felt happier if the stuff
had been going to Franco's side of the barricade. The shortage of
tobacco was the worst of all. At the beginning we had been issued with a
packet of cigarettes a day, then it got down to eight cigarettes a day,
then to five. Finally there were ten deadly days when there was no issue
of tobacco at all. For the first time, in Spain, I saw something that
you see every day in London--people picking up fag-ends.

Towards the end of March I got a poisoned hand that had to be lanced and
put in a sling. I had to go into hospital, but it was not worth sending
me to Sietamo for such a petty injury, so I stayed in the so-called
hospital at Monflorite, which was merely a casualty clearing station. I
was there ten days, part of the time in bed. The _practicantes_ (hospital
assistants) stole practically every valuable object I possessed,
including my camera and all my photographs. At the front everyone stole,
it was the inevitable effect of shortage, but the hospital people were
always the worst. Later, in the hospital at Barcelona, an American who
had come to join the International Column on a ship that was torpedoed
by an Italian submarine, told me how he was carried ashore wounded, and
how, even as they lifted him into the ambulance, the stretcher-bearers
pinched his wrist-watch.

While my arm was in the sling I spent several blissful days wandering
about the country-side. Monflorite was the usual huddle of mud and stone
houses, with narrow tortuous alleys that had been churned by lorries
till they looked like the craters of the moon. The church had been badly
knocked about but was used as a military store. In the whole
neighbourhood there were only two farm-houses of any size, Torre Lorenzo
and Torre Fabian, and only two really large buildings, obviously the
houses of the landowners who had once lorded it over the countryside;
you could see their wealth reflected in the miserable huts of the
peasants. Just behind the river, close to the front line, there was an
enormous flour-mill with a country-house attached to it. It seemed
shameful to see the huge costly machine rusting useless and the wooden
flour chutes torn down for firewood. Later on, to get firewood for the
troops farther back, parties of men were sent in lorries to wreck the
place systematically. They used to smash the floorboards of a room by
bursting a hand-grenade in it. La Granja, our store and cook-house, had
possibly at one time been a convent. It had huge courtyards and
out-houses, covering an acre or more, with stabling for thirty or forty
horses. The country-houses in that part of Spain are of no interest
architecturally, but their farm-buildings, of lime-washed stone with
round arches and magnificent roof-beams, are noble places, built on a
plan that has probably not altered for centuries. Sometimes it gave you
a sneaking sympathy with the Fascist ex-owners to see the way the
militia treated the buildings they had seized. In La Granja every room
that was not in use had been turned into a latrine--a frightful shambles
of smashed furniture and excrement. The little church that adjoined it,
its walls perforated by shell-holes, had its floor inches deep in dung.
In the great courtyard where the cooks ladled out the rations the litter
of rusty tins, mud, mule dung, and decaying food was revolting. It gave
point to the old army song:

There are rats, rats,
Rats as big as cats,
In the quartermaster's store!

The ones at La Granja itself really were as big as cats, or nearly;
great bloated brutes that waddled over the beds of muck, too impudent
even to run away unless you shot at them.

Spring was really here at last. The blue in the sky was softer, the air
grew suddenly balmy. The frogs were mating noisily in the ditches. Round
the drinking-pool that served for the village mules I found exquisite
green frogs the size of a penny, so brilliant that the young grass
looked dull beside them. Peasant lads went out with buckets hunting for
snails, which they roasted alive on sheets of tin. As soon as the
weather improved the peasants had turned out for the spring ploughing.
It is typical of the utter vagueness in which the Spanish agrarian
revolution is wrapped that I could not even discover for certain whether
the land here was collectivized or whether the peasants had simply
divided it up among themselves. I fancy that in theory it was
collectivized, this being P.O.U.M. and Anarchist territory. At any rate
the landowners were gone, the fields were being cultivated, and people
seemed satisfied. The friendliness of the peasants towards ourselves
never ceased to astonish me. To some of the older ones the war must have
seemed meaningless, visibly it produced a shortage of everything and a
dismal dull life for everybody, and at the best of times peasants hate
having troops quartered upon them. Yet they were invariably friendly--I
suppose reflecting that, however intolerable we might be in other ways,
we did stand between them and their one-time landlords. Civil war is a
queer thing. Huesca was not five miles away, it was these people's
market town, all of them had relatives there, every week of their lives
they had gone there to sell their poultry and vegetables. And now for
eight months an impenetrable barrier of barbed wire and machine-guns had
lain between. Occasionally it slipped their memory. Once I was talking
to an old woman who was carrying one of those tiny iron lamps in which
the Spaniards bum olive oil. 'Where can I buy a lamp like that?' I
said.' In Huesca,' she said without thinking, and then we both laughed.
The village girls were splendid vivid creatures with coal-black hair, a
swinging walk, and a straightforward, man-to-man demeanour which was
probably a by-product of the revolution.

Men in ragged blue shirts and black corduroy breeches, with
broad-brimmed straw hats, were ploughing the fields behind teams of
mules with rhythmically flopping ears. Their ploughs were wretched
things, only stirring the soil, not cutting anything we should regard as
a furrow. All the agricultural implements were pitifully antiquated,
everything being governed by the expensiveness of metal. A broken
plough-share, for instance, was patched, and then patched again, till
sometimes it was mainly patches. Rakes and pitchforks were made of wood.
Spades, among a people who seldom possessed boots, were unknown; they
did their digging with a clumsy hoe like those used in India. There was
a kind of harrow that took one straight back to the later Stone Age. It
was made of boards joined together, to about the size of a kitchen
table; in the boards hundreds of holes were morticed, and into each hole
was jammed a piece of flint which had been chipped into shape exactly as
men used to chip them ten thousand years ago. I remember my feelings
almost of horror when I first came upon one of these things in a
derelict hut in no man's land. I had to puzzle over it for a long while
before grasping that it was a harrow. It made me sick to think of the
work that must go into the making of such a thing, and the poverty that
was obliged to use flint in place of steel. I have felt more kindly
towards industrialism ever since. But in the village there were two
up-to-date farm tractors, no doubt seized from some big landowner's
estate.

Once or twice I wandered out to the little walled graveyard that stood a
mile or so from the village. The dead from the front were normally sent
to Sietamo; these were the village dead. It was queerly different from
an English graveyard. No reverence for the dead here! Everything
overgrown with bushes and coarse grass, human bones littered everywhere.
But the really surprising thing was the almost complete lack of
religious inscriptions on the gravestones, though they all dated from
before the revolution. Only once, I think, I saw the 'Pray for the Soul
of So-and-So' which is usual on Catholic graves. Most of the
inscriptions were purely secular, with ludicrous poems about the virtues
of the deceased. On perhaps one grave in four or five there was a small
cross or a perfunctory reference to Heaven; this had usually been
chipped off by some industrious atheist with a chisel.

It struck me that the people in this part of Spain must be genuinely
without religious feeling--religious feeling, I mean, in the orthodox
sense. It is curious that all the time I was in Spain I never once saw a
person cross himself; yet you would think such a movement would become
instinctive, revolution or no revolution. Obviously the Spanish Church
will come back (as the saying goes, night and the Jesuits always
return), but there is no doubt that at the outbreak of the revolution it
collapsed and was smashed up to an extent that would be unthinkable even
for the moribund C. of E. in like circumstances. To the Spanish people,
at any rate in Catalonia and Aragón, the Church was a racket pure and
simple. And possibly Christian belief was replaced to some extent by
Anarchism, whose influence is widely spread and which undoubtedly has a
religious tinge.

It was the day I came back from hospital that we advanced the line to
what was really its proper position, about a thousand yards forward,
along the little stream that lay a couple of hundred yards in front of
the Fascist line. This operation ought to have been carried out months
earlier. The point of doing it now was that the Anarchists were
attacking on the Jaca road, and to advance on this side made them divert
troops to face us.

We were sixty or seventy hours without sleep, and my memories go down
into a sort of blue, or rather a series of pictures. Listening-duty in
no man's land, a hundred yards from the Casa Francesa, a fortified
farm-house which was part of the Fascist line. Seven hours lying in a
horrible marsh, in reedy-smelling water into which one's body subsided
gradually deeper and deeper: the reedy smell, the numbing cold, the
stars immovable in the black sky, the harsh croaking of the frogs.
Though this was April it was the coldest night that I remember in Spain.
Only a hundred yards behind us the working-parties were hard at it, but
there was utter silence except for the chorus of the frogs. Just once
during the night I heard a sound--the familiar noise of a sand-bag being
flattened with a spade. It is queer how, just now and again, Spaniards
can carry out a brilliant feat of organization. The whole move was
beautifully planned. In seven hours six hundred men constructed twelve
hundred metres of trench and parapet, at distances of from a hundred and
fifty to three hundred yards from the Fascist line, and all so silently
that the Fascists heard nothing, and during the night there was only one
casualty. There were more next day, of course. Every man had his job
assigned to him, even to the cook-house orderlies who suddenly arrived
when the work was done with buckets of wine laced with brandy.

And then the dawn coming up and the Fascists suddenly discovering that
we were there. The square white block of the Casa Francesa, though it
was two hundred yards away, seemed to tower over us, and the
machine-guns in its sandbagged upper windows seemed to be pointing
straight down into the trench. We all stood gaping at it, wondering why
the Fascists didn't see us. Then a vicious swirl of bullets, and
everyone had flung himself on his knees and was frantically digging,
deepening the trench and scooping out small shelters in the side. My arm
was still in bandages, I could not dig, and I spent most of that day
reading a detective story--_The Missing Moneylender_ its name was. I
don't remember the plot of it, but I remember very clearly the feeling
of sitting there reading it; the dampish clay of the trench bottom
underneath me, the constant shifting of my legs out of the way as men
hurried stopping down the trench, the crack-crack-crack of bullets a
foot or two overhead. Thomas Parker got a bullet through the top of his
thigh, which, as he said, was nearer to being a D.S.O. than he cared
about. Casualties were happening all along the line, but nothing to what
there would have been if they had caught us on the move during the
night. A deserter told us afterwards that five Fascist sentries were
shot for negligence. Even now they could have massacred us if they had
had the initiative to bring up a few mortars. It was an awkward job
getting the wounded down the narrow, crowded trench. I saw one poor
devil, his breeches dark with blood, flung out of his stretcher and
gasping in agony. One had to carry wounded men a long distance, a mile
or more, for even when a road existed the ambulances never came very
near the front line. If they came too near the Fascists had a habit of
shelling them--justifiably, for in modern war no one scruples to use an
ambulance for carrying ammunition.

And then, next night, waiting at Torre Fabian for an attack that was
called off at the last moment by wireless. In the barn where we waited
the floor was a thin layer of chaff over deep beds of bones, human bones
and cows' bones mixed up, and the place was alive with rats. The filthy
brutes came swarming out of the ground on every side. If there is one
thing I hate more than another it is a rat running over me in the
darkness. However, I had the satisfaction of catching one of them a good
punch that sent him flying.

And then waiting fifty or sixty yards from the Fascist parapet for the
order to attack. A long line of men crouching in an irrigation ditch
with their bayonets peeping over the edge and the whites of their eyes
shining through the darkness. Kopp and Benjamin squatting behind us with
a man who had a wireless receiving-box strapped to his shoulders. On the
western horizon rosy gun-flashes followed at intervals of several
seconds by enormous explosions. And then a pip-pip-pip noise from the
wireless and the whispered order that we were to get out of it while the
going was good. We did so, but not quickly enough. Twelve wretched
children of the J.C.I. (the Youth League of the P.O.U.M., corresponding
to the J.S.U. of the P.S.U.C.) who had been posted only about forty
yards from the Fascist parapet, were caught by the dawn and unable to
escape. All day they had to lie there, with only tufts of grass for
cover, the Fascists shooting at them every time they moved. By nightfall
seven were dead, then the other five managed to creep away in the
darkness.

And then, for many mornings to follow, the sound of the Anarchist
attacks on the other side of Huesca. Always the same sound. Suddenly, at
some time in the small hours, the opening crash of several score bombs
bursting simultaneously--even from miles away a diabolical, rending
crash--and then the unbroken roar of massed rifles and machine-guns, a
heavy rolling sound curiously similar to the roll of drums. By degrees
the firing would spread all round the lines that encircled Huesca, and
we would stumble out into the trench to lean sleepily against the
parapet while a ragged meaningless fire swept overhead.

In the daytime the guns thundered fitfully. Torre Fabian, now our
cookhouse, was shelled and partially destroyed. It is curious that when
you are watching artillery-fire from a safe distance you always want the
gunner to hit his mark, even though the mark contains your dinner and
some of your comrades. The Fascists were shooting well that morning;
perhaps there were German gunners on the job. They bracketed neatly on
Torre Fabian. One shell beyond it, one shell short of it, then
whizz-BOOM' Burst rafters leaping upwards and a sheet of uralite
skimming down the air like a nicked playing-card. The next shell took
off a corner of a building as neatly as a giant might do it with a
knife. But the cooks produced dinner on time--a memorable feat.

As the days went on the unseen but audible guns began each to assume a
distinct personality. There were the two batteries of Russian 75-mm.
guns which fired from close in our rear and which somehow evoked in my
mind the picture of a fat man hitting a golf-ball. These were the first
Russian guns I had seen--or heard, rather. They had a low trajectory and
a very high velocity, so that you heard the cartridge explosion, the
whizz, and the shell-burst almost simultaneously. Behind Monflorite were
two very heavy guns which fired a few times a day, with a deep, muffled
roar that was like the baying of distant chained-up monsters. Up at
Mount Aragón, the medieval fortress which the Government troops had
stormed last year (the first time in its history, it was said), and
which guarded one of the approaches to Huesca, there was a heavy gun
which must have dated well back into the nineteenth century. Its great
shells whistled over so slowly that you felt certain you could run
beside them and keep up with them. A shell from this gun sounded like
nothing so much as a man riding along on a bicycle and whistling. The
trench-mortars, small though they were, made the most evil sound of all.
Their shells are really a kind of winged torpedo, shaped like the darts
thrown in public-houses and about the size of a quart bottle; they go
off with a devilish metallic crash, as of some monstrous globe of
brittle steel being shattered on an anvil. Sometimes our aeroplanes flew
over and let loose the aerial torpedoes whose tremendous echoing roar
makes the earth tremble even at two miles' distance. The shell-bursts
from the Fascist anti-aircraft guns dotted the sky like cloudlets in a
bad water-colour, but I never saw them get within a thousand yards of an
aeroplane. When an aeroplane swoops down and uses its machine-gun the
sound, from below, is like the fluttering of wings.

On our part of the line not much was happening. Two hundred yards to the
right of us, where the Fascists were on higher ground, their snipers
picked off a few of our comrades. Two hundred yards to the left, at the
bridge over the stream, a sort of duel was going on between the Fascist
mortars and the men who were building a concrete barricade across the
bridge. The evil little shells whizzed over, zwing-crash! zwing-crash!,
making a doubly diabolical noise when they landed on the asphalt road. A
hundred yards away you could stand in perfect safety and watch the
columns of earth and black smoke leaping into the air like magic trees.
The poor devils round the bridge spent much of the daytime cowering in
the little man-holes they had scooped in the side of the trench. But
there were less casualties than might have been expected, and the
barricade rose steadily, a wall of concrete two feet thick, with
embrasures for two machine-guns and a small field gun. The concrete was
being reinforced with old bedsteads, which apparently was the only iron
that could be found for the purpose.



Chapter 7


One afternoon Benjamin told us that he wanted fifteen volunteers. The
attack on the Fascist redoubt which had been called off on the previous
occasion was to be carried out tonight. I oiled my ten Mexican
cartridges, dirtied my bayonet (the things give your position away if
they flash too much), and packed up a hunk of bread, three inches of red
sausage, and a cigar which my wife had sent from Barcelona and which I
had been hoarding for a long time. Bombs were served out, three to a
man. The Spanish Government had at last succeeded in producing a decent
bomb. It was on the principle of a Mills bomb, but with two pins instead
of one. After you had pulled the pins out there was an interval of seven
seconds before the bomb exploded. Its chief disadvantage was that one
pin was very stiff and the other very loose, so that you had the choice
of leaving both pins in place and being unable to pull the stiff one out
in a moment of emergency, or pulling out the stiff one beforehand and
being in a constant stew lest the thing should explode in your pocket.
But it was a handy little bomb to throw.

A little before midnight Benjamin led the fifteen of us down to Torre
Fabian. Ever since evening the rain had been pelting down. The
irrigation ditches were brimming over, and every time you stumbled into
one you were in water up to your waist. In the pitch darkness and
sheeting rain in the farm-yard a dim mass of men was waiting. Kopp
addressed us, first in Spanish, then in English, and explained the plan
of attack. The Fascist line here made an L-bend and the parapet we were
to attack lay on rising ground at the corner of the L. About thirty of
us, half English, and half Spanish, under the command of Jorge Roca, our
battalion commander (a battalion in the militia was about four hundred
men), and Benjamin, were to creep up and cut the Fascist wire. Jorge
would fling the first bomb as a signal, then the rest of us were to send
in a rain of bombs, drive the Fascists out of the parapet, and seize it
before they could rally. Simultaneously seventy Shock Troopers were to
assault the next Fascist 'position', which lay two hundred yards to the
right of the other, joined to it by a communication-trench. To prevent
us from shooting each other in the darkness white armlets would be worn.
At this moment a messenger arrived to say that there were no white
armlets. Out of the darkness a plaintive voice suggested: 'Couldn't we
arrange for the Fascists to wear white armlets instead?'

There was an hour or two to put in. The barn over the mule stable was so
wrecked by shell-fire that you could not move about in it without a
light. Half the floor had been torn away by a plunging shell and there
was a twenty-foot drop on to the stones beneath. Someone found a pick
and levered a burst plank out of the floor, and in a few minutes we had
got a fire alight and our drenched clothes were steaming. Someone else
produced a pack of cards. A rumour--one of those mysterious rumours that
are endemic in war--flew round that hot coffee with brandy in it was
about to be served out. We filed eagerly down the almost-collapsing
staircase and wandered round the dark yard, inquiring where the coffee
was to be found. Alas! there was no coffee. Instead, they called us
together, ranged us into single file, and then Jorge and Benjamin set
off rapidly into the darkness, the rest of us following.

It was still raining and intensely dark, but the wind had dropped. The
mud was unspeakable. The paths through the beet-fields were simply a
succession of lumps, as slippery as a greasy pole, with huge pools
everywhere. Long before we got to the place where we were to leave our
own parapet everyone had fallen several times and our rifles were coated
with mud. At the parapet a small knot of men, our reserves, were
waiting, and the doctor and a row of stretchers. We filed through the
gap in the parapet and waded through another irrigation ditch.
Splash-gurgle! Once again in water up to your waist, with the filthy,
slimy mud oozing over your boot-tops. On the grass outside Jorge waited
till we were all through. Then, bent almost double, he began creeping
slowly forward. The Fascist parapet was about a hundred and fifty yards
away. Our one chance of getting there was to move without noise.

I was in front with Jorge and Benjamin. Bent double, but with faces
raised, we crept into the almost utter darkness at a pace that grew
slower at every step. The rain beat lightly in our faces. When I glanced
back I could see the men who were nearest to me, a bunch of humped
shapes like huge black mushrooms gliding slowly forward. But every time
I raised my head Benjamin, close beside me, whispered fiercely in my
ear: 'To keep ze head down! To keep ze head down!' I could have told him
that he needn't worry. I knew by experiment that on a dark night you can
never see a man at twenty paces. It was far more important to go
quietly. If they once heard us we were done for. They had only to spray
the darkness with their machine-gun and there was nothing for it but to
run or be massacred.

But on the sodden ground it was almost impossible to move quietly. Do
what you would your feet stuck to the mud, and every step you took was
slop-slop, slop-slop. And the devil of it was that the wind had dropped,
and in spite of the rain it was a very quiet night. Sounds would carry a
long way. There was a dreadful moment when I kicked against a tin and
thought every Fascist within miles must have heard it. But no, not a
sound, no answering shot, no movement in the Fascist lines. We crept
onwards, always more slowly. I cannot convey to you the depth of my
desire to get there. Just to get within bombing distance before they
heard us! At such a time you have not even any fear, only a tremendous
hopeless longing to get over the intervening ground. I have felt exactly
the same thing when stalking a wild animal; the same agonized desire to
get within range, the same dreamlike certainty that it is impossible.
And how the distance stretched out! I knew the ground well, it was
barely a hundred and fifty yards, and yet it seemed more like a mile.
When you are creeping at that pace you are aware as an ant might be of
the enormous variations in the ground; the splendid patch of smooth
grass here, the evil patch of sticky mud there, the tall rustling reeds
that have got to be avoided, the heap of stones that almost makes you
give up hope because it seems impossible to get over it without noise.

We had been creeping forward for such an age that I began to think we
had gone the wrong way. Then in the darkness thin parallel lines of
something blacker were faintly visible. It was the outer wire (the
Fascists had two lines of wire). Jorge knelt down, fumbled in his
pocket. He had our only pair of wire-cutters. Snip, snip. The trailing
stuff was lifted delicately aside. We waited for the men at the back to
close up. They seemed to be making a frightful noise. It might be fifty
yards to the Fascist parapet now. Still onwards, bent double. A stealthy
step, lowering your foot as gently as a cat approaching a mousehole;
then a pause to listen; then another step. Once I raised my head; in
silence Benjamin put his hand behind my neck and pulled it violently
down. I knew that the inner wire was barely twenty yards from the
parapet. It seemed to me inconceivable that thirty men could get there
unheard. Our breathing was enough to give us away. Yet somehow we did
get there. The Fascist parapet was visible now, a dim black mound,
looming high above us. Once again Jorge knelt and fumbled. Snip, snip.
There was no way of cutting the stuff silently.

So that was the inner wire. We crawled through it on all fours and
rather more rapidly. If we had time to deploy now all was well. Jorge
and Benjamin crawled across to the right. But the men behind, who were
spread out, had to form into single file to get through the narrow gap
in the wire, and just as this moment there was a flash and a bang from
the Fascist parapet. The sentry had heard us at last. Jorge poised
himself on one knee and swung his arm like a bowler. Crash! His bomb
burst somewhere over the parapet. At once, far more promptly than one
would have thought possible, a roar of fire, ten or twenty rifles, burst
out from the Fascist parapet. They had been waiting for us after all.
Momentarily you could see every sand-bag in the lurid light. Men too far
back were flinging their bombs and some of them were falling short of
the parapet. Every loophole seemed to be spouting jets of flame. It is
always hateful to be shot at in the dark--every rifle-flash seems to be
pointed straight at yourself--but it was the bombs that were the worst.
You cannot conceive the horror of these things till you have seen one
burst close to you in darkness; in the daytime there is only the crash
of the explosion, in the darkness there is the blinding red glare as
well. I had flung myself down at the first volley. All this while I was
lying on my side in the greasy mud, wrestling savagely with the pin of a
bomb. The damned thing would not come out. Finally I realized that I was
twisting it in the wrong direction. I got the pin out, rose to my knees,
hurled the bomb, and threw myself down again. The bomb burst over to the
right, outside the parapet; fright had spoiled my aim. Just at this
moment another bomb burst right in front of me, so close that I could
feel the heat of the explosion. I flattened myself out and dug my face
into the mud so hard that I hurt my neck and thought that I was wounded.
Through the din I heard an English voice behind me say quietly: 'I'm
hit.' The bomb had, in fact, wounded several people round about me
without touching myself. I rose to my knees and flung my second bomb. I
forget where that one went.

The Fascists were firing, our people behind were firing, and I was very
conscious of being in the middle. I felt the blast of a shot and
realized that a man was firing from immediately behind me. I stood up
and shouted at him: 'Don't shoot at me, you bloody fool!' At this moment
I saw that Benjamin, ten or fifteen yards to my right, was motioning to
me with his arm. I ran across to him. It meant crossing the line of
spouting loop-holes, and as I went I clapped my left hand over my cheek;
an idiotic gesture--as though one's hand could stop a bullet!--but I had
a horror of being hit in the face. Benjamin was kneeling on one knee
with a pleased, devilish sort of expression on his face and firing
carefully at the rifle-flashes with his automatic pistol. Jorge had
dropped wounded at the first volley and was somewhere out of sight. I
knelt beside Benjamin, pulled the pin out of my third bomb and flung it.
Ah! No doubt about it that time. The bomb crashed inside the parapet, at
the corner, just by the machine-gun nest.

The Fascist fire seemed to have slackened very suddenly. Benjamin leapt
to his feet and shouted: 'Forward! Charge!' We dashed up the short steep
slope on which the parapet stood. I say 'dashed'; 'lumbered' would be a
better word; the fact is that you can't move fast when you are sodden
and mudded from head to foot and weighted down with a heavy rifle and
bayonet and a hundred and fifty cartridges. I took it for granted that
there would be a Fascist waiting for me at the top. If he fired at that
range he could not miss me, and yet somehow I never expected him to
fire, only to try for me with his bayonet. I seemed to feel in advance
the sensation of our bayonets crossing, and I wondered whether his arm
would be stronger than mine. However, there was no Fascist waiting. With
a vague feeling of relief I found that it was a low parapet and the
sand-bags gave a good foothold. As a rule they are difficult to get
over. Everything inside was smashed to pieces, beams flung all over the
place, and great shards of uralite littered everywhere. Our bombs had
wrecked all the huts and dug-outs. And still there was not a soul
visible. I thought they would be lurking somewhere underground, and
shouted in English (I could not think of any Spanish at the moment):
'Come on out of it! Surrender!' No answer. Then a man, a shadowy figure
in the half-light, skipped over the roof of one of the ruined huts and
dashed away to the left. I started after him, prodding my bayonet
ineffectually into the darkness. As I rounded the comer of the hut I saw
a man--I don't know whether or not it was the same man as I had seen
before--fleeing up the communication-trench that led to the other
Fascist position. I must have been very close to him, for I could see
him clearly. He was bareheaded and seemed to have nothing on except a
blanket which he was clutching round his shoulders. If I had fired I
could have blown him to pieces. But for fear of shooting one another we
had been ordered to use only bayonets once we were inside the parapet,
and in any case I never even thought of firing. Instead, my mind leapt
backwards twenty years, to our boxing instructor at school, showing me
in vivid pantomime how he had bayoneted a Turk at the Dardanelles. I
gripped my rifle by the small of the butt and lunged at the man's back.
He was just out of my reach. Another lunge: still out of reach. And for
a little distance we proceeded like this, he rushing up the trench and I
after him on the ground above, prodding at his shoulder-blades and never
quite getting there--a comic memory for me to look back upon, though I
suppose it seemed less comic to him.

Of course, he knew the ground better than I and had soon slipped away
from me. When I came back the position was full of shouting men. The
noise of firing had lessened somewhat. The Fascists were still pouring a
heavy fire at us from three sides, but it was coming from a greater
distance.

We had driven them back for the time being. I remember saying in an
oracular manner: 'We can hold this place for half an hour, not more.' I
don't know why I picked on half an hour. Looking over the right-hand
parapet you could see innumerable greenish rifle-flashes stabbing the
darkness; but they were a long way back, a hundred or two hundred yards.
Our job now was to search the position and loot anything that was worth
looting. Benjamin and some others were already scrabbling among the
ruins of a big hut or dug-out in the middle of the position. Benjamin
staggered excitedly through the ruined roof, tugging at the rope handle
of an ammunition box.

'Comrades! Ammunition! Plenty ammunition here!'

'We don't want ammunition,' said a voice, 'we want rifles.'

This was true. Half our rifles were jammed with mud and unusable. They
could be cleaned, but it is dangerous to take the bolt out of a rifle in
the darkness; you put it down somewhere and then you lose it. I had a
tiny electric torch which my wife had managed to buy in Barcelona,
otherwise we had no light of any description between us. A few men with
good rifles began a desultory fire at the flashes in the distance. No
one dared fire too rapidly; even the best of the rifles were liable to
jam if they got too hot. There were about sixteen of us inside the
parapet, including one or two who were wounded. A number of wounded,
English and Spanish, were lying outside. Patrick O'Hara, a Belfast
Irishman who had had some training in first-aid, went to and fro with
packets of bandages, binding up the wounded men and, of course, being
shot at every time he returned to the parapet, in spite of his indignant
shouts of 'POUM!'

We began searching the position. There were several dead men lying
about, but I did not stop to examine them. The thing I was after was the
machine-gun. All the while when we were lying outside I had been
wondering vaguely why the gun did not fire. I flashed my torch inside
the machine-gun nest. A bitter disappointment! The gun was not there.
Its tripod was there, and various boxes of ammunition and spare parts,
but the gun was gone. They must have unscrewed it and carried it off at
the first alarm. No doubt they were acting under orders, but it was a
stupid and cowardly thing to do, for if they had kept the gun in place
they could have slaughtered the whole lot of us. We were furious. We had
set our hearts on capturing a machine-gun.

We poked here and there but did not find anything of much value. There
were quantities of Fascist bombs lying about--a rather inferior type of
bomb, which you touched off by pulling a string--and I put a couple of
them in my pocket as souvenirs. It was impossible not to be struck by
the bare misery of the Fascist dug-outs. The litter of spare clothes,
books, food, petty personal belongings that you saw in our own dug-outs
was completely absent; these poor unpaid conscripts seemed to own
nothing except blankets and a few soggy hunks of bread. Up at the far
end there was a small dug-out which was partly above ground and had a
tiny window. We flashed the torch through the window and instantly
raised a cheer. A cylindrical object in a leather case, four feet high
and six inches in diameter, was leaning against the wall. Obviously the
machine-gun barrel. We dashed round and got in at the doorway, to find
that the thing in the leather case was not a machine-gun but something
which, in our weapon-starved army, was even more precious. It was an
enormous telescope, probably of at least sixty or seventy
magnifications, with a folding tripod. Such telescopes simply did not
exist on our side of the line and they were desperately needed. We
brought it out in triumph and leaned it against the parapet, to be
carried off after.

At this moment someone shouted that the Fascists were closing in.
Certainly the din of firing had grown very much louder. But it was
obvious that the Fascists would not counterattack from the right, which
meant crossing no man's land and assaulting their own parapet. If they
had any sense at all they would come at us from inside the line. I went
round to the other side of the dug-outs. The position was roughly
horseshoe-shaped, with the dug-outs in the middle, so that we had
another parapet covering us on the left. A heavy fire was coming from
that direction, but it did not matter greatly. The danger-spot was
straight in front, where there was no protection at all. A stream of
bullets was passing just overhead. They must be coming from the other
Fascist position farther up the line; evidently the Shock Troopers had
not captured it after all. But this time the noise was deafening. It was
the unbroken, drum-like roar of massed rifles which I was used to
hearing from a little distance; this was the first time I had been in
the middle of it. And by now, of course, the firing had spread along the
line for miles around. Douglas Thompson, with a wounded arm dangling
useless at his side, was leaning against the parapet and firing
one-handed at the flashes. Someone whose rifle had jammed was loading
for him.

There were four or five of us round this side. It was obvious what we
must do. We must drag the sand-bags from the front parapet and make a
barricade across the unprotected side. And we had got to be quick. The
fire was high at present, but they might lower it at any moment; by the
flashes all round I could see that we had a hundred or two hundred men
against us. We began wrenching the sand-bags loose, carrying them twenty
yards forward and dumping them into a rough heap. It was a vile job.
They were big sand-bags, weighing a hundredweight each and it took every
ounce of your strength to prise them loose; and then the rotten sacking
split and the damp earth cascaded all over you, down your neck and up
your sleeves. I remember feeling a deep horror at everything: the chaos,
the darkness, the frightful din, the slithering to and fro in the mud,
the struggles with the bursting sand-bags--all the time encumbered with
my rifle, which I dared not put down for fear of losing it. I even
shouted to someone as we staggered along with a bag between us: 'This is
war! Isn't it bloody?' Suddenly a succession of tall figures came
leaping over the front parapet. As they came nearer we saw that they
wore the uniform of the Shock Troopers, and we cheered, thinking they
were reinforcements. However, there were only four of them, three
Germans and a Spaniard. We heard afterwards what had happened to the
Shock Troopers. They did not know the ground and in the darkness had
been led to the wrong place, where they were caught on the Fascist wire
and numbers of them were shot down. These were four who had got lost,
luckily for themselves. The Germans did not speak a word of English,
French, or Spanish. With difficulty and much gesticulation we explained
what we were doing and got them to help us in building the barricade.

The Fascists had brought up a machine-gun now. You could see it spitting
like a squib a hundred or two hundred yards away; the bullets came over
us with a steady, frosty crackle. Before long we had flung enough
sand-bags into place to make a low breastwork behind which the few men
who were on this side of the position could lie down and fire. I was
kneeling behind them. A mortar-shell whizzed over and crashed somewhere
in no man's land. That was another danger, but it would take them some
minutes to find our range. Now that we had finished wrestling with those
beastly sand-bags it was not bad fun in a way; the noise, the darkness,
the flashes approaching, our own men blazing back at the flashes. One
even had time to think a little. I remember wondering whether I was
frightened, and deciding that I was not. Outside, where I was probably
in less danger, I had been half sick with fright. Suddenly there was
another shout that the Fascists were closing in. There was no doubt
about it this time, the rifle-flashes were much nearer. I saw a flash
hardly twenty yards away. Obviously they were working their way up the
communication-trench. At twenty yards they were within easy bombing
range; there were eight or nine of us bunched together and a single
well-placed bomb would blow us all to fragments. Bob Smillie, the blood
running down his face from a small wound, sprang to his knee and flung a
bomb. We cowered, waiting for the crash. The fuse fizzled red as it
sailed through the air, but the bomb failed to explode. (At least a
quarter of these bombs were duds). I had no bombs left except the
Fascist ones and I was not certain how these worked. I shouted to the
others to know if anyone had a bomb to spare. Douglas Moyle felt in his
pocket and passed one across. I flung it and threw myself on my face. By
one of those strokes of luck that happen about once in a year I had
managed to drop the bomb almost exactly where the rifle had flashed.
There was the roar of the explosion and then, instantly, a diabolical
outcry of screams and groans. We had got one of them, anyway; I don't
know whether he was killed, but certainly he was badly hurt. Poor
wretch, poor wretch! I felt a vague sorrow as I heard him screaming. But
at the same instant, in the dim light of the rifle-flashes, I saw or
thought I saw a figure standing near the place where the rifle had
flashed. I threw up my rifle and let fly. Another scream, but I think it
was still the effect of the bomb. Several more bombs were thrown. The
next rifle-flashes we saw were a long way off, a hundred yards or more.
So we had driven them back, temporarily at least.

Everyone began cursing and saying why the hell didn't they send us some
supports. With a sub-machine-gun or twenty men with clean rifles we
could hold this place against a battalion. At this moment Paddy
Donovan, who was second-in-command to Benjamin and had been sent back for
orders, climbed over the front parapet.

'Hi! Come on out of it! All men to retire at once!'

'What?'

'Retire! Get out of it!'

'Why?'

'Orders. Back to our own lines double-quick.'

People were already climbing over the front parapet. Several of them
were struggling with a heavy ammunition box. My mind flew to the
telescope which I had left leaning against the parapet on the other side
of the position. But at this moment I saw that the four Shock Troopers,
acting I suppose on some mysterious orders they had received beforehand,
had begun running up the communication-trench. It led to the other
Fascist position and--if they got there--to certain death. They were
disappearing into the darkness. I ran after them, trying to think of the
Spanish for 'retire'; finally I shouted, '_Atrás! Atrás!_' which perhaps
conveyed the right meaning. The Spaniard understood it and brought the
others back. Paddy was waiting at the parapet.

'Come on, hurry up.'

'But the telescope!'

'Bugger the telescope! Benjamin's waiting outside.'

We climbed out. Paddy held the wire aside for me. As soon as we got away
from the shelter of the Fascist parapet we were under a devilish fire
that seemed to be coming at us from every direction. Part of it, I do
not doubt, came from our own side, for everyone was firing all along the
line. Whichever way we turned a fresh stream of bullets swept past; we
were driven this way and that in the darkness like a flock of sheep. It
did not make it any easier that we were dragging a captured box of
ammunition--one of those boxes that hold 1750 rounds and weigh about a
hundredweight--besides a box of bombs and several Fascist rifles. In a
few minutes, although the distance from parapet to parapet was not two
hundred yards and most of us knew the ground, we were completely lost.
We found ourselves slithering about in a muddy field, knowing nothing
except that bullets were coming from both sides. There was no moon to go
by, but the sky was growing a little lighter. Our lines lay east of
Huesca; I wanted to stay where we were till the first crack of dawn
showed us which was east and which was west; but the others were against
it. We slithered onwards, changing our direction several times and
taking it in turns to haul at the ammunition-box. At last we saw the low
flat line of a parapet looming in front of us. It might be ours or it
might be the Fascists'; nobody had the dimmest idea which way we were
going. Benjamin crawled on his belly through some tall whitish weed till
he was about twenty yards from the parapet and tried a challenge. A
shout of 'POUM!' answered him. We jumped to our feet, found our way
along the parapet, slopped once more through the irrigation
ditch--splash-gurgle!--and were in safety.

Kopp was waiting inside the parapet with a few Spaniards. The doctor and
the stretchers were gone. It appeared that all the wounded had been got
in except Jorge and one of our own men, Hiddlestone by name, who were
missing. Kopp was pacing up and down, very pale. Even the fat folds at
the back of his neck were pale; he was paying no attention to the
bullets that streamed over the low parapet and cracked close to his
head. Most of us were squatting behind the parapet for cover. Kopp was
muttering. '_Jorge! Coño! Jorge!_' And then in English. 'If Jorge is gone
it is terreeble, terreeble!' Jorge was his personal friend and one of
his best officers. Suddenly he turned to us and asked for five
volunteers, two English and three Spanish, to go and look for the
missing men. Moyle and I volunteered with three Spaniards.

As we got outside the Spaniards murmured that it was getting dangerously
light. This was true enough; the sky was dimly blue. There was a
tremendous noise of excited voices coming from the Fascist redoubt.
Evidently they had re-occupied the place in much greater force than
before. We were sixty or seventy yards from the parapet when they must
have seen or heard us, for they sent over a heavy burst of fire which
made us drop on our faces. One of them flung a bomb over the parapet--a
sure sign of panic. We were lying in the grass, waiting for an
opportunity to move on, when we heard or thought we heard--I have no
doubt it was pure imagination, but it seemed real enough at the
time--that the Fascist voices were much closer. They had left the
parapet and were coming after us. 'Run!' I yelled to Moyle, and jumped
to my feet. And heavens, how I ran! I had thought earlier in the night
that you can't run when you are sodden from head to foot and weighted
down with a rifle and cartridges; I learned now you can _always_ run when
you think you have fifty or a hundred armed men after you. But if I
could run fast, others could run faster. In my flight something that
might have been a shower of meteors sped past me. It was the three
Spaniards, who had been in front. They were back to our own parapet
before they stopped and I could catch up with them. The truth was that
our nerves were all to pieces. I knew, however, that in a half light one
man is invisible where five are clearly visible, so I went back alone. I
managed to get to the outer wire and searched the ground as well as I
could, which was not very well, for I had to lie on my belly. There was
no sign of Jorge or Hiddlestone, so I crept back. We learned afterwards
that both Jorge and Hiddlestone had been taken to the dressing-station
earlier. Jorge was lightly wounded through the shoulder. Hiddlestone had
received a dreadful wound--a bullet which travelled right up his left
arm, breaking the bone in several places; as he lay helpless on the
ground a bomb had burst near him and torn various other parts of his
body. He recovered, I am glad to say. Later he told me that he had
worked his way some distance lying on his back, then had clutched hold
of a wounded Spaniard and they had helped one another in.

It was getting light now. Along the line for miles around a ragged
meaningless fire was thundering, like the rain that goes on raining
after a storm. I remember the desolate look of everything, the morasses
of mud, the weeping poplar trees, the yellow water in the
trench-bottoms; and men's exhausted faces, unshaven, streaked with mud,
and blackened to the eyes with smoke. When I got back to my dug-out the
three men I shared it with were already fast sleep. They had flung
themselves down with all their equipment on and their muddy rifles
clutched against them. Everything was sodden, inside the dug-out as well
as outside. By long searching I managed to collect enough chips of dry
wood to make a tiny fire. Then I smoked the cigar which I had been
hoarding and which, surprisingly enough, had not got broken during the
night.

Afterwards we learned that the action had been a success, as such things
go. It was merely a raid to make the Fascists divert troops from the
other side of Huesca, where the Anarchists were attacking again. I had
judged that the Fascists had thrown a hundred or two hundred men into
the counterattack, but a deserter told us later on that it was six
hundred. I dare say he was lying--deserters, for obvious reasons, often
try to curry favour. It was a great pity about the telescope. The
thought of losing that beautiful bit of loot worries me even now.



Chapter 8


The days grew hotter and even the nights grew tolerably warm. On a
bullet-chipped tree in front of our parapet thick clusters of cherries
were forming. Bathing in the river ceased to be an agony and became
almost a pleasure. Wild roses with pink blooms the size of saucers
straggled over the shell-holes round Torre Fabian. Behind the line you
met peasants wearing wild roses over their ears. In the evenings they
used to go out with green nets, hunting quails. You spread the net over
the tops of the grasses and then lay down and made a noise like a female
quail. Any male quail that was within hearing then came running towards
you, and when he was underneath the net you threw a stone to scare him,
whereupon he sprang into the air and was entangled in the net.
Apparently only male quails were caught, which struck me as unfair.

There was a section of Andalusians next to us in the line now. I do not
know quite how they got to this front. The current explanation was that
they had run away from Málaga so fast that they had forgotten to stop at
Valencia; but this, of course, came from the Catalans, who professed to
look down on the Andalusians as a race of semi-savages. Certainly the
Andalusians were very ignorant. Few if any of them could read, and they
seemed not even to know the one thing that everybody knows in
Spain--which political party they belonged to. They thought they were
Anarchists, but were not quite certain; perhaps they were Communists.
They were gnarled, rustic-looking men, shepherds or labourers from the
olive groves, perhaps, with faces deeply stained by the ferocious suns
of farther south. They were very useful to us, for they had an
extraordinary dexterity at rolling the dried-up Spanish tobacco into
cigarettes. The issue of cigarettes had ceased, but in Monflorite it was
occasionally possible to buy packets of the cheapest kind of tobacco,
which in appearance and texture was very like chopped chaff. Its flavour
was not bad, but it was so dry that even when you had succeeded in
making a cigarette the tobacco promptly fell out and left an empty
cylinder. The Andalusians, however, could roll admirable cigarettes and
had a special technique for tucking the ends in.

Two Englishmen were laid low by sunstroke. My salient memories of that
time are the heat of the midday sun, and working half-naked with
sand-bags punishing one's shoulders which were already flayed by the
sun; and the lousiness of our clothes and boots, which were literally
dropping to pieces; and the struggles with the mule which brought our
rations and which did not mind rifle-fire but took to flight when
shrapnel burst in the air; and the mosquitoes (just beginning to be
active) and the rats, which were a public nuisance and would even devour
leather belts and cartridge-pouches. Nothing was happening except an
occasional casualty from a sniper's bullet and the sporadic
artillery-fire and air-raids on Huesca. Now that the trees were in full
leaf we had constructed snipers' platforms, like machans, in the poplar
trees that fringed the line. On the other side of Huesca the attacks
were petering out. The Anarchists had had heavy losses and had not
succeeded in completely cutting the Jaca road. They had managed to
establish themselves close enough on either side to bring the road
itself under machine-gun fire and make it impassable for traffic; but
the gap was a kilometre wide and the Fascists had constructed a sunken
road, a sort of enormous trench, along which a certain number of lorries
could come and go. Deserters reported that in Huesca there were plenty
of munitions and very little food. But the town was evidently not going
to fall. Probably it would have been impossible to take it with the
fifteen thousand ill-armed men who were available. Later, in June, the
Government brought troops from the Madrid front and concentrated thirty
thousand men on Huesca, with an enormous quantity of aeroplanes, but
still the town did not fall.

When we went on leave I had been a hundred and fifteen days in the line,
and at the time this period seemed to me to have been one of the most
futile of my whole life. I had joined the militia in order to fight
against Fascism, and as yet I had scarcely fought at all, had merely
existed as a sort of passive object, doing nothing in return for my
rations except to suffer from cold and lack of sleep. Perhaps that is
the fate of most soldiers in most wars. But now that I can see this
period in perspective I do not altogether regret it. I wish, indeed,
that I could have served the Spanish Government a little more
effectively; but from a personal point of view--from the point of view
of my own development--those first three or four months that I spent in
the line were less futile than I then thought. They formed a kind of
interregnum in my life, quite different from anything that had gone
before and perhaps from anything that is to come, and they taught me
things that I could not have learned in any other way.

The essential point is that all this time I had been isolated--for at
the front one was almost completely isolated from the outside world:
even of what was happening in Barcelona one had only a dim
conception--among people who could roughly but not too inaccurately be
described as revolutionaries. This was the result of the militia-system,
which on the Aragón front was not radically altered till about June
1937. The workers' militias, based on the trade unions and each composed
of people of approximately the same political opinions, had the effect
of canalizing into one place all the most revolutionary sentiment in the
country. I had dropped more or less by chance into the only community of
any size in Western Europe where political consciousness and disbelief
in capitalism were more normal than their opposites. Up here in Aragón
one was among tens of thousands of people, mainly though not entirely of
working-class origin, all living at the same level and mingling on terms
of equality. In theory it was perfect equality, and even in practice it
was not far from it. There is a sense in which it would be true to say
that one was experiencing a foretaste of Socialism, by which I mean that
the prevailing mental atmosphere was that of Socialism.
Many of the normal motives of civilized life--snobbishness,
money-grubbing, fear of the boss, etc.--had simply ceased to exist. The
ordinary class-division of society had disappeared to an extent that is
almost unthinkable in the money-tainted air of England; there was no one
there except the peasants and ourselves, and no one owned anyone else as
his master. Of course such a state of affairs could not last. It was
simply a temporary and local phase in an enormous game that is being
played over the whole surface of the earth. But it lasted long enough to
have its effect upon anyone who experienced it. However much one cursed
at the time, one realized afterwards that one had been in contact with
something strange and valuable. One had been in a community where hope
was more normal than apathy or cynicism, where the word 'comrade' stood
for comradeship and not, as in most countries, for humbug. One had
breathed the air of equality. I am well aware that it is now the fashion
to deny that Socialism has anything to do with equality. In every
country in the world a huge tribe of party-hacks and sleek little
professors are busy 'proving' that Socialism means no more than a
planned state-capitalism with the grab-motive left intact. But
fortunately there also exists a vision of Socialism quite different from
this. The thing that attracts ordinary men to Socialism and makes them
willing to risk their skins for it, the 'mystique' of Socialism, is the
idea of equality; to the vast majority of people Socialism means a
classless society, or it means nothing at all. And it was here that
those few months in the militia were valuable to me. For the Spanish
militias, while they lasted, were a sort of microcosm of a classless
society. In that community where no one was on the make, where there was
a shortage of everything but no privilege and no boot-licking, one got,
perhaps, a crude forecast of what the opening stages of Socialism might
be like. And, after all, instead of disillusioning me it deeply
attracted me. The effect was to make my desire to see Socialism
established much more actual than it had been before. Partly, perhaps,
this was due to the good luck of being among Spaniards, who, with their
innate decency and their ever-present Anarchist tinge, would make even
the opening stages of Socialism tolerable if they had the chance.

Of course at the time I was hardly conscious of the changes that were
occurring in my own mind. Like everyone about me I was chiefly conscious
of boredom, heat, cold, dirt, lice, privation, and occasional danger. It
is quite different now. This period which then seemed so futile and
eventless is now of great importance to me. It is so different from the
rest of my life that already it has taken on the magic quality which, as
a rule, belongs only to memories that are years old. It was beastly
while it was happening, but it is a good patch for my mind to browse
upon. I wish I could convey to you the atmosphere of that time. I hope I
have done so, a little, in the earlier chapters of this book. It is all
bound up in my mind with the winter cold, the ragged uniforms of
militiamen, the oval Spanish faces, the morse-like tapping of
machine-guns, the smells of urine and rotting bread, the tinny taste of
bean-stews wolfed hurriedly out of unclean pannikins.

The whole period stays by me with curious vividness. In my memory I live
over incidents that might seem too petty to be worth recalling. I am in
the dug-out at Monte Pocero again, on the ledge of limestone that serves
as a bed, and young Ramon is snoring with his nose flattened between my
shoulder-blades. I am stumbling up the mucky trench, through the mist
that swirls round me like cold steam. I am half-way up a crack in the
mountain-side, struggling to keep my balance and to tug a root of wild
rosemary out of the ground. High overhead some meaningless bullets are
singing.

I am lying hidden among small fir-trees on the low ground west of Monte
Oscuro, with Kopp and Bob Edwards and three Spaniards. Up the naked grey
hill to the right of us a string of Fascists are climbing like ants.
Close in front a bugle-call rings out from the Fascist lines. Kopp
catches my eye and, with a schoolboy gesture, thumbs his nose at the
sound.

I am in the mucky yard at La Granja, among the mob of men who are
struggling with their tin pannikins round the cauldron of stew. The fat
and harassed cook is warding them off with the ladle. At a table nearby
a bearded man with a huge automatic pistol strapped to his belt is
hewing loaves of bread into five pieces. Behind me a Cockney voice (Bill
Chambers, with whom I quarrelled bitterly and who was afterwards killed
outside Huesca) is singing:

There are rats, rats,
Rats as big as cats,
In the...

A shell comes screaming over. Children of fifteen fling themselves on
their faces. The cook dodges behind the cauldron. Everyone rises with a
sheepish expression as the shell plunges and booms a hundred yards away.

I am walking up and down the line of sentries, under the dark boughs of
the poplars. In the flooded ditch outside the rats are paddling about,
making as much noise as otters. As the yellow dawn comes up behind us,
the Andalusian sentry, muffled in his cloak, begins singing. Across no
man's land, a hundred or two hundred yards away, you can hear the
Fascist sentry also singing.

On 25 April, after the usual _mañanas_, another section relieved us and
we handed over our rifles, packed our kits, and marched back to
Monflorite. I was not sorry to leave the line. The lice were multiplying
in my trousers far faster than I could massacre them, and for a month
past I had had no socks and my boots had very little sole left, so that
I was walking more or less barefoot. I wanted a hot bath, clean clothes,
and a night between sheets more passionately than it is possible to want
anything when one has been living a normal civilized life. We slept a
few hours in a barn in Monflorite, jumped a lorry in the small hours,
caught the five o'clock train at Barbastro, and--having the luck to
connect with a fast train at Lérida--were in Barcelona by three o'clock
in the afternoon of the 26th. And after that the trouble began.



Chapter 9


From Mandalay, in Upper Burma, you can travel by train to Maymyo, the
principal hill-station of the province, on the edge of the Shan plateau.
It is rather a queer experience. You start off in the typical atmosphere
of an eastern city--the scorching sunlight, the dusty palms, the smells
of fish and spices and garlic, the squashy tropical fruits, the swarming
dark-faced human beings--and because you are so used to it you carry
this atmosphere intact, so to speak, in your railway carriage. Mentally
you are still in Mandalay when the train stops at Maymyo, four thousand
feet above sea-level. But in stepping out of the carriage you step into
a different hemisphere. Suddenly you are breathing cool sweet air that
might be that of England, and all round you are green grass, bracken,
fir-trees, and hill-women with pink cheeks selling baskets of
strawberries.

Getting back to Barcelona, after three and a half months at the front,
reminded me of this. There was the same abrupt and startling change of
atmosphere. In the train, all the way to Barcelona, the atmosphere of
the front persisted; the dirt, the noise, the discomfort, the ragged
clothes, the feeling of privation, comradeship, and equality. The train,
already full of militiamen when it left Barbastro, was invaded by more
and more peasants at every station on the line; peasants with bundles of
vegetables, with terrified fowls which they carried head-downwards, with
sacks which looped and writhed all over the floor and were discovered to
be full of live rabbits--finally with a quite considerable flock of
sheep which were driven into the compartments and wedged into every
empty space. The militiamen shouted revolutionary songs which drowned
the rattle of the train and kissed their hands or waved red and black
handkerchiefs to every pretty girl along the line. Bottles of wine and
of anis, the filthy Aragónese liqueur, travelled from hand to hand. With
the Spanish goat-skin water-bottles you can squirt a jet of wine right
across a railway carriage into your friend's mouth, which saves a lot of
trouble. Next to me a black-eyed boy of fifteen was recounting
sensational and, I do not doubt, completely untrue stories of his own
exploits at the front to two old leather-faced peasants who listened
open-mouthed. Presently the peasants undid their bundles and gave us
some sticky dark-red wine. Everyone was profoundly happy, more happy
than I can convey. But when the train had rolled through Sabadell and
into Barcelona, we stepped into an atmosphere that was scarcely less
alien and hostile to us and our kind than if this had been Paris or
London.

Everyone who has made two visits, at intervals of months, to Barcelona
during the war has remarked upon the extraordinary changes that took
place in it. And curiously enough, whether they went there first in
August and again in January, or, like myself, first in December and
again in April, the thing they said was always the same: that the
revolutionary atmosphere had vanished. No doubt to anyone who had been
there in August, when the blood was scarcely dry in the streets and
militia were quartered in the smart hotels, Barcelona in December would
have seemed bourgeois; to me, fresh from England, it was liker to a
workers' city than anything I had conceived possible. Now the tide had
rolled back. Once again it was an ordinary city, a little pinched and
chipped by war, but with no outward sign of working-class predominance.

The change in the aspect of the crowds was startling. The militia
uniform and the blue overalls had almost disappeared; everyone seemed to
be wearing the smart summer suits in which Spanish tailors specialize.
Fat prosperous men, elegant women, and sleek cars were everywhere. (It
appeared that there were still no private cars; nevertheless, anyone who
'was anyone' seemed able to command a car.) The officers of the new
Popular Army, a type that had scarcely existed when I left Barcelona,
swarmed in surprising numbers. The Popular Army was officered at the
rate of one officer to ten men. A certain number of these officers had
served in the militia and been brought back from the front for technical
instruction, but the majority were young men who had gone to the School
of War in preference to joining the militia. Their relation to their men
was not quite the same as in a bourgeois army, but there was a definite
social difference, expressed by the difference of pay and uniform. The
men wore a kind of coarse brown overalls, the officers wore an elegant
khaki uniform with a tight waist, like a British Army officer's uniform,
only a little more so. I do not suppose that more than one in twenty of
them had yet been to the front, but all of them had automatic pistols
strapped to their belts; we, at the front, could not get pistols for
love or money. As we made our way up the street I noticed that people
were staring at our dirty exteriors. Of course, like all men who have
been several months in the line, we were a dreadful sight. I was
conscious of looking like a scarecrow. My leather jacket was in tatters,
my woollen cap had lost its shape and slid perpetually over one eye, my
boots consisted of very little beyond splayed-out uppers. All of us were
in more or less the same state, and in addition we were dirty and
unshaven, so it was no wonder that the people stared. But it dismayed me
a little, and brought it home to me that some queer things had been
happening in the last three months.

During the next few days I discovered by innumerable signs that my first
impression had not been wrong. A deep change had come over the town.
There were two facts that were the keynote of all else. One was that the
people--the civil population--had lost much of their interest in the
war; the other was that the normal division of society into rich and
poor, upper class and lower class, was reasserting itself.

The general indifference to the war was surprising and rather
disgusting. It horrified people who came to Barcelona from Madrid or
even from Valencia. Partly it was due to the remoteness of Barcelona
from the actual fighting; I noticed the same thing a month later in
Tarragona, where the ordinary life of a smart seaside town was
continuing almost undisturbed. But it was significant that all over
Spain voluntary enlistment had dwindled from about January onwards. In
Catalonia, in February, there had been a wave of enthusiasm over the
first big drive for the Popular Army, but it had not led to any great
increase in recruiting. The war was only six months old or thereabouts
when the Spanish Government had to resort to conscription, which would
be natural in a foreign war, but seems anomalous in a civil war.
Undoubtedly it was bound up with the disappointment of the revolutionary
hopes with which the war had started. The trade union members who formed
themselves into militias and chased the Fascists back to Zaragoza in the
first few weeks of war had done so largely because they believed
themselves to be fighting for working-class control; but it was becoming
more and more obvious that working-class control was a lost cause, and
the common people, especially the town proletariat, who have to fill the
ranks in any war, civil or foreign, could not be blamed for a certain
apathy. Nobody wanted to lose the war, but the majority were chiefly
anxious for it to be over. You noticed this wherever you went.
Everywhere you met with the same perfunctory remark: 'This
war--terrible, isn't it? When is it going to end?' Politically conscious
people were far more aware of the internecine struggle between Anarchist
and Communist than of the fight against Franco. To the mass of the
people the food shortage was the most important thing. 'The front' had
come to be thought of as a mythical far-off place to which young men
disappeared and either did not return or returned after three or four
months with vast sums of money in their pockets. (A militiaman usually
received his back pay when he went on leave.) Wounded men, even when
they were hopping about on crutches, did not receive any special
consideration. To be in the militia was no longer fashionable. The
shops, always the barometers of public taste, showed this clearly. When
I first reached Barcelona the shops, poor and shabby though they were,
had specialized in militiamen's equipment. Forage-caps, zipper jackets,
Sam Browne belts, hunting-knives, water-bottles, revolver-holsters were
displayed in every window. Now the shops were markedly smarter, but the
war had been thrust into the background. As I discovered later, when
buying my kit before going back to the front, certain things that one
badly needed at the front were very difficult to procure.

Meanwhile there was going on a systematic propaganda against the party
militias and in favour of the Popular Army. The position here was rather
curious. Since February the entire armed forces had theoretically been
incorporated in the Popular Army, and the militias were, on paper,
reconstructed along Popular Army lines, with differential pay-rates,
gazetted rank, etc., etc. The divisions were made up of 'mixed
brigades', which were supposed to consist partly of Popular Army troops
and partly of militia. But the only changes that had actually taken
place were changes of name. The P.O.U.M. troops, for instance,
previously called the Lenin Division, were now known as the 29th
Division. Until June very few Popular Army troops reached the Aragón
front, and in consequence the militias were able to retain their
separate structure and their special character. But on every wall the
Government agents had stencilled: 'We need a Popular Army', and over the
radio and in the Communist Press there was a ceaseless and sometimes
very malignant jibing against the militias, who were described as
ill-trained, undisciplined, etc., etc.; the Popular Army was always
described as 'heroic'. From much of this propaganda you would have
derived the impression that there was something disgraceful in having
gone to the front voluntarily and something praiseworthy in waiting to
be conscripted. For the time being, however, the militias were holding
the line while the Popular Army was training in the rear, and this fact
had to be advertised as little as possible. Drafts of militia returning
to the front were no longer marched through the streets with drums
beating and flags flying. They were smuggled away by train or lorry at
five o'clock in the morning. A few drafts of the Popular Army were now
beginning to leave for the front, and these, as before, were marched
ceremoniously through the streets; but even they, owing to the general
waning of interest in the war, met with comparatively little enthusiasm.
The fact that the militia troops were also, on paper. Popular Army
troops, was skilfully used in the Press propaganda. Any credit that
happened to be going was automatically handed to the Popular Army, while
all blame was reserved for the militias. It sometimes happened that the
same troops were praised in one capacity and blamed in the other.

But besides all this there was the startling change in the social
atmosphere--a thing difficult to conceive unless you have actually
experienced it. When I first reached Barcelona I had thought it a town
where class distinctions and great differences of wealth hardly existed.
Certainly that was what it looked like. 'Smart' clothes were an
abnormality, nobody cringed or took tips, waiters and flower-women and
bootblacks looked you in the eye and called you 'comrade'. I had not
grasped that this was mainly a mixture of hope and camouflage. The
working class believed in a revolution that had been begun but never
consolidated, and the bourgeoisie were scared and temporarily disguising
themselves as workers. In the first months of revolution there must have
been many thousands of people who deliberately put on overalls and
shouted revolutionary slogans as a way of saving their skins. Now things
were returning to normal. The smart restaurants and hotels were full of
rich people wolfing expensive meals, while for the working-class
population food-prices had jumped enormously without any corresponding
rise in wages. Apart from the expensiveness of everything, there were
recurrent shortages of this and that, which, of course, always hit the
poor rather than the rich. The restaurants and hotels seemed to have
little difficulty in getting whatever they wanted, but in the
working-class quarters the queues for bread, olive oil, and other
necessaries were hundreds of yards long. Previously in Barcelona I had
been struck by the absence of beggars; now there were quantities of
them. Outside the delicatessen shop at the top of the Ramblas gangs of
barefooted children were always waiting to swarm round anyone who came
out and clamour for scraps of food. The 'revolutionary' forms of speech
were dropping out of use. Strangers seldom addressed you as _tú_ and
_camarada_ nowadays; it was usually _señor_ and _usted_. _Buenos días_
was beginning to replace _salud_. The waiters were back in their boiled
shirts and the shop-walkers were cringing in the familiar manner. My
wife and I went into a hosiery shop on the Ramblas to buy some
stockings. The shopman bowed and rubbed his hands as they do not do even
in England nowadays, though they used to do it twenty or thirty years
ago. In a furtive indirect way the practice of tipping was coming back.
The workers' patrols had been ordered to dissolve and the pre-war police
forces were back on the streets. One result of this was that the cabaret
show and high-class brothels, many of which had been closed by the
workers' patrols, had promptly reopened.*

[* Footnote: Orwell's footnote to the original edition read: "The
workers' patrols are said to have closed 75 per cent of the brothels."
An errata note found after his death says: "Remark should be modified. I
have no good evidence that prostitution decreased 75 per cent in the
early days of the war, and I believe the Anarchists went on the
principle of 'collectivizing' the brothels, not suppressing them. But
there was a drive against prostitution (posters, etc.) and it is a fact
that the smart brothel and naked cabaret shows were shut in the early
months of the war and open again when the war was about a year old."]

A small but significant instance of the way in which everything was now
orientated in favour of the wealthier classes could be seen in the
tobacco shortage. For the mass of the people the shortage of tobacco was
so desperate that cigarettes filled with sliced liquorice-root were
being sold in the streets. I tried some of these once. (A lot of people
tried them once.) Franco held the Canaries, where all the Spanish
tobacco is grown; consequently the only stocks of tobacco left on the
Government side were those that had been in existence before the war.
These were running so low that the tobacconists' shops only opened once
a week; after waiting for a couple of hours in a queue you might, if you
were lucky, get a three-quarter-ounce packet of tobacco. Theoretically
the Government would not allow tobacco to be purchased from abroad,
because this meant reducing the gold-reserves, which had got to be kept
for arms and other necessities. Actually there was a steady supply of
smuggled foreign cigarettes of the more expensive kinds, Lucky Strikes
and so forth, which gave a grand opportunity for profiteering. You could
buy the smuggled cigarettes openly in the smart hotels and hardly less
openly in the streets, provided that you could pay ten pesetas (a
militiaman's daily wage) for a packet. The smuggling was for the benefit
of wealthy people, and was therefore connived at. If you had enough
money there was nothing that you could not get in any quantity, with the
possible exception of bread, which was rationed fairly strictly. This
open contrast of wealth and poverty would have been impossible a few
months earlier, when the working class still were or seemed to be in
control. But it would not be fair to attribute it solely to the shift of
political power. Partly it was a result of the safety of life in
Barcelona, where there was little to remind one of the war except an
occasional air-raid. Everyone who had been in Madrid said that it was
completely different there. In Madrid the common danger forced people of
almost all kinds into some sense of comradeship. A fat man eating quails
while children are begging for bread is a disgusting sight, but you are
less likely to see it when you are within sound of the guns.

A day or two after the street-fighting I remember passing through one of
the fashionable streets and coming upon a confectioner's shop with a
window full of pastries and bonbons of the most elegant kinds, at
staggering prices. It was the kind of shop you see in Bond Street or the
Rue de la Paix. And I remember feeling a vague horror and amazement that
money could still be wasted upon such things in a hungry war-stricken
country. But God forbid that I should pretend to any personal
superiority. After several months of discomfort I had a ravenous desire
for decent food and wine, cocktails, American cigarettes, and so forth,
and I admit to having wallowed in every luxury that I had money to buy.
During that first week, before the street-fighting began, I had several
preoccupations which interacted upon one another in a curious way. In
the first place, as I have said, I was busy making myself as comfortable
as I could. Secondly, thanks to over-eating and over-drinking, I was
slightly out of health all that week. I would feel a little unwell, go
to bed for half a day, get up and eat another excessive meal, and then
feel ill again. At the same time I was making secret negotiations to buy
a revolver. I badly wanted a revolver--in trench-fighting much more
useful than a rifle--and they were very difficult to get hold of. The
Government issued them to policemen and Popular Army officers, but
refused to issue them to the militia; you had to buy them, illegally,
from the secret stores of the Anarchists. After a lot of fuss and
nuisance an Anarchist friend managed to procure me a tiny 26-mm.
automatic pistol, a wretched weapon, useless at more than five yards but
better than nothing. And besides all this I was making preliminary
arrangements to leave the P.O.U.M. militia and enter some other unit
that would ensure my being sent to the Madrid front.

I had told everyone for a long time past that I was going to leave the
P.O.U.M. As far as my purely personal preferences went I would have
liked to join the Anarchists. If one became a member of the C.N.T. it
was possible to enter the F.A.I. militia, but I was told that the F.A.I.
were likelier to send me to Teruel than to Madrid. If I wanted to go to
Madrid I must join the International Column, which meant getting a
recommendation from a member of the Communist Party. I sought out a
Communist friend, attached to the Spanish Medical Aid, and explained my
case to him. He seemed very anxious to recruit me and asked me, if
possible, to persuade some of the other I.L.P. Englishmen to come with
me. If I had been in better health I should probably have agreed there
and then. It is hard to say now what difference this would have made.
Quite possibly I should have been sent to Albacete before the Barcelona
fighting started; in which case, not having seen the fighting at close
quarters, I might have accepted the official version of it as truthful.
On the other hand, if I had been in Barcelona during the fighting, under
Communist orders but still with a sense of personal loyalty to my
comrades in the P.O.U.M., my position would have been impossible. But I
had another week's leave due to me and I was very anxious to get my
health back before returning to the line. Also--the kind of detail that
is always deciding one's destiny--I had to wait while the boot-makers
made me a new pair of marching boots. (The entire Spanish army had
failed to produce a pair of boots big enough to fit me.) I told my
Communist friend that I would make definite arrangements later.
Meanwhile I wanted a rest. I even had a notion that we--my wife and
I--might go to the seaside for two or three days. What an idea! The
political atmosphere ought to have warned me that that was not the kind
of thing one could do nowadays.

For under the surface-aspect of the town, under the luxury and growing
poverty, under the seeming gaiety of the streets, with their
flower-stalls, their many-coloured flags, their propaganda-posters, and
thronging crowds, there was an unmistakable and horrible feeling of
political rivalry and hatred. People of all shades of opinion were
saying forebodingly: 'There's going to be trouble before long.' The
danger was quite simple and intelligible. It was the antagonism between
those who wished the revolution to go forward and those who wished to
check or prevent it--ultimately, between Anarchists and Communists.
Politically there was now no power in Catalonia except the P.S.U.C. and
their Liberal allies. But over against this there was the uncertain
strength of the C.N.T., less well-armed and less sure of what they
wanted than their adversaries, but powerful because of their numbers and
their predominance in various key industries. Given this alignment of
forces there was bound to be trouble. From the point of view of the
P.S.U.C.-controlled Generalite, the first necessity, to make their
position secure, was to get the weapons out of the C.N.T. workers'
hands. As I have pointed out earlier, the move to break up the party
militias was at bottom a manoeuvre towards this end. At the same time
the pre-war armed police forces, Civil Guards, and so forth, had been
brought back into use and were being heavily reinforced and armed. This
could mean only one thing. The Civil Guards, in particular, were a
gendarmerie of the ordinary continental type, who for nearly a century
past had acted as the bodyguards of the possessing class. Meanwhile a
decree had been issued that all arms held by private persons were to be
surrendered. Naturally this order had not been obeyed; it was clear that
the Anarchists' weapons could only be taken from them by force.
Throughout this time there were rumours, always vague and contradictory
owing to newspaper censorship, of minor clashes that were occurring all
over Catalonia. In various places the armed police forces had made
attacks on Anarchist strongholds. At Puigcerda, on the French frontier,
a band of Carabineros were sent to seize the Customs Office, previously
controlled by Anarchists and Antonio Martin, a well-known Anarchist, was
killed.*

[* Footnote: Errata note found after Orwell's death: "I am told my
reference to this incident is incorrect and misleading."]

Similar incidents had occurred at Figueras and, I think, at Tarragona.
In Barcelona there had been a series of more or less unofficial brawls
in the working-class suburbs. C.N.T. and U.G.T. members had been
murdering one another for some time past; on several occasions the
murders were followed by huge, provocative funerals which were quite
deliberately intended to stir up political hatred. A short time earlier
a C.N.T. member had been murdered, and the C.N.T. had turned out in
hundreds of thousands to follow the cortege. At the end of April, just
after I got to Barcelona, Roldan, a prominent member of the U.G.T., was
murdered, presumably by someone in the C.N.T. The Government ordered all
shops to close and staged an enormous funeral procession, largely of
Popular Army troops, which took two hours to pass a given point. From
the hotel window I watched it without enthusiasm. It was obvious that
the so-called funeral was merely a display of strength; a little more of
this kind of thing and there might be bloodshed. The same night my wife
and I were woken by a fusillade of shots from the Plaza de Cataluña, a
hundred or two hundred yards away. We learned next day that it was a man
being bumped off, presumably by someone in the U.G.T. It was of course
distinctly possible that all these murders were committed by _agents
provocateurs_. One can gauge the attitude of the foreign capitalist Press
towards the Communist-Anarchist feud by the fact that Roldan's murder
was given wide publicity, while the answering murder was carefully
unmentioned.

The 1st of May was approaching, and there was talk of a monster
demonstration in which both the C.N.T. and the U.G.T. were to take part.
The C.N.T. leaders, more moderate than many of their followers, had long
been working for a reconciliation with the U.G.T.; indeed the keynote of
their policy was to try and form the two blocks of unions into one huge
coalition. The idea was that the C.N.T.and U.G.T. should march together
and display their solidarity. But at the last moment the demonstration
was called off. It was perfectly clear that it would only lead to
rioting. So nothing happened on 1 May. It was a queer state of affairs.
Barcelona, the so-called revolutionary city, was probably the only city
in non-Fascist Europe that had no celebrations that day. But I admit I
was rather relieved. The I.L.P. contingent was expected to march in the
P.O.U.M. section of the procession, and everyone expected trouble. The
last thing I wished for was to be mixed up in some meaningless
street-fight. To be marching up the street behind red flags inscribed
with elevating slogans, and then to be bumped off from an upper window
by some total stranger with a sub-machine-gun--that is not my idea of a
useful way to die.



Chapter 10


About midday on 3 May a friend crossing the lounge of the hotel said
casually: 'There's been some kind of trouble at the Telephone Exchange,
I hear.' For some reason I paid no attention to it at the time.

That afternoon, between three and four, I was half-way down the Ramblas
when I heard several rifle-shots behind me. I turned round and saw some
youths, with rifles in their hands and the red and black handkerchiefs
of the Anarchists round their throats, edging up a side-street that ran
off the Ramblas northward. They were evidently exchanging shots with
someone in a tall octagonal tower--a church, I think--that commanded the
side-street. I thought instantly: 'It's started!' But I thought it
without any very great feeling of surprise--for days past everyone had
been expecting 'it' to start at any moment. I realized that I must get
back to the hotel at once and see if my wife was all right. But the knot
of Anarchists round the opening of the side-street were motioning the
people back and shouting to them not to cross the line of fire. More
shots rang out. The bullets from the tower were flying across the street
and a crowd of panic-stricken people was rushing down the Ramblas, away
from the firing; up and down the street you could hear snap-snap-snap as
the shopkeepers slammed the steel shutters over their windows. I saw two
Popular Army officers retreating cautiously from tree to tree with their
hands on their revolvers. In front of me the crowd was surging into the
Metro station in the middle of the Ramblas to take cover. I immediately
decided not to follow them. It might mean being trapped underground for
hours.

At this moment an American doctor who had been with us at the front ran
up to me and grabbed me by the arm. He was greatly excited.

'Come on, we must get down to the Hotel Falcon.' (The Hotel Falcon was a
sort of boarding-house maintained by the P.O.U.M. and used chiefly by
militiamen on leave.) 'The P.O.U.M. chaps will be meeting there. The
trouble's starting. We must hang together.'

'But what the devil is it all about?' I said.

The doctor was hauling me along by the arm. He was too excited to give a
very clear statement. It appeared that he had been in the Plaza de
Cataluña when several lorry-loads of armed Civil Guards* had driven up
to the Telephone Exchange, which was operated mainly by C.N.T. workers,
and made a sudden assault upon it. Then some Anarchists had arrived and
there had been a general affray. I gathered that the 'trouble' earlier
in the day had been a demand by the Government to hand over the
Telephone Exchange, which, of course, was refused.

[* Footnote: Errata note found after Orwell's death: 'All through these
chapters are constant references to 'Civil Guards.' Should be 'Assault
Guards' all the way through. I was misled because the Assault Guards in
Catalonia wore a different uniform from those afterwards sent from
Valenica, and by the Spaniards' referring to all these formations as
'_la guardia.'_ The undoubted fact that civil guards often joined Franco
when able to do so makes no reflection on the Assault Guards who were a
formation raised since the Second Republic. But the general reference to
popular hostility to '_la guardia_' and this having played its part in
the Barcelona business should stand.]

As we moved down the street a lorry raced past us from the opposite
direction. It was full of Anarchists with rifles in their hands. In
front a ragged youth was lying on a pile of mattresses behind a light
machine-gun. When we got to the Hotel Falcon, which was at the bottom of
the Ramblas, a crowd of people was seething in the entrance-hall; there
was a great confusion, nobody seemed to know what we were expected to
do, and nobody was armed except the handful of Shock Troopers who
usually acted as guards for the building. I went across to the Comite
Local of the P.O.U.M., which was almost opposite. Upstairs, in the room
where militiamen normally went to draw their pay, another crowd was
seething. A tall, pale, rather handsome man of about thirty, in civilian
clothes, was trying to restore order and handing out belts and
cartridge-boxes from a pile in the corner. There seemed to be no rifles
as yet. The doctor had disappeared--I believe there had already been
casualties and a call for doctors--but another Englishman had arrived.
Presently, from an inner office, the tall man and some others began
bringing out armfuls of rifles and handing them round. The other
Englishman and myself, as foreigners, were slightly under suspicion and
at first nobody would give us a rifle. Then a militiaman whom I had
known at the front arrived and recognized me, after which we were given
rifles and a few clips of cartridges, somewhat grudgingly.

There was a sound of firing in the distance and the streets were
completely empty of people. Everyone said that it was impossible to go
up the Ramblas. The Civil Guards had seized buildings in commanding
positions and were letting fly at everyone who passed. I would have
risked it and gone back to the hotel, but there was a vague idea
floating round that the Comite Local was likely to be attacked at any
moment and we had better stand by. All over the building, on the stairs,
and on the pavement outside, small knots of people were standing and
talking excitedly. No one seemed to have a very clear idea of what was
happening. All I could gather was that the Civil Guards had attacked the
Telephone Exchange and seized various strategic spots that commanded
other buildings belonging to the workers. There was a general impression
that the Civil Guards were 'after' the C.N.T. and the working class
generally. It was noticeable that, at this stage, no one seemed to put
the blame on the Government. The poorer classes in Barcelona looked upon
the Civil Guards as something rather resembling the Black and Tans, and
it seemed to be taken for granted that they had started this attack on
their own initiative. Once I heard how things stood I felt easier in my
mind. The issue was clear enough. On one side the C.N.T., on the other
side the police. I have no particular love for the idealized 'worker' as
he appears in the bourgeois Communist's mind, but when I see an actual
flesh-and-blood worker in conflict with his natural enemy, the
policeman, I do not have to ask myself which side I am on.

A long time passed and nothing seemed to be happening at our end of the
town. It did not occur to me that I could ring up the hotel and find out
whether my wife was all right; I took it for granted that the Telephone
Exchange would have stopped working--though, as a matter of fact, it was
only out of action for a couple of hours. There seemed to be about three
hundred people in the two buildings. Predominantly they were people of
the poorest class, from the back-streets down by the quays; there was a
number of women among them, some of them carrying babies, and a crowd of
little ragged boys. I fancy that many of them had no notion what was
happening and had simply fled into the P.O.U.M. buildings for
protection. There was also a number of militiamen on leave, and a
sprinkling of foreigners. As far as I could estimate, there were only
about sixty rifles between the lot of us. The office upstairs was
ceaselessly besieged by a crowd of people who were demanding rifles and
being told that there were none left. The younger militia boys, who
seemed to regard the whole affair as a kind of picnic, were prowling
round and trying to wheedle or steal rifles from anyone who had them. It
was not long before one of them got my rifle away from me by a clever
dodge and immediately made himself scarce. So I was unarmed again,
except for my tiny automatic pistol, for which I had only one clip of
cartridges.

It grew dark, I was getting hungry, and seemingly there was no food in
the Falcon. My friend and I slipped out to his hotel, which was not far
away, to get some dinner. The streets were utterly dark and silent, not
a soul stirring, steel shutters drawn over all the shop windows, but no
barricades built yet. There was a great fuss before they would let us
into the hotel, which was locked and barred. When we got back I learned
that the Telephone Exchange was working and went to the telephone in the
office upstairs to ring up my wife. Characteristically, there was no
telephone directory in the building, and I did not know the number of
the Hotel Continental; after a searching from room to room for about an
hour I came upon a guide-book which gave me the number. I could not make
contact with my wife, but I managed to get hold of John McNair, the
I.L.P. representative in Barcelona. He told me that all was well, nobody
had been shot, and asked me if we were all right at the Comite Local. I
said that we should be all right if we had some cigarettes. I only meant
this as a joke; nevertheless half an hour later McNair appeared with two
packets of Lucky Strikes. He had braved the pitch-dark streets, roamed
by Anarchist patrols who had twice stopped him at the pistol's point and
examined his papers. I shall not forget this small act of heroism. We
were very glad of the cigarettes.

They had placed armed guards at most of the windows, and in the street
below a little group of Shock Troopers were stopping and questioning the
few passers-by. An Anarchist patrol car drove up, bristling with
weapons. Beside the driver a beautiful dark-haired girl of about
eighteen was nursing a sub-machine-gun across her knees. I spent a long
time wandering about the building, a great rambling place of which it
was impossible to learn the geography. Everywhere was the usual litter,
the broken furniture and torn paper that seem to be the inevitable
products of revolution. All over the place people were sleeping; on a
broken sofa in a passage two poor women from the quayside were
peacefully snoring. The place had been a cabaret-theatre before the
P.O.U.M. took it over. There were raised stages in several of the rooms;
on one of them was a desolate grand piano. Finally I discovered what I
was looking for--the armoury. I did not know how this affair was going
to turn out, and I badly wanted a weapon. I had heard it said so often
that all the rival parties, P.S.U.C., P.O.U.M., and C.N.T.-F.A.I. alike,
were hoarding arms in Barcelona, that I could not believe that two of
the principal P.O.U.M. buildings contained only the fifty or sixty
rifles that I had seen. The room which acted as an armoury was unguarded
and had a flimsy door; another Englishman and myself had no difficulty
in prizing it open. When we got inside we found that what they had told
us was true--there _were_ no more weapons. All we found there were about
two dozen small-bore rifles of an obsolete pattern and a few shot-guns,
with no cartridges for any of them. I went up to the office and asked if
they had any spare pistol ammunition; they had none. There were a few
boxes of bombs, however, which one of the Anarchist patrol cars had
brought us. I put a couple in one of my cartridge-boxes. They were a
crude type of bomb, ignited by rubbing a sort of match at the top and
very liable to go off of their own accord.

People were sprawling asleep all over the floor. In one room a baby was
crying, crying ceaselessly. Though this was May the night was getting
cold. On one of the cabaret-stages the curtains were still up, so I
ripped a curtain down with my knife, rolled myself up in it, and had a
few hours' sleep. My sleep was disturbed, I remember, by the thought of
those beastly bombs, which might blow me into the air if I rolled on
them too vigorously. At three in the morning the tall handsome man who
seemed to be in command woke me up, gave me a rifle, and put me on guard
at one of the windows. He told me that Salas, the Chief of Police
responsible for the attack on the Telephone Exchange, had been placed
under arrest. (Actually, as we learned later, he had only been deprived
of his post. Nevertheless the news confirmed the general impression that
the Civil Guards had acted without orders.) As soon as it was dawn the
people downstairs began building two barricades, one outside the Comite
Local and the other outside the Hotel Falcon. The Barcelona streets are
paved with square cobbles, easily built up into a wall, and under the
cobbles is a kind of shingle that is good for filling sand-bags. The
building of those barricades was a strange and wonderful sight; I would
have given something to be able to photograph it. With the kind of
passionate energy that Spaniards display when they have definitely
decided to begin upon any job of work, long lines of men, women, and
quite small children were tearing up the cobblestones, hauling them
along in a hand-cart that had been found somewhere, and staggering to
and fro under heavy sacks of sand. In the doorway of the Comite Local a
German-Jewish girl, in a pair of militiaman's trousers whose
knee-buttons just reached her ankles, was watching with a smile. In a
couple of hours the barricades were head-high, with riflemen posted at
the loopholes, and behind one barricade a fire was burning and men were
frying eggs.

They had taken my rifle away again, and there seemed to be nothing that
one could usefully do. Another Englishman and myself decided to go back
to the Hotel Continental. There was a lot of firing in the distance, but
seemingly none in the Ramblas. On the way up we looked in at the
food-market. A very few stalls had opened; they were besieged by a crowd
of people from the working-class quarters south of the Ramblas. Just as
we got there, there was a heavy crash of rifle-fire outside, some panes
of glass in the roof were shivered, and the crowd went flying for the
back exits. A few stalls remained open, however; we managed to get a cup
of coffee each and buy a wedge of goat's-milk cheese which I tucked in
beside my bombs. A few days later I was very glad of that cheese.

At the street-corner where I had seen the Anarchists begin firing the
day before a barricade was now standing. The man behind it (I was on the
other side of the street) shouted to me to be careful. The Civil Guards
in the church tower were firing indiscriminately at everyone who passed.
I paused and then crossed the opening at a run; sure enough, a bullet
cracked past me, uncomfortably close. When I neared the P.O.U.M.
Executive Building, still on the other side of the road, there were
fresh shouts of warning from some Shock Troopers standing in the
doorway--shouts which, at the moment, I did not understand. There were
trees and a newspaper kiosk between myself and the building (streets of
this type in Spain have a broad walk running down the middle), and I
could not see what they were pointing at. I went up to the Continental,
made sure that all was well, washed my face, and then went back to the
P.O.U.M. Executive Building (it was about a hundred yards down the
street) to ask for orders. By this time the roar of rifle and
machine-gun fire from various directions was almost comparable to the
din of a battle. I had just found Kopp and was asking him what we were
supposed to do when there was a series of appalling crashes down below.
The din was so loud that I made sure someone must be firing at us with a
field-gun. Actually it was only hand-grenades, which make double their
usual noise when they burst among stone buildings.

Kopp glanced out of the window, cocked his stick behind his back, said:
'Let us investigate,' and strolled down the stairs in his usual
unconcerned manner, I following. Just inside the doorway a group of
Shock Troopers were bowling bombs down the pavement as though playing
skittles. The bombs were bursting twenty yards away with a frightful,
ear-splitting crash which was mixed up with the banging of rifles. Half
across the street, from behind the newspaper kiosk, a head--it was the
head of an American militiaman whom I knew well--was sticking up, for
all the world like a coconut at a fair. It was only afterwards that I
grasped what was really happening. Next door to the P.O.U.M. building
there was a café with a hotel above it, called the Café Moka. The day
before twenty or thirty armed Civil Guards had entered the café and
then, when the fighting started, had suddenly seized the building and
barricaded themselves in. Presumably they had been ordered to seize the
café as a preliminary to attacking the P.O.U.M. offices later. Early in
the morning they had attempted to come out, shots had been exchanged,
and one Shock Trooper was badly wounded and a Civil Guard killed. The
Civil Guards had fled back into the café, but when the American came
down the street they had opened fire on him, though he was not armed.
The American had flung himself behind the kiosk for cover, and the Shock
Troopers were flinging bombs at the Civil Guards to drive them indoors
again.

Kopp took in the scene at a glance, pushed his way forward and hauled
back a red-haired German Shock Trooper who was just drawing the pin out
of a bomb with his teeth. He shouted to everyone to stand back from the
doorway, and told us in several languages that we had got to avoid
bloodshed. Then he stepped out on to the pavement and, in sight of the
Civil Guards, ostentatiously took off his pistol and laid it on the
ground. Two Spanish militia officers did the same, and the three of them
walked slowly up to the doorway where the Civil Guards were huddling. It
was a thing I would not have done for twenty pounds. They were walking,
unarmed, up to men who were frightened out of their wits and had loaded
guns in their hands. A Civil Guard, in shirt-sleeves and livid with
fright, came out of the door to parley with Kopp. He kept pointing in an
agitated manner at two unexploded bombs that were lying on the pavement.
Kopp came back and told us we had better touch the bombs off. Lying
there, they were a danger to anyone who passed. A Shock Trooper fired
his rifle at one of the bombs and burst it, then fired at the other and
missed. I asked him to give me his rifle, knelt down and let fly at the
second bomb. I also missed it, I am sorry to say. This was the only shot
I fired during the disturbances. The pavement was covered with broken
glass from the sign over the Café Moka, and two cars that were parked
outside, one of them Kopp's official car, had been riddled with bullets
and their windscreens smashed by bursting bombs.

Kopp took me upstairs again and explained the situation. We had got to
defend the P.O.U.M. buildings if they were attacked, but the P.O.U.M.
leaders had sent instructions that we were to stand on the defensive and
not open fire if we could possibly avoid it. Immediately opposite there
was a cinematograph, called the Poliorama, with a museum above it, and
at the top, high above the general level of the roofs, a small
observatory with twin domes. The domes commanded the street, and a few
men posted up there with rifles could prevent any attack on the P.O.U.M.
buildings. The caretakers at the cinema were C.N.T. members and would
let us come and go. As for the Civil Guards in the Café Moka, there would
be no trouble with them; they did not want to fight and would be only
too glad to live and let live. Kopp repeated that our orders were not to
fire unless we were fired on ourselves or our buildings attacked. I
gathered, though he did not say so, that the P.O.U.M. leaders were
furious at being dragged into this affair, but felt that they had got to
stand by the C.N.T.

They had already placed guards in the observatory. The next three days
and nights I spent continuously on the roof of the Poliorama, except for
brief intervals when I slipped across to the hotel for meals. I was in
no danger, I suffered from nothing worse than hunger and boredom, yet it
was one of the most unbearable periods of my whole life. I think few
experiences could be more sickening, more disillusioning, or, finally,
more nerve-racking than those evil days of street warfare.

I used to sit on the roof marvelling at the folly of it all. From the
little windows in the observatory you could see for miles around--vista
after vista of tall slender buildings, glass domes, and fantastic curly
roofs with brilliant green and copper tiles; over to eastward the
glittering pale blue sea--the first glimpse of the sea that I had had
since coming to Spain. And the whole huge town of a million people was
locked in a sort of violent inertia, a nightmare of noise without
movement. The sunlit streets were quite empty. Nothing was happening
except the streaming of bullets from barricades and sand-bagged windows.
Not a vehicle was stirring in the streets; here and there along the
Ramblas the trams stood motionless where their drivers had jumped out of
them when the fighting started. And all the while the devilish noise,
echoing from thousands of stone buildings, went on and on and on, like a
tropical rainstorm. Crack-crack, rattle-rattle, roar--sometimes it died
away to a few shots, sometimes it quickened to a deafening fusillade,
but it never stopped while daylight lasted, and punctually next dawn it
started again.

What the devil was happening, who was fighting whom, and who was
winning, was at first very difficult to discover. The people of
Barcelona are so used to street-fighting and so familiar with the local
geography that they knew by a kind of instinct which political party
will hold which streets and which buildings. A foreigner is at a
hopeless disadvantage. Looking out from the observatory, I could grasp
that the Ramblas, which is one of the principal streets of the town,
formed a dividing line. To the right of the Ramblas the working-class
quarters were solidly Anarchist; to the left a confused fight was going
on among the tortuous by-streets, but on that side the P.S.U.C. and the
Civil Guards were more or less in control. Up at our end of the Ramblas,
round the Plaza de Cataluña, the position was so complicated that it
would have been quite unintelligible if every building had not flown a
party flag. The principal landmark here was the Hotel Colon, the
headquarters of the P.S.U.C., dominating the Plaza de Cataluña. In a
window near the last O but one in the huge 'Hotel Colon' that sprawled
across its face they had a machine-gun that could sweep the square with
deadly effect. A hundred yards to the right of us, down the Ramblas, the
J.S.U., the youth league of the P.S.U.C. (corresponding to the Young
Communist League in England), were holding a big department store whose
sandbagged side-windows fronted our observatory. They had hauled down
their red flag and hoisted the Catalan national flag. On the Telephone
Exchange, the starting-point of all the trouble, the Catalan national
flag and the Anarchist flag were flying side by side. Some kind of
temporary compromise had been arrived at there, the exchange was working
uninterruptedly and there was no firing from the building.

In our position it was strangely peaceful. The Civil Guards in the Café
Moka had drawn down the steel curtains and piled up the café furniture
to make a barricade. Later half a dozen of them came on to the roof,
opposite to ourselves, and built another barricade of mattresses, over
which they hung a Catalan national flag. But it was obvious that they
had no wish to start a fight. Kopp had made a definite agreement with
them: if they did not fire at us we would not fire at them. He had grown
quite friendly with the Civil Guards by this time, and had been to visit
them several times in the Café Moka. Naturally they had looted
everything drinkable the café possessed, and they made Kopp a present of
fifteen bottles of beer. In return Kopp had actually given them one of
our rifles to make up for one they had somehow lost on the previous day.
Nevertheless, it was a queer feeling sitting on that roof. Sometimes I
was merely bored with the whole affair, paid no attention to the hellish
noise, and spent hours reading a succession of Penguin Library books
which, luckily, I had bought a few days earlier; sometimes I was very
conscious of the armed men watching me fifty yards away. It was a little
like being in the trenches again; several times I caught myself, from
force of habit, speaking of the Civil Guards as 'the Fascists'. There
were generally about six of us up there. We placed a man on guard in
each of the observatory towers, and the rest of us sat on the lead roof
below, where there was no cover except a stone palisade. I was well
aware that at any moment the Civil Guards might receive telephone orders
to open fire. They had agreed to give us warning before doing so, but
there was no certainty that they would keep to their agreement. Only
once, however, did trouble look like starting. One of the Civil Guards
opposite knelt down and began firing across the barricade. I was on
guard in the observatory at the time. I trained my rifle on him and
shouted across:

'Hi! Don't you shoot at us!'

'What?'

'Don't you fire at us or we'll fire back!'

'No, no! I wasn't firing at you. Look--down there!'

He motioned with his rifle towards the side-street that ran past the
bottom of our building. Sure enough, a youth in blue overalls, with a
rifle in his hand, was dodging round the corner. Evidently he had just
taken a shot at the Civil Guards on the roof.

'I was firing at him. He fired first.' (I believe this was true.) 'We
don't want to shoot you. We're only workers, the same as you are.'

He made the anti-Fascist salute, which I returned. I shouted across:

'Have you got any more beer left?'

'No, it's all gone.'

The same day, for no apparent reason, a man in the J.S.U. building
farther down the street suddenly raised his rifle and let fly at me when
I was leaning out of the window. Perhaps I made a tempting mark. I did
not fire back. Though he was only a hundred yards away the bullet went
so wide that it did not even hit the roof of the observatory. As usual,
Spanish standards of marksmanship had saved me. I was fired at several
times from this building.

The devilish racket of firing went on and on. But so far as I could see,
and from all I heard, the fighting was defensive on both sides. People
simply remained in their buildings or behind their barricades and blazed
away at the people opposite. About half a mile away from us there was a
street where some of the main offices of the C.N.T. and the U.G.T. were
almost exactly facing one another; from that direction the volume of
noise was terrific. I passed down that street the day after the fighting
was over and the panes of the shop-windows were like sieves. (Most of
the shopkeepers in Barcelona had their windows criss-crossed with strips
of paper, so that when a bullet hit a pane it did not shiver to pieces.)
Sometimes the rattle of rifle and machine-gun fire was punctuated by the
crash of hand-grenades. And at long intervals, perhaps a dozen times in
all, there were tremendously heavy explosions which at the time I could
not account for; they sounded like aerial bombs, but that was
impossible, for there were no aeroplanes about. I was told
afterwards--quite possibly it was true--that _agents provocateurs_ were
touching off masses of explosive in order to increase the general noise
and panic. There was, however, no artillery-fire. I was listening for
this, for if the guns began to fire it would mean that the affair was
becoming serious (artillery is the determining factor in street
warfare). Afterwards there were wild tales in the newspapers about
batteries of guns firing in the streets, but no one was able to point to
a building that had been hit by a shell. In any case the sound of
gunfire is unmistakable if one is used to it.

Almost from the start food was running short. With difficulty and under
cover of darkness (for the Civil Guards were constantly sniping into the
Ramblas) food was brought from the Hotel Falcon for the fifteen or
twenty militiamen who were in the P.O.U.M. Executive Building, but there
was barely enough to go round, and as many of us as possible went to the
Hotel Continental for our meals. The Continental had been
'collectivized' by the Generalite and not, like most of the hotels, by
the C.N.T. or U.G.T., and it was regarded as neutral ground. No sooner
had the fighting started than the hotel filled to the brim with a most
extraordinary collection of people. There were foreign journalists,
political suspects of every shade, an American airman in the service of
the Government, various Communist agents, including a fat,
sinister-looking Russian, said to be an agent of the Ogpu, who was
nicknamed Charlie Chan and wore attached to his waist-band a revolver
and a neat little bomb, some families of well-to-do Spaniards who looked
like Fascist sympathizers, two or three wounded men from the
International Column, a gang of lorry drivers from some huge French
lorries which had been carrying a load of oranges back to France and had
been held up by the fighting, and a number of Popular Army officers. The
Popular Army, as a body, remained neutral throughout the fighting,
though a few soldiers slipped away from the barracks and took part as
individuals; on the Tuesday morning I had seen a couple of them at the
P.O.U.M. barricades. At the beginning, before the food-shortage became
acute and the newspapers began stirring up hatred, there was a tendency
to regard the whole affair as a joke. This was the kind of thing that
happened every year in Barcelona, people were saying. George Tioli, an
Italian journalist, a great friend of ours, came in with his trousers
drenched with blood. He had gone out to see what was happening and had
been binding up a wounded man on the pavement when someone playfully
tossed a hand-grenade at him, fortunately not wounding him seriously. I
remember his remarking that the Barcelona paving-stones ought to be
numbered; it would save such a lot of trouble in building and
demolishing barricades. And I remember a couple of men from the
International Column sitting in my room at the hotel when I came in
tired, hungry, and dirty after a night on guard. Their attitude was
completely neutral. If they had been good party-men they would, I
suppose, have urged me to change sides, or even have pinioned me and
taken away the bombs of which my pockets were full; instead they merely
commiserated with me for having to spend my leave in doing guard-duty on
a roof. The general attitude was: 'This is only a dust-up between the
Anarchists and the police--it doesn't mean anything.' In spite of the
extent of the fighting and the number of casualties I believe this was
nearer the truth than the official version which represented the affair
as a planned rising.

It was about Wednesday (5 May) that a change seemed to come over things.
The shuttered streets looked ghastly. A very few pedestrians, forced
abroad for one reason or another, crept to and fro, flourishing white
handkerchiefs, and at a spot in the middle of the Ramblas that was safe
from bullets some men were crying newspapers to the empty street. On
Tuesday _Solidaridad Obrera_, the Anarchist paper, had described the
attack on the Telephone Exchange as a 'monstrous provocation' (or words
to that effect), but on Wednesday it changed its tune and began
imploring everyone to go back to work. The Anarchist leaders were
broadcasting the same message. The office of _La Batalla_, the P.O.U.M.
paper, which was not defended, had been raided and seized by the Civil
Guards at about the same time as the Telephone Exchange, but the paper
was being printed, and a few copies distributed, from another address. I
urged everyone to remain at the barricades. People were divided in their
minds and wondering uneasily how the devil this was going to end. I
doubt whether anyone left the barricades as yet, but everyone was sick
of the meaningless fighting, which could obviously lead to no real
decision, because no one wanted this to develop into a full-sized civil
war which might mean losing the war against Franco. I heard this fear
expressed on all sides. So far as one could gather from what people were
saying at the time the C.N.T. rank and file wanted, and had wanted from
the beginning, only two things: the handing back of the Telephone
Exchange and the disarming of the hated Civil Guards. If the Generalite
had promised to do these two things, and also promised to put an end to
the food profiteering, there is little doubt that the barricades would
have been down in two hours. But it was obvious that the Generalite was
not going to give in. Ugly rumours were flying round. It was said that
the Valencia Government was sending six thousand men to occupy
Barcelona, and that five thousand Anarchist and P.O.U.M. troops had left
the Aragón front to oppose them. Only the first of these rumours was
true. Watching from the observatory tower we saw the low grey shapes of
warships closing in upon the harbour. Douglas Moyle, who had been a
sailor, said that they looked like British destroyers. As a matter of
fact they _were_ British destroyers, though we did not learn this till
afterwards.

That evening we heard that on the Plaza de España four hundred Civil
Guards had surrendered and handed their arms to the Anarchists; also the
news was vaguely filtering through that in the suburbs (mainly
working-class quarters) the C.N.T. were in control. It looked as though
we were winning. But the same evening Kopp sent for me and, with a grave
face, told me that according to information he had just received the
Government was about to outlaw the P.O.U.M. and declare a state of war
upon it. The news gave me a shock. It was the first glimpse I had had of
the interpretation that was likely to be put upon this affair later on.
I dimly foresaw that when the fighting ended the entire blame would be
laid upon the P.O.U.M., which was the weakest party and therefore the
most suitable scapegoat. And meanwhile our local neutrality was at an
end. If the Government declared war upon us we had no choice but to
defend ourselves, and here at the Executive building we could be certain
that the Civil Guards next door would get orders to attack us. Our only
chance was to attack them first. Kopp was waiting for orders on the
telephone; if we heard definitely that the P.O.U.M. was outlawed we must
make preparations at once to seize the Café Moka.

I remember the long, nightmarish evening that we spent in fortifying the
building. We locked the steel curtains across the front entrance and
behind them built a barricade of slabs of stone left behind by the
workmen who had been making some alterations. We went over our stock of
weapons. Counting the six rifles that were on the roof of the Poliorama
opposite, we had twenty-one rifles, one of them defective, about fifty
rounds of ammunition for each rifle, and a few dozen bombs; otherwise
nothing except a few pistols and revolvers. About a dozen men, mostly
Germans, had volunteered for the attack on the Café Moka, if it came
off. We should attack from the roof, of course, some time in the small
hours, and take them by surprise; they were more numerous, but our
morale was better, and no doubt we could storm the place, though people
were bound to be killed in doing so. We had no food in the building
except a few slabs of chocolate, and the rumour had gone round that
'they' were going to cut off the water supply. (Nobody knew who 'they'
were. It might be the Government that controlled the waterworks, or it
might be the C.N.T.--nobody knew.) We spent a long time filling up every
basin in the lavatories, every bucket we could lay hands on, and,
finally, the fifteen beer bottles, now empty, which the Civil Guards had
given to Kopp.

I was in a ghastly frame of mind and dog-tired after about sixty hours
without much sleep. It was now late into the night. People were sleeping
all over the floor behind the barricade downstairs. Upstairs there was a
small room, with a sofa in it, which we intended to use as a
dressing-station, though, needless to say, we discovered that there was
neither iodine nor bandages in the building. My wife had come down from
the hotel in case a nurse should be needed. I lay down on the sofa,
feeling that I would like half an hour's rest before the attack on the
Moka, in which I should presumably be killed. I remember the intolerable
discomfort caused by my pistol, which was strapped to my belt and
sticking into the small of my back. And the next thing I remember is
waking up with a jerk to find my wife standing beside me. It was broad
daylight, nothing had happened, the Government had not declared war on
the P.O.U.M., the water had not been cut off, and except for the
sporadic firing in the streets everything was normal. My wife said that
she had not had the heart to wake me and had slept in an arm-chair in
one of the front rooms.

That afternoon there was a kind of armistice. The firing died away and
with surprising suddenness the streets filled with people. A few shops
began to pull up their shutters, and the market was packed with a huge
crowd clamouring for food, though the stalls were almost empty. It was
noticeable, however, that the trams did not start running. The Civil
Guards were still behind their barricades in the Moka; on neither side
were the fortified buildings evacuated. Everyone was rushing round and
trying to buy food. And on every side you heard the same anxious
questions: 'Do you think it's stopped? Do you think it's going to start
again?' 'It'--the fighting--was now thought of as some kind of natural
calamity, like a hurricane or an earthquake, which was happening to us
all alike and which we had no power of stopping. And sure enough, almost
immediately--I suppose there must really have been several hours' truce,
but they seemed more like minutes than hours--a sudden crash of
rifle-fire, like a June cloud-burst, sent everyone scurrying; the steel
shutters snapped into place, the streets emptied like magic, the
barricades were manned, and 'it' had started again.

I went back to my post on the roof with a feeling of concentrated
disgust and fury. When you are taking part in events like these you are,
I suppose, in a small way, making history, and you ought by rights to
feel like a historical character. But you never do, because at such
times the physical details always outweigh everything else. Throughout
the fighting I never made the correct 'analysis' of the situation that
was so glibly made by journalists hundreds of miles away. What I was
chiefly thinking about was not the rights and wrongs of this miserable
internecine scrap, but simply the discomfort and boredom of sitting day
and night on that intolerable roof, and the hunger which was growing
worse and worse--for none of us had had a proper meal since Monday. It
was in my mind all the while that I should have to go back to the front
as soon as this business was over. It was infuriating. I had been a
hundred and fifteen days in the line and had come back to Barcelona
ravenous for a bit of rest and comfort; and instead I had to spend my
time sitting on a roof opposite Civil Guards as bored as myself, who
periodically waved to me and assured me that they were 'workers'
(meaning that they hoped I would not shoot them), but who would
certainly open fire if they got the order to do so. If this was history
it did not feel like it. It was more like a bad period at the front,
when men were short and we had to do abnormal hours of guard-duty;
instead of being heroic one just had to stay at one's post, bored,
dropping with sleep, and completely uninterested as to what it was all
about.

Inside the hotel, among the heterogeneous mob who for the most part had
not dared to put their noses out of doors, a horrible atmosphere of
suspicion had grown up. Various people were infected with spy mania and
were creeping round whispering that everyone else was a spy of the
Communists, or the Trotskyists, or the Anarchists, or what-not. The fat
Russian agent was cornering all the foreign refugees in turn and
explaining plausibly that this whole affair was an Anarchist plot. I
watched him with some interest, for it was the first time that I had
seen a person whose profession was telling lies--unless one counts
journalists. There was something repulsive in the parody of smart hotel
life that was still going on behind shuttered windows amid the rattle of
rifle-fire. The front dining-room had been abandoned after a bullet came
through the window and chipped a pillar, and the guests were crowded
into a darkish room at the back, where there were never quite enough
tables to go round. The waiters were reduced in numbers--some of them
were C.N.T. members and had joined in the general strike--and had
dropped their boiled shirts for the time being, but meals were still
being served with a pretence of ceremony. There was, however,
practically nothing to eat. On that Thursday night the principal dish at
dinner was one sardine each. The hotel had had no bread for days, and
even the wine was running so low that we were drinking older and older
wines at higher and higher prices. This shortage of food went on for
several days after the fighting was over. Three days running, I
remember, my wife and I breakfasted off a little piece of goat's-milk
cheese with no bread and nothing to drink. The only thing that was
plentiful was oranges. The French lorry drivers brought quantities of
their oranges into the hotel. They were a tough-looking bunch; they had
with them some flashy Spanish girls and a huge porter in a black blouse.
At any other time the little snob of a hotel manager would have done his
best to make them uncomfortable, in fact would have refused to have them
on the premises, but at present they were popular because, unlike the
rest of us, they had a private store of bread which everyone was trying
to cadge from them.

I spent that final night on the roof, and the next day it did really
look as though the fighting was coming to an end. I do not think there
was much firing that day--the Friday. No one seemed to know for certain
whether the troops from Valencia were really coming; they arrived that
evening, as a matter of fact. The Government was broadcasting
half-soothing, half-threatening messages, asking everyone to go home and
saying that after a certain hour anyone found carrying arms would be
arrested. Not much attention was paid to the Government's broadcasts,
but everywhere the people were fading away from the barricades. I have
no doubt that it was mainly the food shortage that was responsible. From
every side you heard the same remark: 'We have no more food, we must go
back to work.' On the other hand the Civil Guards, who could count on
getting their rations so long as there was any food in the town, were
able to stay at their posts. By the afternoon the streets were almost
normal, though the deserted barricades were still standing; the Ramblas
were thronged with people, the shops nearly all open, and--most
reassuring of all--the trams that had stood so long in frozen blocks
jerked into motion and began running. The Civil Guards were still
holding the Café Moka and had not taken down their barricades, but some
of them brought chairs out and sat on the pavement with their rifles
across their knees. I winked at one of them as I went past and got a not
unfriendly grin; he recognized me, of course. Over the Telephone
Exchange the Anarchist flag had been hauled down and only the Catalan
flag was flying. That meant that the workers were definitely beaten; I
realized--though, owing to my political ignorance, not so clearly as I
ought to have done--that when the Government felt more sure of itself
there would be reprisals. But at the time I was not interested in that
aspect of things. All I felt was a profound relief that the devilish din
of firing was over, and that one could buy some food and have a bit of
rest and peace before going back to the front.

It must have been late that evening that the troops from Valencia first
appeared in the streets. They were the Assault Guards, another formation
similar to the Civil Guards and the Carabineros (i.e. a formation
intended primarily for police work), and the picked troops of the
Republic. Quite suddenly they seemed to spring up out of the ground; you
saw them everywhere patrolling the streets in groups of ten--tall men in
grey or blue uniforms, with long rifles slung over their shoulders, and
a sub-machine-gun to each group. Meanwhile there was a delicate job to
be done. The six rifles which we had used for the guard in the
observatory towers were still lying there, and by hook or by crook we
had got to get them back to the P.O.U.M. building. It was only a
question of getting them across the street. They were part of the
regular armoury of the building, but to bring them into the street was
to contravene the Government's order, and if we were caught with them in
our hands we should certainly be arrested--worse, the rifles would be
confiscated. With only twenty-one rifles in the building we could not
afford to lose six of them. After a lot of discussion as to the best
method, a red-haired Spanish boy and myself began to smuggle them out.
It was easy enough to dodge the Assault Guard patrols; the danger was
the Civil Guards in the Moka, who were well aware that we had rifles in
the observatory and might give the show away if they saw us carrying
them across. Each of us partially undressed and slung a rifle over the
left shoulder, the butt under the armpit, the barrel down the
trouser-leg. It was unfortunate that they were long Mausers. Even a man
as tall as I am cannot wear a long Mauser down his trouser-leg without
discomfort. It was an intolerable job getting down the corkscrew
staircase of the observatory with a completely rigid left leg. Once in
the street, we found that the only way to move was with extreme
slowness, so slowly that you did not have to bend your knees. Outside
the picture-house I saw a group of people staring at me with great
interest as I crept along at tortoise-speed. I have often wondered what
they thought was the matter with me. Wounded in the war, perhaps.
However, all the rifles were smuggled across without incident.

Next day the Assault Guards were everywhere, walking the streets like
conquerors. There was no doubt that the Government was simply making a
display of force in order to overawe a population which it already knew
would not resist; if there had been any real fear of further outbreaks
the Assault Guards would have been kept in barracks and not scattered
through the streets in small bands. They were splendid troops, much the
best I had seen in Spain, and, though I suppose they were in a sense
'the enemy', I could not help liking the look of them. But it was with a
sort of amazement that I watched them strolling to and fro. I was used
to the ragged, scarcely-armed militia on the Aragón front, and I had not
known that the Republic possessed troops like these. It was not only
that they were picked men physically, it was their weapons that most
astonished me. All of them were armed with brand-new rifles of the type
known as 'the Russian rifle' (these rifles were sent to Spain by the
U.S.S.R., but were, I believe, manufactured in America). I examined one
of them. It was a far from perfect rifle, but vastly better than the
dreadful old blunderbusses we had at the front. The Assault Guards had
one submachine-gun between ten men and an automatic pistol each; we at
the front had approximately one machine-gun between fifty men, and as
for pistols and revolvers, you could only procure them illegally. As a
matter of fact, though I had not noticed it till now, it was the same
everywhere. The Civil Guards and Carabineros, who were not intended for
the front at all, were better armed and far better clad than ourselves.
I suspect it is the same in all wars--always the same contrast between
the sleek police in the rear and the ragged soldiers in the line. On the
whole the Assault Guards got on very well with the population after the
first day or two. On the first day there was a certain amount of trouble
because some of the Assault Guards--acting on instructions, I
suppose--began behaving in a provocative manner. Bands of them boarded
trams, searched the passengers, and, if they had C.N.T. membership cards
in their pockets, tore them up and stamped on them. This led to scuffles
with armed Anarchists, and one or two people were killed. Very soon,
however, the Assault Guards dropped their conquering air and relations
became more friendly. It was noticeable that most of them had picked up
a girl after a day or two.

The Barcelona fighting had given the Valencia Government the long-wanted
excuse to assume fuller control of Catalonia. The workers' militias were
to be broken up and redistributed among the Popular Army. The Spanish
Republican flag was flying all over Barcelona--the first time I had seen
it, I think, except over a Fascist trench. In the working-class quarters
the barricades were being pulled down, rather fragmentarily, for it is a
lot easier to build a barricade than to put the stones back. Outside the
P.S.U.C. buildings the barricades were allowed to remain standing, and
indeed many were standing as late as June. The Civil Guards were still
occupying strategic points. Huge seizures of arms were being made from
C.N.T. strongholds, though I have no doubt a good many escaped seizure.
_La Batalla_ was still appearing, but it was censored until the front
page was almost completely blank. The P.S.U.C. papers were uncensored
and were publishing inflammatory articles demanding the suppression of
the P.O.U.M. The P.O.U.M. was declared to be a disguised Fascist
organization, and a cartoon representing the P.O.U.M. as a figure
slipping off a mask marked with the hammer and sickle and revealing a
hideous, maniacal face marked with the swastika, was being circulated
all over the town by P.S.U.C. agents. Evidently the official version of
the Barcelona fighting was already fixed upon: it was to be represented
as a 'fifth column' Fascist rising engineered solely by the P.O.U.M.

In the hotel the horrible atmosphere of suspicion and hostility had
grown worse now that the fighting was over. In the face of the
accusations that were being flung about it was impossible to remain
neutral. The posts were working again, the foreign Communist papers were
beginning to arrive, and their accounts of the fighting were not only
violently partisan but, of course, wildly inaccurate as to facts. I
think some of the Communists on the spot, who had seen what was actually
happening, were dismayed by the interpretation that was being put upon
events, but naturally they had to stick to their own side. Our Communist
friend approached me once again and asked me whether I would not
transfer into the International Column.

I was rather surprised. 'Your papers are saying I'm a Fascist,' I said.
'Surely I should be politically suspect, coming from the P.O.U.M.'

'Oh, that doesn't matter. After all, you were only acting under orders.'

I had to tell him that after this affair I could not join any
Communist-controlled unit. Sooner or later it might mean being used
against the Spanish working class. One could not tell when this kind of
thing would break out again, and if I had to use my rifle at all in such
an affair I would use it on the side of the working class and not
against them. He was very decent about it. But from now on the whole
atmosphere was changed. You could not, as before, 'agree to differ' and
have drinks with a man who was supposedly your political opponent. There
were some ugly wrangles in the hotel lounge. Meanwhile the jails were
already full and overflowing. After the fighting was over the Anarchists
had, of course, released their prisoners, but the Civil Guards had not
released theirs, and most of them were thrown into prison and kept there
without trial, in many cases for months on end. As usual, completely
innocent people were being arrested owing to police bungling. I
mentioned earlier that Douglas Thompson was wounded about the beginning
of April. Afterwards we had lost touch with him, as usually happened
when a man was wounded, for wounded men were frequently moved from one
hospital to another. Actually he was at Tarragona hospital and was sent
back to Barcelona about the time when the fighting started. On the
Tuesday morning I met him in the street, considerably bewildered by the
firing that was going on all round. He asked the question everyone was
asking:

'What the devil is this all about?'

I explained as well as I could. Thompson said promptly:

'I'm going to keep out of this. My arm's still bad. I shall go back to
my hotel and stay there.'

He went back to his hotel, but unfortunately (how important it is in
street-fighting to understand the local geography!) it was a hotel in a
part of the town controlled by the Civil Guards. The place was raided
and Thompson was arrested, flung into jail, and kept for eight days in a
cell so full of people that nobody had room to lie down. There were many
similar cases. Numerous foreigners with doubtful political records were
on the run, with the police on their track and in constant fear of
denunciation. It was worst for the Italians and Germans, who had no
passports and were generally wanted by the secret police in their own
countries. If they were arrested they were liable to be deported to
France, which might mean being sent back to Italy or Germany, where God
knew what horrors were awaiting them. One or two foreign women hurriedly
regularized their position by 'marrying' Spaniards. A German girl who
had no papers at all dodged the police by posing for several days as a
man's mistress. I remember the look of shame and misery on the poor
girl's face when I accidentally bumped into her coming out of the man's
bedroom. Of course she was not his mistress, but no doubt she thought I
thought she was. You had all the while a hateful feeling that someone
hitherto your friend might be denouncing you to the secret police. The
long nightmare of the fighting, the noise, the lack of food and sleep,
the mingled strain and boredom of sitting on the roof and wondering
whether in another minute I should be shot myself or be obliged to shoot
somebody else had put my nerves on edge. I had got to the point when
every time a door banged I grabbed for my pistol. On the Saturday
morning there was an uproar of shots outside and everyone cried out:
'It's starting again!' I ran into the street to find that it was only
some Assault Guards shooting a mad dog. No one who was in Barcelona
then, or for months later, will forget the horrible atmosphere produced
by fear, suspicion, hatred, censored newspapers, crammed jails, enormous
food queues, and prowling gangs of armed men.

I have tried to give some idea of what it felt like to be in the middle
of the Barcelona fighting; yet I do not suppose I have succeeded in
conveying much of the strangeness of that time. One of the things that
stick in my mind when I look back is the casual contacts one made at the
time, the sudden glimpses of non-combatants to whom the whole thing was
simply a meaningless uproar. I remember the fashionably-dressed woman I
saw strolling down the Ramblas, with a shopping-basket over her arm and
leading a white poodle, while the rifles cracked and roared a street or
two away. It is conceivable that she was deaf. And the man I saw rushing
across the completely empty Plaza de Cataluña, brandishing a white
handkerchief in each hand. And the large party of people all dressed in
black who kept trying for about an hour to cross the Plaza de Cataluña
and always failing. Every time they emerged from the side-street at the
corner the P.S.U.C. machine-gunners in the Hotel Colon opened fire and
drove them back--I don't know why, for they were obviously unarmed. I
have since thought that they may have been a funeral party. And the
little man who acted as caretaker at the museum over the Poliorama and
who seemed to regard the whole affair as a social occasion. He was so
pleased to have the English visiting him--the English were so _simpático_,
he said. He hoped we would all come and see him again when the trouble
was over; as a matter of fact I did go and see him. And the other little
man, sheltering in a doorway, who jerked his head in a pleased manner
towards the hell of firing on the Plaza de Cataluña and said (as though
remarking that it was a fine morning): 'So we've got the nineteenth of
July back again!' And the people in the shoe-shop who were making my
marching-boots. I went there before the fighting, after it was over,
and, for a very few minutes, during the brief armistice on 5 May. It was
an expensive shop, and the shop-people were U.G.T. and may have been
P.S.U.C. members--at any rate they were politically on the other side
and they knew that I was serving with the P.O.U.M. Yet their attitude
was completely indifferent. 'Such a pity, this kind of thing, isn't it?
And so bad for business. What a pity it doesn't stop! As though there
wasn't enough of that kind of thing at the front!' etc., etc. There must
have been quantities of people, perhaps a majority of the inhabitants of
Barcelona, who regarded the whole affair without a flicker of interest,
or with no more interest than they would have felt in an air-raid.

In this chapter I have described only my personal experiences. In the
next chapter I must discuss as best I can the larger issues--what
actually happened and with what results, what were the rights and wrongs
of the affair, and who if anyone was responsible. So much political
capital has been made out of the Barcelona fighting that it is important
to try and get a balanced view of it. An immense amount, enough to fill
many books, has already been written on the subject, and I do not
suppose I should exaggerate if I said that nine-tenths of it is
untruthful. Nearly all the newspaper accounts published at the time were
manufactured by journalists at a distance, and were not only inaccurate
in their facts but intentionally misleading. As usual, only one side of
the question has been allowed to get to the wider public. Like everyone
who was in Barcelona at the time. I saw only what was happening in my
immediate neighbourhood, but I saw and heard quite enough to be able to
contradict many of the lies that have been circulated. As before, if you
are not interested in political controversy and the mob of parties and
sub-parties with their confusing names (rather like the names of the
generals in a Chinese war), please skip. It is a horrible thing to have
to enter into the details of inter-party polemics; it is like diving
into a cesspool. But it is necessary to try and establish the truth, so
far as it is possible. This squalid brawl in a distant city is more
important than might appear at first sight.



Chapter 11


It will never be possible to get a completely accurate and unbiased
account of the Barcelona fighting, because the necessary records do not
exist. Future historians will have nothing to go upon except a mass of
accusations and party propaganda. I myself have little data beyond what
I saw with my own eyes and what I have learned from other eyewitnesses
whom I believe to be reliable. I can, however, contradict some of the
more flagrant lies and help to get the affair into some kind of
perspective.

First of all, what actually happened?

For some time past there had been tension throughout Catalonia. In
earlier chapters of this book I have given some account of the struggle
between Communists and Anarchists. By May 1937 things had reached a
point at which some kind of violent outbreak could be regarded as
inevitable. The immediate cause of friction was the Government's order
to surrender all private weapons, coinciding with the decision to build
up a heavily-armed 'non-political' police-force from which trade union
members were to be excluded. The meaning of this was obvious to
everyone; and it was also obvious that the next move would be the taking
over of some of the key industries controlled by the C.N.T. In addition
there was a certain amount of resentment among the working classes
because of the growing contrast of wealth and poverty and a general
vague feeling that the revolution had been sabotaged. Many people were
agreeably surprised when there was no rioting on 1 May. On 3 May the
Government decided to take over the Telephone Exchange, which had been
operated since the beginning of the war mainly by C.N.T. workers; it was
alleged that it was badly run and that official calls were being tapped.
Salas, the Chief of Police (who may or may not have been exceeding his
orders), sent three lorry-loads of armed Civil Guards to seize the
building, while the streets outside were cleared by armed police in
civilian clothes. At about the same time bands of Civil Guards seized
various other buildings in strategic spots. Whatever the real intention
may have been, there was a widespread belief that this was the signal
for a general attack on the C.N.T. by the Civil Guards and the P.S.U.C.
(Communists and Socialists). The word flew round the town that the
workers' buildings were being attacked, armed Anarchists appeared on the
streets, work ceased, and fighting broke out immediately. That night and
the next morning barricades were built all over the town, and there was
no break in the fighting until the morning of 6 May. The fighting was,
however, mainly defensive on both sides. Buildings were besieged, but,
so far as I know, none were stormed, and there was no use of artillery.
Roughly speaking, the C.N.T.-F.A.I.-P.O.U.M. forces held the
working-class suburbs, and the armed police-forces and the P.S.U.C. held
the central and official portion of the town. On 6 May there was an
armistice, but fighting soon broke out again, probably because of
premature attempts by Civil Guards to disarm C.N.T. workers. Next
morning, however, the people began to leave the barricades of their own
accord. Up till, roughly, the night of 5 May the C.N.T. had had the
better of it, and large numbers of Civil Guards had surrendered. But
there was no generally accepted leadership and no fixed plan--indeed, so
far as one could judge, no plan at all except a vague determination to
resist the Civil Guards. The official leaders of the C.N.T. had joined
with those of the U.G.T. in imploring everyone to go back to work; above
all, food was running short. In such circumstances nobody was sure
enough of the issue to go on fighting. By the afternoon of 7 May
conditions were almost normal. That evening six thousand Assault Guards,
sent by sea from Valencia, arrived and took control of the town. The
Government issued an order for the surrender of all arms except those
held by the regular forces, and during the next few days large numbers
of arms were seized. The casualties during the fighting were officially
given out as four hundred killed and about a thousand wounded. Four
hundred killed is possibly an exaggeration, but as there is no way of
verifying this we must accept it as accurate.

Secondly, as to the after-effects of the fighting. Obviously it is
impossible to say with any certainty what these were. There is no
evidence that the outbreak had any direct effect upon the course of the
war, though obviously it must have had if it continued even a few days
longer. It was made the excuse for bringing Catalonia under the direct
control of Valencia, for hastening the break-up of the militias, and for
the suppression of the P.O.U.M., and no doubt it also had its share in
bringing down the Caballero Government. But we may take it as certain
that these things would have happened in any case. The real question is
whether the C.N.T. workers who came into the street gained or lost by
showing fight on this occasion. It is pure guesswork, but my own opinion
is that they gained more than they lost. The seizure of the Barcelona
Telephone Exchange was simply one incident in a long process. Since the
previous year direct power had been gradually manoeuvred out of the
hands of the syndicates, and the general movement was away from
working-class control and towards centralized control, leading on to
State capitalism or, possibly, towards the reintroduction of private
capitalism. The fact that at this point there was resistance probably
slowed the process down. A year after the outbreak of war the Catalan
workers had lost much of their power, but their position was still
comparatively favourable. It might have been much less so if they had
made it clear that they would lie down under no matter what provocation.
There are occasions when it pays better to fight and be beaten than not
to fight at all.

Thirdly, what purpose, if any, lay behind the outbreak? Was it any kind
of _coup d'état_ or revolutionary attempt? Did it definitely aim at
overthrowing the Government? Was it preconcerted at all?

My own opinion is that the fighting was only preconcerted in the sense
that everyone expected it. There were no signs of any very definite plan
on either side. On the Anarchist side the action was almost certainly
spontaneous, for it was an affair mainly of the rank and file. The
people came into the streets and their political leaders followed
reluctantly, or did not follow at all. The only people who even talked
in a revolutionary strain were the Friends of Durruti, a small extremist
group within the F.A.I., and the P.O.U.M. But once again they were
following and not leading. The Friends of Durruti distributed some kind
of revolutionary leaflet, but this did not appear until 5 May and cannot
be said to have started the fighting, which had started of its own
accord two days earlier. The official leaders of the C.N.T. disowned the
whole affair from the start. There were a number of reasons for this. To
begin with, the fact that the C.N.T. was still represented in the
Government and the Generalite ensured that its leaders would be more
conservative than their followers. Secondly, the main object of the
C.N.T. leaders was to form an alliance with the U.G.T., and the fighting
was bound to widen the split between C.N.T. and U.G.T., at any rate for
the time being. Thirdly--though this was not generally known at the
time--the Anarchist leaders feared that if things went beyond a certain
point and the workers took possession of the town, as they were perhaps
in a position to do on 5 May, there would be foreign intervention. A
British cruiser and two British destroyers had closed in upon the
harbour, and no doubt there were other warships not far away. The
English newspapers gave it out that these ships were proceeding to
Barcelona 'to protect British interests', but in fact they made no move
to do so; that is, they did not land any men or take off any refugees.
There can be no certainty about this, but it was at least inherently
likely that the British Government, which had not raised a finger to
save the Spanish Government from Franco, would intervene quickly enough
to save it from its own working class.

The P.O.U.M. leaders did not disown the affair, in fact they encouraged
their followers to remain at the barricades and even gave their approval
(in _La Batalla_, 6 May) to the extremist leaflet issued by the Friends
of Durruti. (There is great uncertainty about this leaflet, of which no
one now seems able to produce a copy.) In some of the foreign papers it
was described as an 'inflammatory poster' which was 'plastered' all over
the town. There was certainly no such poster. From comparison of various
reports I should say that the leaflet called for (i) The formation of a
revolutionary council (junta), (ii) The shooting of those responsible
for the attack on the Telephone Exchange, (iii) The disarming of the
Civil Guards. There is also some uncertainty as to how far _La Batalla_
expressed agreement with the leaflet. I myself did not see the leaflet
or _La Batalla_ of that date. The only handbill I saw during the
fighting was one issued by the tiny group of Trotskyists
('Bolshevik-Leninists') on 4 May. This merely said: 'Everyone to the
barricades--general strike of all industries except war industries.' (In
other words, it merely demanded what was happening already.) But in
reality the attitude of the P.O.U.M. leaders was hesitating. They had
never been in favour of insurrection until the war against Franco was
won; on the other hand the workers had come into the streets, and the
P.O.U.M. leaders took the rather pedantic Marxist line that when the
workers are on the streets it is the duty of the revolutionary parties
to be with them. Hence, in spite of uttering revolutionary slogans about
the 'reawakening of the spirit of 19 July', and so forth, they did their
best to limit the workers' action to the defensive. They never, for
instance, ordered an attack on any building; they merely ordered their
followers to remain on guard and, as I mentioned in the last chapter,
not to fire when it could be avoided. _La Batalla_ also issued
instructions that no troops were to leave the front.*

[* Footnote: A recent number of _Inprecor_ states the exact
opposite--that _La Batalla_ ordered the P.O.U.M. troops to leave the
front! The point can easily be settled by referring to _La Batalla_ of
the date named.]

As far as one can estimate it, I should say that the responsibility of
the P.O.U.M. amounts to having urged everyone to remain at the
barricades, and probably to having persuaded a certain number to remain
there longer than they would otherwise have done. Those who were in
personal touch with the P.O.U.M. leaders at the time (I myself was not)
have told me that they were in reality dismayed by the whole business,
but felt that they had got to associate themselves with it. Afterwards,
of course, political capital was made out of it in the usual manner.
Gorkin, one of the P.O.U.M. leaders, even spoke later of 'the glorious
days of May'.From the propaganda point of view this may have been the
right line; certainly the P.O.U.M. rose somewhat in numbers during the
brief period before its suppression. Tactically it was probably a
mistake to give countenance to the leaflet of the Friends of Durruti,
which was a very small organization and normally hostile to the P.O.U.M.
Considering the general excitement and the things that were being said
on both sides, the leaflet did not in effect mean much more than 'Stay
at the barricades', but by seeming to approve of it while _Solidaridad
Obrera_, the Anarchist paper, repudiated it, the P.O.U.M. leaders made
it easy for the Communist press to say afterwards that the fighting was
a kind of insurrection engineered solely by the P.O.U.M. However, we may
be certain that the Communist press would have said this in any case. It
was nothing compared with the accusations that were made both before and
afterwards on less evidence. The C.N.T. leaders did not gain much by
their more cautious attitude; they were praised for their loyalty but
were levered out of both the Government and the Generalite as soon as
the opportunity arose.

So far as one could judge from what people were saying at the time,
there was no real revolutionary intention anywhere. The people behind the
barricades were ordinary C.N.T. workers, probably with a sprinkling of
U.G.T. workers among them, and what they were attempting was not to
overthrow the Government but to resist what they regarded, rightly or
wrongly, as an attack by the police. Their action was essentially
defensive, and I doubt whether it should be described, as it was in
nearly all the foreign newspapers, as a 'rising'. A rising implies
aggressive action and a definite plan. More exactly it was a riot--a
very bloody riot, because both sides had fire-arms in their hands and
were willing to use them.

But what about the intentions on the other side? If it was not an
Anarchist _coup d'état_, was it perhaps a Communist _coup d'état_--a
planned effort to smash the power of the C.N.T. at one blow?

I do not believe it was, though certain things might lead one to suspect
it. It is significant that something very similar (seizure of the
Telephone Exchange by armed police acting under orders from Barcelona)
happened in Tarragona two days later. And in Barcelona the raid on the
Telephone Exchange was not an isolated act. In various parts of the town
bands of Civil Guards and P.S.U.C. adherents seized buildings in
strategic spots, if not actually before the fighting started, at any
rate with surprising promptitude. But what one has got to remember is
that these things were happening in Spain and not in England. Barcelona
is a town with a long history of street-fighting. In such places things
happen quickly, the factions are ready-made, everyone knows the local
geography, and when the guns begin to shoot people take their places
almost as in a fire-drill. Presumably those responsible for the seizure
of the Telephone Exchange expected trouble--though not on the scale that
actually happened--and had made ready to meet it. But it does not follow
that they were planning a general attack on the C.N.T. There are two
reasons why I do not believe that either side had made preparations for
large-scale fighting:

(i) Neither side had brought troops to Barcelona beforehand. The
fighting was only between those who were in Barcelona already, mainly
civilians and police.

(ii) The food ran short almost immediately. Anyone who has served in
Spain knows that the one operation of war that Spaniards really perform
really well is that of feeding their troops. It is most unlikely that if
either side had contemplated a week or two of street-fighting and a
general strike they would not have stored food beforehand.

Finally, as to the rights and wrongs of the affair.

A tremendous dust was kicked up in the foreign anti-Fascist press, but,
as usual, only one side of the case has had anything like a hearing. As
a result the Barcelona fighting has been represented as an insurrection
by disloyal Anarchists and Trotskyists who were 'stabbing the Spanish
Government in the back', and so forth. The issue was not quite so simple
as that. Undoubtedly when you are at war with a deadly enemy it is
better not to begin fighting among yourselves; but it is worth
remembering that it takes two to make a quarrel and that people do not
begin building barricades unless they have received something that they
regard as a provocation.

The trouble sprang naturally out of the Government's order to the
Anarchists to surrender their arms. In the English press this was
translated into English terms and took this form: that arms were
desperately needed on the Aragón front and could not be sent there
because the unpatriotic Anarchists were holding them back. To put it
like this is to ignore the conditions actually existing in Spain.
Everyone knew that both the Anarchists and the P.S.U.C. were hoarding
arms, and when the fighting broke out in Barcelona this was made clearer
still; both sides produced arms in abundance. The Anarchists were well
aware that even if they surrendered their arms, the P.S.U.C.,
politically the main power in Catalonia, would still retain theirs; and
this in fact was what happened after the fighting was over. Meanwhile
actually visible on the streets, there were quantities of arms which
would have been very welcome at the front, but which were being retained
for the 'non-political' police forces in the rear. And underneath this
there was the irreconcilable difference between Communists and
Anarchists, which was bound to lead to some kind of struggle sooner or
later. Since the beginning of the war the Spanish Communist Party had
grown enormously in numbers and captured most of the political power,
and there had come into Spain thousands of foreign Communists, many of
whom were openly expressing their intention of 'liquidating' Anarchism
as soon as the war against Franco was won. In the circumstances one
could hardly expect the Anarchists to hand over the weapons which they
had got possession of in the summer of 1936.

The seizure of the Telephone Exchange was simply the match that fired an
already existing bomb. It is perhaps just conceivable that those
responsible imagined that it would not lead to trouble. Companys, the
Catalan President, is said to have declared laughingly a few days
earlier that the Anarchists would put up with anything.*
But certainly it was not a wise action. For months past there had been a
long series of armed clashes between Communists and Anarchists in
various parts of Spain. Catalonia and especially Barcelona was in a
state of tension that had already led to street affrays, assassinations,
and so forth. Suddenly the news ran round the city that armed men were
attacking the buildings that the workers had captured in the July
fighting and to which they attached great sentimental importance. One
must remember that the Civil Guards were not loved by the working-class
population. For generations past _la guardia_ had been simply an appendage
of the landlord and the boss, and the Civil Guards were doubly hated
because they were suspected, quite justly, of being of very doubtful
loyalty against the Fascists.**

[* Footnote: _New Statesman_ (14 May).]

[** Footnote: At the outbreak of war the Civil Guards had everywhere
sided with the stronger party. On several occasions later in the war,
e.g. at Santander, the local Civil Guards went over to the Fascists in a
body.]

It is probable that the emotion that brought people into the streets in
the first few hours was much the same emotion as had led them to resist
the rebel generals at the beginning of the war. Of course it is arguable
that the C.N.T. workers ought to have handed over the Telephone Exchange
without protest. One's opinion here will be governed by one's attitude
on the question of centralized government and working-class control.
More relevantly it may be said: 'Yes, very likely the C.N.T. had a case.
But, after all, there was a war on, and they had no business to start a
fight behind the lines.' Here I agree entirely. Any internal disorder
was likely to aid Franco. But what actually precipitated the fighting?
The Government may or may not have had the right to seize the Telephone
Exchange; the point is that in the actual circumstances it was bound to
lead to a fight. It was a provocative action, a gesture which said in
effect, and presumably was meant to say: 'Your power is at an end--we
are taking over.' It was not common sense to expect anything but
resistance. If one keeps a sense of proportion one must realize that the
fault was not--could not be, in a matter of this kind--entirely on one
side. The reason why a one-sided version has been accepted is simply
that the Spanish revolutionary parties have no footing in the foreign
press. In the English press, in particular, you would have to search for
a long time before finding any favourable reference, at any period of
the war, to the Spanish Anarchists. They have been systematically
denigrated, and, as I know by my own experience, it is almost impossible
to get anyone to print anything in their defence.

I have tried to write objectively about the Barcelona fighting, though,
obviously, no one can be completely objective on a question of this
kind. One is practically obliged to take sides, and it must be clear
enough which side I am on. Again, I must inevitably have made mistakes
of fact, not only here but in other parts of this narrative. It is very
difficult to write accurately about the Spanish war, because of the lack
of non-propagandist documents. I warn everyone against my bias, and I
warn everyone against my mistakes. Still, I have done my best to be
honest. But it will be seen that the account I have given is completely
different from that which appeared in the foreign and especially the
Communist press. It is necessary to examine the Communist version,
because it was published all over the world, has been supplemented at
short intervals ever since, and is probably the most widely accepted
one.

In the Communist and pro-Communist press the entire blame for the
Barcelona fighting was laid upon the P.O.U.M. The affair was represented
not as a spontaneous outbreak, but as a deliberate, planned insurrection
against the Government, engineered solely by the P.O.U.M. with the aid
of a few misguided 'uncontrollables'. More than this, it was definitely
a Fascist plot, carried out under Fascist orders with the idea of
starting civil war in the rear and thus paralysing the Government. The
P.O.U.M. was 'Franco's Fifth Column'--a 'Trotskyist' organization
working in league with the Fascists. According to the _Daily Worker_ (11
May):


The German and Italian agents, who poured into Barcelona ostensibly to
'prepare' the notorious 'Congress of the Fourth International', had one
big task. It was this:

They were--in cooperation with the local Trotskyists--to prepare a
situation of disorder and bloodshed, in which it would be possible for
the Germans and Italians to declare that they were 'unable to exercise
naval control of the Catalan coasts effectively because of the disorder
prevailing in Barcelona' and were, therefore, 'unable to do otherwise
than land forces in Barcelona'.

In other words, what was being prepared was a situation in which the
German and Italian Governments could land troops or marines quite openly
on the Catalan coasts, declaring that they were doing so 'in order to
preserve order'...

The instrument for all this lay ready to hand for the Germans and
Italians in the shape of the Trotskyist organization known as the
P.O.U.M.

The P.O.U.M., acting in cooperation with well-known criminal elements,
and with certain other deluded persons in the Anarchist organizations
planned, organized, and led the attack in the rearguard, accurately
timed to coincide with the attack on the front at Bilbao, etc., etc.

Later in the article the Barcelona fighting becomes 'the P.O.U.M.
attack', and in another article in the same issue it is stated that
there is 'no doubt that it is at the door of the P.O.U.M. that the
responsibility for the bloodshed in Catalonia must be laid'. _Inprecor_
(29 May) states that those who erected the barricades in Barcelona were
'only members of the P.O.U.M. organized from that party for this
purpose'.

I could quote a great deal more, but this is clear enough. The P.O.U.M.
was wholly responsible and the P.O.U.M. was acting under Fascist orders.
In a moment I will give some more extracts from the accounts that
appeared in the Communist press; it will be seen that they are so
self-contradictory as to be completely worthless. But before doing so it
is worth pointing to several _a priori_ reasons why this version of the
May fighting as a Fascist rising engineered by the P.O.U.M. is next door
to incredible.

(i) The P.O.U.M. had not the numbers or influence to provoke disorders
of this magnitude. Still less had it the power to call a general strike.
It was a political organization with no very definite footing in the
trade unions, and it would have been hardly more capable of producing a
strike throughout Barcelona than (say) the English Communist Party would
be of producing a general strike throughout Glasgow. As I said earlier,
the attitude of the P.O.U.M. leaders may have helped to prolong the
fighting to some extent; but they could not have originated it even if
they had wanted to.

(ii) The alleged Fascist plot rests on bare assertion and all the
evidence points in the other direction. We are told that the plan was
for the German and Italian Governments to land troops in Catalonia; but
no German or Italian troopships approached the coast. As to the
'Congress of the Fourth International' and the 'German and Italian
agents', they are pure myth. So far as I know there had not even been
any talk of a Congress of the Fourth International. There were vague
plans for a Congress of the P.O.U.M. and its brother-parties (English
I.L.P., German S.A.P., etc., etc.); this had been tentatively fixed for
some time in July--two months later--and not a single delegate had yet
arrived. The 'German and Italian agents' have no existence outside the
pages of the _Daily Worker_. Anyone who crossed the frontier at that
time knows that it was not so easy to 'pour' into Spain, or out of it,
for that matter.

(iii) Nothing happened either at Lérida, the chief stronghold of the
P.O.U.M., or at the front. It is obvious that if the P.O.U.M. leaders
had wanted to aid the Fascists they would have ordered their militia to
walk out of the line and let the Fascists through. But nothing of the
kind was done or suggested. Nor were any extra men brought out of the
line beforehand, though it would have been easy enough to smuggle, say,
a thousand or two thousand men back to Barcelona on various pretexts.
And there was no attempt even at indirect sabotage of the front. The
transport of food, munitions, and so forth continued as usual; I
verified this by inquiry afterwards. Above all, a planned rising of the
kind suggested would have needed months of preparation, subversive
propaganda among the militia, and so forth. But there was no sign or
rumour of any such thing. The fact that the militia at the front played
no part in the 'rising' should be conclusive. If the P.O.U.M. were
really planning a _coup d'état_ it is inconceivable that they would not
have used the ten thousand or so armed men who were the only striking
force they had.


It will be clear enough from this that the Communist thesis of a
P.O.U.M. 'rising' under Fascist orders rests on less than no evidence. I
will add a few more extracts from the Communist press. The Communist
accounts of the opening incident, the raid on the Telephone Exchange,
are illuminating; they agree in nothing except in putting the blame on
the other side. It is noticeable that in the English Communist papers
the blame is put first upon the Anarchists and only later upon the
P.O.U.M. There is a fairly obvious reason for this. Not everyone in
England has heard of 'Trotskyism', whereas every English-speaking person
shudders at the name of 'Anarchist'. Let it once be known that
'Anarchists' are implicated, and the right atmosphere of prejudice is
established; after that the blame can safely be transferred to the
'Trotskyists'. The _Daily Worker_ begins thus (6 May):


A minority gang of Anarchists on Monday and Tuesday seized and attempted
to hold the telephone and telegram buildings, and started firing into
the street.


There is nothing like starting off with a reversal of roles. The Civil
Guards attack a building held by the C.N.T.; so the C.N.T. are
represented as attacking their own building--attacking themselves, in
fact. On the other hand, the _Daily Worker_ of 11 May states:


The Left Catalan Minister of Public Security, Aiguade, and the United
Socialist General Commissar of Public Order, Rodrigue Salas, sent the
armed republican police into the Telefonica building to disarm the
employees there, most of them members of C.N.T. unions.


This does not seem to agree very well with the first statement;
nevertheless the _Daily Worker_ contains no admission that the first
statement was wrong. The _Daily Worker_ of 11 May states that the
leaflets of the Friends of Durruti, which were disowned by the C.N.T.,
appeared on 4 May and 5 May, during the fighting. _Inprecor_ (22 May)
states that they appeared on 3 May, _before_ the fighting, and adds that
'in view of these facts' (the appearance of various leaflets):


The police, led by the Prefect of Police in person, occupied the central
telephone exchange in the afternoon of 3 May. The police were shot at
while discharging their duty. This was the signal for the provocateurs
to begin shooting affrays all over the city.


And here is _Inprecor_ for 29 May:


At three o'clock in the afternoon the Commissar for Public Security,
Comrade Salas, went to the Telephone Exchange, which on the previous
night had been occupied by 50 members of the P.O.U.M. and various
uncontrollable elements.


This seems rather curious. The occupation of the Telephone Exchange by
50 P.O.U.M. members is what one might call a picturesque circumstance,
and one would have expected somebody to notice it at the time. Yet it
appears that it was discovered only three or four weeks later. In
another issue of _Inprecor_ the 50 P.O.U.M. members become 50 P.O.U.M.
militiamen. It would be difficult to pack together more contradictions
than are contained in these few short passages. At one moment the C.N.T.
are attacking the Telephone Exchange, the next they are being attacked
there; a leaflet appears before the seizure of the Telephone Exchange
and is the cause of it, or, alternatively, appears afterwards and is the
result of it; the people in the Telephone Exchange are alternatively
C.N.T. members and P.O.U.M. members--and so on. And in a still later
issue of the _Daily Worker_ (3 June) Mr J. R. Campbell informs us that
the Government only seized the Telephone Exchange because the barricades
were already erected!

For reasons of space I have taken only the reports of one incident, but
the same discrepancies run all through the accounts in the Communist
press. In addition there are various statements which are obviously pure
fabrication. Here for instance is something quoted by the _Daily Worker_
(7 May) and said to have been issued by the Spanish Embassy in Paris:


A significant feature of the uprising has been that the old monarchist
flag was flown from the balcony of various houses in Barcelona,
doubtless in the belief that those who took part in the rising had
become masters of the situation.


The _Daily Worker_ very probably reprinted this statement in good faith,
but those responsible for it at the Spanish Embassy must have been quite
deliberately lying. Any Spaniard would understand the internal situation
better than that. A monarchist flag in Barcelona! It was the one thing
that could have united the warring factions in a moment. Even the
Communists on the spot were obliged to smile when they read about it. It
is the same with the reports in the various Communist papers upon the
arms supposed to have been used by the P.O.U.M. during the 'rising'.
They would be credible only if one knew nothing whatever of the facts.
In the _Daily Worker_ of 17 May Mr Frank Pitcairn states:


There were actually all sorts of arms used by them in the outrage. There
were the arms which they have been stealing for months past, and hidden,
and there were arms such as tanks, which they stole from the barracks
just at the beginning of the rising. It is clear that scores of
machine-guns and several thousand rifles are still in their possession.


_Inprecor_ (29 May) also states:


On 3 May the P.O.U.M. had at its disposal some dozens of machine-guns
and several thousand rifles...On the Plaza de España the Trotskyists
brought into action batteries of '75' guns which were destined for the
front in Aragón and which the militia had carefully concealed on their
premises.


Mr Pitcairn does not tell us how and when it became clear that the
P.O.U.M. possessed scores of machine-guns and several thousand rifles. I
have given an estimate of the arms which were at three of the principal
P.O.U.M. buildings--about eighty rifles, a few bombs, and no
machine-guns; i.e. about sufficient for the armed guards which, at that
time, all the political parties placed on their buildings. It seems
strange that afterwards, when the P.O.U.M. was suppressed and all its
buildings seized, these thousands of weapons never came to light;
especially the tanks and field-guns, which are not the kind of thing
that can be hidden up the chimney. But what is revealing in the two
statements above is the complete ignorance they display of the local
circumstances. According to Mr Pitcairn the P.O.U.M. stole tanks 'from
the barracks'. He does not tell us which barracks. The P.O.U.M.
militiamen who were in Barcelona (now comparatively few, as direct
recruitment to the party militias had ceased) shared the Lenin Barracks
with a considerably larger number of Popular Army troops. Mr Pitcairn is
asking us to believe, therefore, that the P.O.U.M. stole tanks with the
connivance of the Popular Army. It is the same with the 'premises' on
which the 75-mm. guns were concealed. There is no mention of where these
'premises' were. Those batteries of guns, firing on the Plaza de España,
appeared in many newspaper reports, but I think we can say with
certainty that they never existed. As I mentioned earlier, I heard no
artillery-fire during the fighting, though the Plaza de España was only
a mile or so away. A few days later I examined the Plaza de España and
could find no buildings that showed marks of shell-fire. And an
eye-witness who was in that neighbourhood throughout the fighting
declares that no guns ever appeared there. (Incidentally, the tale of
the stolen guns may have originated with Antonov-Ovseenko, the Russian
Consul-General. He, at any rate, communicated it to a well-known English
journalist, who afterwards repeated it in good faith in a weekly paper.
Antonov-Ovseenko has since been 'purged'. How this would affect his
credibility I do not know.) The truth is, of course, that these tales
about tanks, field-guns, and so forth have only been invented because
otherwise it is difficult to reconcile the scale of the Barcelona
fighting with the P.O.U.M.'s small numbers. It was necessary to claim
that the P.O.U.M. was wholly responsible for the fighting; it was also
necessary to claim that it was an insignificant party with no following
and 'numbered only a few thousand members', according to _Inprecor_. The
only hope of making both statements credible was to pretend that the
P.O.U.M. had all the weapons of a modern mechanized army.

It is impossible to read through the reports in the Communist Press
without realizing that they are consciously aimed at a public ignorant
of the facts and have no other purpose than to work up prejudice. Hence,
for instance, such statements as Mr Pitcairn's in the _Daily Worker_ of
11 May that the 'rising' was suppressed by the Popular Army. The idea
here is to give outsiders the impression that all Catalonia was solid
against the 'Trotskyists'. But the Popular Army remained neutral
throughout the fighting; everyone in Barcelona knew this, and it is
difficult to believe that Mr Pitcairn did not know it too. Or again, the
juggling in the Communist Press with the figures for killed and wounded,
with the object of exaggerating the scale of the disorders. Diaz,
General Secretary of the Spanish Communist Party, widely quoted in the
Communist Press, gave the numbers as 900 dead and 2500 wounded. The
Catalan Minister of Propaganda, who was hardly likely to underestimate,
gave the numbers as 400 killed and 1000 wounded. The Communist Party
doubles the bid and adds a few more hundreds for luck.

The foreign capitalist newspapers, in general, laid the blame for the
fighting upon the Anarchists, but there were a few that followed the
Communist line. One of these was the English _News Chronicle_, whose
correspondent, Mr John Langdon-Davies, was in Barcelona at the time. I
quote portions of his article here:


A TROTSKYIST REVOLT

...This has not been an Anarchist uprising. It is a frustrated _putsch_
of the 'Trotskyist' P.O.U.M., working through their controlled
organizations, 'Friends of Durruti' and Libertarian Youth...The tragedy
began on Monday afternoon when the Government sent armed police into the
Telephone Building, to disarm the workers there, mostly C.N.T. men.
Grave irregularities in the service had been a scandal for some time. A
large crowd gathered in the Plaza de Cataluña outside, while the C.N.T.
men resisted, retreating floor by floor to the top of the building...The
incident was very obscure, but word went round that the Government was
out against the Anarchists. The streets filled with armed men...By
nightfall every workers'centre and Government building was barricaded,
and at ten o'clock the first volleys were fired and the first ambulances
began ringing their way through the streets. By dawn all Barcelona was
under fire...As the day wore on and the dead mounted to over a hundred,
one could make a guess at what was happening. The Anarchist C.N.T. and
Socialist U.G.T. were not technically 'out in the street'. So long as
they remained behind the barricades they were merely watchfully waiting,
an attitude which included the right to shoot at anything armed in the
open street...(the) general bursts were invariably aggravated by
_pacos_--hidden solitary men, usually Fascists, shooting from roof-tops
at nothing in particular, but doing all they could to add to the general
panic...By Wednesday evening, however, it began to be clear who was
behind the revolt. All the walls had been plastered with an inflammatory
poster calling for an immediate revolution and for the shooting of
Republican and Socialist leaders. It was signed by the 'Friends of
Durruti'. On Thursday morning the Anarchists daily denied all knowledge
or sympathy with it, but _La Batalla_, the P.O.U.M. paper, reprinted the
document with the highest praise. Barcelona, the first city of Spain,
was plunged into bloodshed by _agents provocateurs_ using this
subversive organization.


This does not agree very completely with the Communist versions I have
quoted above, but it will be seen that even as it stands it is
self-contradictory. First the affair is described as 'a Trotskyist
revolt', then it is shown to have resulted from a raid on the Telephone
building and the general belief that the Government was 'out against'
the Anarchists. The city is barricaded and both C.N.T. and U.G.T. are
behind the barricades; two days afterwards the inflammatory poster
(actually a leaflet) appears, and this is declared by implication to
have started the whole business--effect preceding cause. But there is a
piece of very serious misrepresentation here. Mr Langdon-Davies
describes the Friends of Durruti and Libertarian Youth as 'controlled
organizations' of the P.O.U.M. Both were Anarchist organizations and had
no connexion with the P.O.U.M. The Libertarian Youth was the youth
league of the Anarchists, corresponding to the J.S.U. of the P.S.U.C.,
etc. The Friends of Durruti was a small organization within the F.A.I.,
and was in general bitterly hostile to the P.O.U.M. So far as I can
discover, there was no one who was a member of both. It would be about
equally true to say that the Socialist League is a 'controlled
organization' of the English Liberal Party. Was Mr Langdon-Davies
unaware of this? If he was, he should have written with more caution
about this very complex subject.

I am not attacking Mr Langdon-Davies's good faith; but admittedly he
left Barcelona as soon as the fighting was over, i.e. at the moment when
he could have begun serious inquiries, and throughout his report there
are clear signs that he has accepted the official version of a
'Trotskyist revolt' without sufficient verification. This is obvious
even in the extract I have quoted. 'By nightfall' the barricades are
built, and 'at ten o'clock' the first volleys are fired. These are not
the words of an eye-witness. From this you would gather that it is usual
to wait for your enemy to build a barricade before beginning to shoot at
him. The impression given is that some hours elapsed between the
building of the barricades and the firing of the first volleys;
whereas--naturally--it was the other way about. I and many others saw
the first volleys fired early in the afternoon. Again, there are the
solitary men, 'usually Fascists', who are shooting from the roof-tops.
Mr Langdon-Davies does not explain how he knew that these men were
Fascists. Presumably he did not climb on to the roofs and ask them. He
is simply repeating what he has been told and, as it fits in with the
official version, is not questioning it. As a matter of fact, he
indicates one probable source of much of his information by an
incautious reference to the Minister of Propaganda at the beginning of
his article. Foreign journalists in Spain were hopelessly at the mercy
of the Ministry of Propaganda, though one would think that the very name
of this ministry would be a sufficient warning. The Minister of
Propaganda was, of course, about as likely to give an objective account
of the Barcelona trouble as (say) the late Lord Carson would have been
to give an objective account of the Dublin rising of 1916.

I have given reasons for thinking that the Communist version of the
Barcelona fighting cannot be taken seriously. In addition I must say
something about the general charge that the P.O.U.M. was a secret
Fascist organization in the pay of Franco and Hitler.

This charge was repeated over and over in the Communist Press,
especially from the beginning of 1937 onwards. It was part of the
world-wide drive of the official Communist Party against 'Trotskyism',
of which the P.O.U.M. was supposed to be representative in
Spain.'Trotskyism', according to _Frente Rojo_ (the Valencia Communist
paper) 'is not a political doctrine. Trotskyism is an official
capitalist organization, a Fascist terrorist band occupied in crime and
sabotage against the people.' The P.O.U.M. was a 'Trotskyist'
organization in league with the Fascists and part of 'Franco's Fifth
Column'. What was noticeable from the start was that no evidence was
produced in support of this accusation; the thing was simply asserted
with an air of authority. And the attack was made with the maximum of
personal libel and with complete irresponsibility as to any effects it
might have upon the war. Compared with the job of libelling the
P.O.U.M., many Communist writers appear to have considered the betrayal
of military secrets unimportant. In a February number of the _Daily
Worker_, for instance, a writer (Winifred Bates) is allowed to state
that the P.O.U.M. had only half as many troops on its section of the
front as it pretended. This was not true, but presumably the writer
believed it to be true. She and the _Daily Worker_ were perfectly
willing, therefore, to hand to the enemy one of the most important
pieces of information that can be handed through the columns of a
newspaper. In the _New Republic_ Mr Ralph Bates stated that the P.O.U.M.
troops were 'playing football with the Fascists in no man's land' at a
time when, as a matter of fact, the P.O.U.M. troops were suffering heavy
casualties and a number of my personal friends were killed and wounded.
Again, there was the malignant cartoon which was widely circulated,
first in Madrid and later in Barcelona, representing the P.O.U.M. as
slipping off a mask marked with the hammer and sickle and revealing a
face marked with the swastika. Had the Government not been virtually
under Communist control it would never have permitted a thing of this
kind to be circulated in wartime. It was a deliberate blow at the morale
not only of the P.O.U.M. militia, but of any others who happened to be
near them; for it is not encouraging to be told that the troops next to
you in the line are traitors. As a matter of fact, I doubt whether the
abuse that was heaped upon them from the rear actually had the effect of
demoralizing the P.O.U.M. militia. But certainly it was calculated to do
so, and those responsible for it must be held to have put political
spite before anti-Fascist unity.

The accusation against the P.O.U.M. amounted to this: that a body of
some scores of thousands of people, almost entirely working class,
besides numerous foreign helpers and sympathizers, mostly refugees from
Fascist countries, and thousands of militia, was simply a vast spying
organization in Fascist pay. The thing was opposed to common sense, and
the past history of the P.O.U.M. was enough to make it incredible. All
the P.O.U.M. leaders had revolutionary histories behind them. Some of
them had been mixed up in the 1934 revolt, and most of them had been
imprisoned for Socialist activities under the Lerroux Government or the
monarchy. In 1936 its then leader, Joaquin Maurin, was one of the
deputies who gave warning in the Cortes of Franco's impending revolt.
Some time after the outbreak of war he was taken prisoner by the
Fascists while trying to organize resistance in Franco's rear. When the
revolt broke out the P.O.U.M. played a conspicuous part in resisting it,
and in Madrid, in particular, many of its members were killed in the
street-fighting. It was one of the first bodies to form columns of
militia in Catalonia and Madrid. It seems almost impossible to explain
these as the actions of a party in Fascist pay. A party in Fascist pay
would simply have joined in on the other side.

Nor was there any sign of pro-Fascist activities during the war. It was
arguable--though finally I do not agree--that by pressing for a more
revolutionary policy the P.O.U.M. divided the Government forces and thus
aided the Fascists. I think any Government of reformist type would be
justified in regarding a party like the P.O.U.M. as a nuisance. But this
is a very different matter from direct treachery. There is no way of
explaining why, if the P.O.U.M. was really a Fascist body, its militia
remained loyal. Here were eight or ten thousand men holding important
parts of the line during the intolerable conditions of the winter of
1936-7. Many of them were in the trenches four or five months at a
stretch. It is difficult to see why they did not simply walk out of the
line or go over to the enemy. It was always in their power to do so, and
at times the effect might have been decisive. Yet they continued to
fight, and it was shortly after the P.O.U.M. was suppressed as a
political party, when the event was fresh in everyone's mind, that the
militia--not yet redistributed among the Popular Army--took part in the
murderous attack to the east of Huesca when several thousand men were
killed in one or two days. At the very least one would have expected
fraternization with the enemy and a constant trickle of deserters. But,
as I have pointed out earlier, the number of desertions was
exceptionally small. Again, one would have expected pro-Fascist
propaganda, 'defeatism', and so forth. Yet there was no sign of any such
thing. Obviously there must have been Fascist spies and _agents
provocateurs_ in the P.O.U.M.; they exist in all Left-wing parties; but
there is no evidence that there were more of them there than elsewhere.

It is true that some of the attacks in the Communist Press said, rather
grudgingly, that only the P.O.U.M. leaders were in Fascist pay, and not
the rank and file. But this was merely an attempt to detach the rank and
file from their leaders. The nature of the accusation implied that
ordinary members, militiamen, and so forth, were all in the plot
together; for it was obvious that if Nin, Gorkin, and the others were
really in Fascist pay, it was more likely to be known to their
followers, who were in contact with them, than to journalists in London,
Paris, and New York. And in any case, when the P.O.U.M. was suppressed
the Communist-controlled secret police acted on the assumption that all
were guilty alike, and arrested everyone connected with the P.O.U.M.
whom they could lay hands on, including even wounded men, hospital
nurses, wives of P.O.U.M. members, and in some cases, even children.

Finally, on 15-16 June, the P.O.U.M. was suppressed and declared an
illegal organization. This was one of the first acts of the Negrin
Government which came into office in May. When the Executive Committee
of the P.O.U.M. had been thrown into jail, the Communist Press produced
what purported to be the discovery of an enormous Fascist plot. For a
while the Communist Press of the whole world was flaming with this kind
of thing (_Daily Worker_, 21 June, summarizing various Spanish Communist
papers):


SPANISH TROTSKYISTS PLOT WITH FRANCO

Following the arrest of a large number of leading Trotskyists in
Barcelona and elsewhere...there became known, over the weekend, details
of one of the most ghastly pieces of espionage ever known in wartime,
and the ugliest revelation of Trotskyist treachery to date...Documents
in the possession of the police, together with the full confession of no
less than 200 persons under arrest, prove, etc. etc.


What these revelations 'proved' was that the P.O.U.M. leaders were
transmitting military secrets to General Franco by radio, were in touch
with Berlin, and were acting in collaboration with the secret Fascist
organization in Madrid. In addition there were sensational details about
secret messages in invisible ink, a mysterious document signed with the
letter N. (standing for Nin), and so on and so forth.

But the final upshot was this: six months after the event, as I write,
most of the P.O.U.M. leaders are still in jail, but they have never been
brought to trial, and the charges of communicating with Franco by radio,
etc., have never even been formulated. Had they really been guilty of
espionage they would have been tried and shot in a week, as so many
Fascist spies had been previously. But not a scrap of evidence was ever
produced except the unsupported statements in the Communist Press. As
for the two hundred 'full confessions', which, if they had existed,
would have been enough to convict anybody, they have never been heard of
again. They were, in fact, two hundred efforts of somebody's
imagination.

More than this, most of the members of the Spanish Government have
disclaimed all belief in the charges against the P.O.U.M. Recently the
cabinet decided by five to two in favour of releasing anti-Fascist
political prisoners; the two dissentients being the Communist ministers.
In August an international delegation headed by James Maxton M.P., went
to Spain to inquire into the charges against the P.O.U.M. and the
disappearance of Andres Nin. Prieto, the Minister of National Defence,
Irujo, the Minister of Justice, Zugazagoitia, Minister of the Interior,
Ortega y Gasset, the Procureur-General, Prat Garcia, and others all
repudiated any belief in the P.O.U.M. leaders being guilty of espionage.
Irujo added that he had been through the dossier of the case, that none
of the so-called pieces of evidence would bear examination, and that the
document supposed to have been signed by Nin was 'valueless'--i.e. a
forgery. Prieto considered the P.O.U.M. leaders to be responsible for
the May fighting in Barcelona, but dismissed the idea of their being
Fascist spies. 'What is most grave,' he added, 'is that the arrest of
the P.O.U.M. leaders was not decided upon by the Government, and the
police carried out these arrests on their own authority. Those
responsible are not the heads of the police, but their entourage, which
has been infiltrated by the Communists according to their usual custom.'
He cited other cases of illegal arrests by the police. Irujo likewise
declared that the police had become 'quasi-independent' and were in
reality under the control of foreign Communist elements. Prieto hinted
fairly broadly to the delegation that the Government could not afford to
offend the Communist Party while the Russians were supplying arms. When
another delegation, headed by John McGovern M.P., went to Spain in
December, they got much the same answers as before, and Zugazagoitia,
the Minister of the Interior, repeated Prieto's hint in even plainer
terms. 'We have received aid from Russia and have had to permit certain
actions which we did not like.' As an illustration of the autonomy of
the police, it is interesting to learn that even with a signed order
from the Director of Prisons and the Minister of Justice, McGovern and
the others could not obtain admission to one of the 'secret prisons'
maintained by the Communist Party in Barcelona.*

[* Footnote: For reports on the two delegations see _Le Populaire_ (7
September),_ La Flèche_ (18 September), report on the Maxton Delegation
published by _Independent News_ (219 Rue Saint-Denis, Paris), and
McGovern's pamphlet _Terror in Spain_.]

I think this should be enough to make the matter clear. The accusation
of espionage against the P.O.U.M. rested solely upon articles in the
Communist press and the activities of the Communist-controlled secret
police. The P.O.U.M. leaders, and hundreds or thousands of their
followers, are still in prison, and for six months past the Communist
press has continued to clamour for the execution of the 'traitors.' But
Negrin and the others have kept their heads and refused to stage a
wholesale massacre of 'Trotskyists'. Considering the pressure that has
been put upon them, it is greatly to their credit that they have done
so. Meanwhile, in face of what I have quoted above, it becomes very
difficult to believe that the P.O.U.M. was really a Fascist spying
organization, unless one also believes that Maxton, McGovern, Prieto,
Irujo, Zugazagoitia, and the rest are all in Fascist pay together.

Finally, as to the charge that the P.O.U.M. was 'Trotskyist'. This word
is now flung about with greater and greater freedom, and it is used in a
way that is extremely misleading and is often intended to mislead. It is
worth stopping to define it. The word Trotskyist is used to mean three
distinct things:


(i) One who, like Trotsky, advocates 'world revolution' as against
'Socialism in a single country'. More loosely, a revolutionary
extremist.

(ii) A member of the actual organization of which Trotsky is head.

(iii) A disguised Fascist posing as a revolutionary who acts especially
by sabotage in the U.S.S.R., but, in general, by splitting and
undermining the Left-wing forces.


In sense (i) the P.O.U.M. could probably be described as Trotskyist. So
can the English I.L.P., the German S.A.P., the Left Socialists in
France, and so on. But the P.O.U.M. had no connexion with Trotsky or the
Trotskyist ('Bolshevik-Leninist') organization. When the war broke out
the foreign Trotskyists who came to Spain (fifteen or twenty in number)
worked at first for the P.O.U.M., as the party nearest to their own
viewpoint, but without becoming party-members; later Trotsky ordered his
followers to attack the P.O.U.M. policy, and the Trotskyists were purged
from the party offices, though a few remained in the militia. Nin, the
P.O.U.M. leader after Maurin's capture by the Fascists, was at one time
Trotsky's secretary, but had left him some years earlier and formed the
P.O.U.M. by the amalgamation of various Opposition Communists with an
earlier party, the Workers' and Peasants' Bloc. Nin's one-time
association with Trotsky has been used in the Communist press to show
that the P.O.U.M. was really Trotskyist. By the same line of argument it
could be shown that the English Communist Party is really a Fascist
organization, because of Mr John Strachey's one-time association with
Sir Oswald Mosley.

In sense (ii), the only exactly defined sense of the word, the P.O.U.M.
was certainly not Trotskyist. It is important to make this distinction,
because it is taken for granted by the majority of Communists that a
Trotskyist in sense (ii) is invariably a Trotskyist in sense (iii)--i.e.
that the whole Trotskyist organization is simply a Fascist
spying-machine. 'Trotskyism' only came into public notice in the time of
the Russian sabotage trials, and to call a man a Trotskyist is
practically equivalent to calling him a murderer, agent provocateur,
etc. But at the same time anyone who criticizes Communist policy from a
Left-wing standpoint is liable to be denounced as a Trotskyist. Is it
then asserted that everyone professing revolutionary extremism is in
Fascist pay?

In practice it is or is not, according to local convenience. When Maxton
went to Spain with the delegation I have mentioned above, _Verdad_,
_Frente Rojo_, and other Spanish Communist papers instantly denounced
him as a 'Trotsky-Fascist', spy of the Gestapo, and so forth. Yet the
English Communists were careful not to repeat this accusation. In the
English Communist press Maxton becomes merely a 'reactionary enemy of
the working class', which is conveniently vague. The reason, of course,
is simply that several sharp lessons have given the English Communist
press a wholesome dread of the law of libel. The fact that the
accusation was not repeated in a country where it might have to be
proved is sufficient confession that it is a lie.

It may seem that I have discussed the accusations against the P.O.U.M.
at greater length than was necessary. Compared with the huge miseries of
a civil war, this kind of internecine squabble between parties, with its
inevitable injustices and false accusations, may appear trivial. It is
not really so. I believe that libels and press-campaigns of this kind,
and the habits of mind they indicate, are capable of doing the most
deadly damage to the anti-Fascist cause.

Anyone who has given the subject a glance knows that the Communist
tactic of dealing with political opponents by means of trumped-up
accusations is nothing new. Today the key-word is 'Trotsky-Fascist';
yesterday it was 'Social-Fascist'. It is only six or seven years since
the Russian State trials 'proved' that the leaders of the Second
International, including, for instance, Leon Blum and prominent members
of the British Labour Party, were hatching a huge plot for the military
invasion of the U.S.S.R. Yet today the French Communists are glad enough
to accept Blum as a leader, and the English Communists are raising
heaven and earth to get inside the Labour Party. I doubt whether this
kind of thing pays, even from a sectarian point of view. And meanwhile
there is no possible doubt about the hatred and dissension that the
'Trotsky-Fascist' accusation is causing. Rank-and-file Communists
everywhere are led away on a senseless witch-hunt after 'Trotskyists',
and parties of the type of the P.O.U.M. are driven back into the
terribly sterile position of being mere anti-Communist parties. There is
already the beginning of a dangerous split in the world working-class
movement. A few more libels against life-long Socialists, a few more
frame-ups like the charges against the P.O.U.M., and the split may
become irreconcilable. The only hope is to keep political controversy on
a plane where exhaustive discussion is possible. Between the Communists
and those who stand or claim to stand to the Left of them there is a
real difference. The Communists hold that Fascism can be beaten by
alliance with sections of the capitalist class (the Popular Front);
their opponents hold that this manoeuvre simply gives Fascism new
breeding-grounds. The question has got to be settled; to make the wrong
decision may be to land ourselves in for centuries of semi-slavery. But
so long as no argument is produced except a scream of 'Trotsky-Fascist!'
the discussion cannot even begin. It would be impossible for me, for
instance, to debate the rights and wrongs of the Barcelona fighting with
a Communist Party member, because no Communist--that is to say, no
'good' Communist--could admit that I have given a truthful account of
the facts. If he followed his party line dutifully he would have to
declare that I am lying or, at best, that I am hopelessly misled and
that anyone who glanced at the _Daily Worker_ headlines a thousand miles
from the scene of events knows more of what was happening in Barcelona
than I do. In such circumstances there can be no argument; the necessary
minimum of agreement cannot be reached. What purpose is served by saying
that men like Maxton are in Fascist pay? Only the purpose of making
serious discussion impossible. It is as though in the middle of a chess
tournament one competitor should suddenly begin screaming that the other
is guilty of arson or bigamy. The point that is really at issue remains
untouched. Libel settles nothing.



Chapter 12


It must have been three days after the Barcelona fighting ended that we
returned to the front. After the fighting--more particularly after the
slanging-match in the newspapers--it was difficult to think about this
war in quite the same naively idealistic manner as before. I suppose
there is no one who spent more than a few weeks in Spain without being
in some degree disillusioned. My mind went back to the newspaper
correspondent whom I had met my first day in Barcelona, and who said to
me: 'This war is a racket the same as any other.' The remark had shocked
me deeply, and at that time (December) I do not believe it was true; it
was not true even now, in May; but it was becoming truer. The fact is
that every war suffers a kind of progressive degradation with every
month that it continues, because such things as individual liberty and a
truthful press are simply not compatible with military efficiency.

One could begin now to make some kind of guess at what was likely to
happen. It was easy to see that the Caballero Government would fall and
be replaced by a more Right-wing Government with a stronger Communist
influence (this happened a week or two later), which would set itself to
break the power of the trade unions once and for all. And afterwards,
when Franco was beaten--and putting aside the huge problems raised by
the reorganization of Spain--the prospect was not rosy. As for the
newspaper talk about this being a 'war for democracy', it was plain
eyewash. No one in his senses supposed that there was any hope of
democracy, even as we understand it in England or France, in a country
so divided and exhausted as Spain would be when the war was over. It
would have to be a dictatorship, and it was clear that the chance of a
working-class dictatorship had passed. That meant that the general
movement would be in the direction of some kind of Fascism. Fascism
called, no doubt, by some politer name, and--because this was
Spain--more human and less efficient than the German or Italian
varieties. The only alternatives were an infinitely worse dictatorship
by Franco, or (always a possibility) that the war would end with Spain
divided up, either by actual frontiers or into economic zones.

Whichever way you took it it was a depressing outlook. But it did not
follow that the Government was not worth fighting for as against the
more naked and developed Fascism of Franco and Hitler. Whatever faults
the post-war Government might have, Franco's regime would certainly be
worse. To the workers--the town proletariat--it might in the end make
very little difference who won, but Spain is primarily an agricultural
country and the peasants would almost certainly benefit by a Government
victory. Some at least of the seized lands would remain in their
possession, in which case there would also be a distribution of land in
the territory that had been Franco's, and the virtual serfdom that had
existed in some parts of Spain was not likely to be restored. The
Government in control at the end of the war would at any rate be
anti-clerical and anti-feudal. It would keep the Church in check, at
least for the time being, and would modernize the country--build roads,
for instance, and promote education and public health; a certain amount
had been done in this direction even during the war. Franco, on the
other hand, in so far as he was not merely the puppet of Italy and
Germany, was tied to the big feudal landlords and stood for a stuffy
clerico-military reaction. The Popular Front might be a swindle, but
Franco was an anachronism. Only millionaires or romantics could want him
to win.

Moreover, there was the question of the international prestige of
Fascism, which for a year or two past had been haunting me like a
nightmare. Since 1930 the Fascists had won all the victories; it was
time they got a beating, it hardly mattered from whom. If we could drive
Franco and his foreign mercenaries into the sea it might make an immense
improvement in the world situation, even if Spain itself emerged with a
stifling dictatorship and all its best men in jail. For that alone the
war would have been worth winning.

This was how I saw things at the time. I may say that I now think much
more highly of the Negrin Government than I did when it came into
office. It has kept up the difficult fight with splendid courage, and it
has shown more political tolerance than anyone expected. But I still
believe that--unless Spain splits up, with unpredictable
consequences--the tendency of the post-war Government is bound to be
Fascistic. Once again I let this opinion stand, and take the chance that
time will do to me what it does to most prophets.

We had just reached the front when we heard that Bob Smillie, on his way
back to England, had been arrested at the frontier, taken down to
Valencia, and thrown into jail. Smillie had been in Spain since the
previous October. He had worked for several months at the P.O.U.M.
office and had then joined the militia when the other I.L.P. members
arrived, on the understanding that he was to do three months at the
front before going back to England to take part in a propaganda tour. It
was some time before we could discover what he had been arrested for. He
was being kept _incommunicado_, so that not even a lawyer could see him.
In Spain there is--at any rate in practice--no _habeas corpus_, and you
can be kept in jail for months at a stretch without even being charged,
let alone tried. Finally we learned from a released prisoner that
Smillie had been arrested for 'carrying arms'. The 'arms', as I happened
to know, were two hand-grenades of the primitive type used at the
beginning of the war, which he had been taking home to show off at his
lectures, along with shell splinters and other souvenirs. The charges
and fuses had been removed from them--they were mere cylinders of steel
and completely harmless. It was obvious that this was only a pretext and
that he had been arrested because of his known connexion with the
P.O.U.M. The Barcelona fighting had only just ended and the authorities
were, at that moment, extremely anxious not to let anyone out of Spain
who was in a position to contradict the official version. As a result
people were liable to be arrested at the frontier on more or less
frivolous pretexts. Very possibly the intention, at the beginning, was
only to detain Smillie for a few days. But the trouble is that, in
Spain, once you are in jail you generally stay there, with or without
trial.

We were still at Huesca, but they had placed us further to the right,
opposite the Fascist redoubt which we had temporarily captured a few
weeks earlier. I was now acting as _teniente_--corresponding to
second-lieutenant in the British Army, I suppose--in command of about
thirty men, English and Spanish. They had sent my name in for a regular
commission; whether I should get it was uncertain. Previously the
militia officers had refused to accept regular commissions, which meant
extra pay and conflicted with the equalitarian ideas of the militia, but
they were now obliged to do so. Benjamin had already been gazetted
captain and Kopp was in process of being gazetted major. The Government
could not, of course, dispense with the militia officers, but it was not
confirming any of them in a higher rank than major, presumably in order
to keep the higher commands for Regular Army officers and the new
officers from the School of War. As a result, in our division, the 29th,
and no doubt in many others, you had the queer temporary situation of
the divisional commander, the brigade commanders, and the battalion
commanders all being majors.

There was not much happening at the front. The battle round the Jaca
road had died away and did not begin again till mid June. In our
position the chief trouble was the snipers. The Fascist trenches were
more than a hundred and fifty yards away, but they were on higher ground
and were on two sides of us, our line forming a right-angle salient. The
corner of the salient was a dangerous spot; there had always been a toll
of sniper casualties there. From time to time the Fascists let fly at us
with a rifle-grenade or some similar weapon. It made a ghastly
crash--unnerving, because you could not hear it coming in time to
dodge--but was not really dangerous; the hole it blew in the ground was
no bigger than a wash-tub. The nights were pleasantly warm, the days
blazing hot, the mosquitoes were becoming a nuisance, and in spite of
the clean clothes we had brought from Barcelona we were almost
immediately lousy. Out in the deserted orchards in no man's land the
cherries were whitening on the trees. For two days there were torrential
rains, the dug-outs flooded, and the parapet sank a foot; after that
there were more days of digging out the sticky clay with the wretched
Spanish spades which have no handles and bend like tin spoons.

They had promised us a trench-mortar for the company; I was looking
forward to it greatly. At nights we patrolled as usual--more dangerous
than it used to be, because the Fascist trenches were better manned and
they had grown more alert; they had scattered tin cans just outside
their wire and used to open up with the machine-guns when they heard a
clank. In the daytime we sniped from no man's land. By crawling a
hundred yards you could get to a ditch, hidden by tall grasses, which
commanded a gap in the Fascist parapet. We had set up a rifle-rest in
the ditch. If you waited long enough you generally saw a khaki-clad
figure slip hurriedly across the gap. I had several shots. I don't know
whether I hit anyone--it is most unlikely; I am a very poor shot with a
rifle. But it was rather fun, the Fascists did not know where the shots
were coming from, and I made sure I would get one of them sooner or
later. However, the dog it was that died--a Fascist sniper got me
instead. I had been about ten days at the front when it happened. The
whole experience of being hit by a bullet is very interesting and I
think it is worth describing in detail.

It was at the corner of the parapet, at five o'clock in the morning.
This was always a dangerous time, because we had the dawn at our backs,
and if you stuck your head above the parapet it was clearly outlined
against the sky. I was talking to the sentries preparatory to changing
the guard. Suddenly, in the very middle of saying something, I felt--it
is very hard to describe what I felt, though I remember it with the
utmost vividness.

Roughly speaking it was the sensation of being _at the centre_ of an
explosion. There seemed to be a loud bang and a blinding flash of light
all round me, and I felt a tremendous shock--no pain, only a violent
shock, such as you get from an electric terminal; with it a sense of
utter weakness, a feeling of being stricken and shrivelled up to
nothing. The sand-bags in front of me receded into immense distance. I
fancy you would feel much the same if you were struck by lightning. I
knew immediately that I was hit, but because of the seeming bang and
flash I thought it was a rifle nearby that had gone off accidentally and
shot me. All this happened in a space of time much less than a second.
The next moment my knees crumpled up and I was falling, my head hitting
the ground with a violent bang which, to my relief, did not hurt. I had
a numb, dazed feeling, a consciousness of being very badly hurt, but no
pain in the ordinary sense.

The American sentry I had been talking to had started forward. 'Gosh!
Are you hit?' People gathered round. There was the usual fuss--'Lift him
up! Where's he hit? Get his shirt open!'etc., etc. The American called for
a knife to cut my shirt open. I knew that there was one in my pocket and
tried to get it out, but discovered that my right arm was paralysed. Not
being in pain, I felt a vague satisfaction. This ought to please my
wife, I thought; she had always wanted me to be wounded, which would
save me from being killed when the great battle came. It was only now
that it occurred to me to wonder where I was hit, and how badly; I could
feel nothing, but I was conscious that the bullet had struck me
somewhere in the front of the body. When I tried to speak I found that I
had no voice, only a faint squeak, but at the second attempt I managed
to ask where I was hit. In the throat, they said. Harry Webb, our
stretcher-bearer, had brought a bandage and one of the little bottles of
alcohol they gave us for field-dressings. As they lifted me up a lot of
blood poured out of my mouth, and I heard a Spaniard behind me say that
the bullet had gone clean through my neck. I felt the alcohol, which at
ordinary times would sting like the devil, splash on to the wound as a
pleasant coolness.

They laid me down again while somebody fetched a stretcher. As soon as I
knew that the bullet had gone clean through my neck I took it for
granted that I was done for. I had never heard of a man or an animal
getting a bullet through the middle of the neck and surviving it. The
blood was dribbling out of the corner of my mouth. 'The artery's gone,'
I thought. I wondered how long you last when your carotid artery is cut;
not many minutes, presumably. Everything was very blurry. There must
have been about two minutes during which I assumed that I was killed.
And that too was interesting--I mean it is interesting to know what your
thoughts would be at such a time. My first thought, conventionally
enough, was for my wife. My second was a violent resentment at having to
leave this world which, when all is said and done, suits me so well. I
had time to feel this very vividly. The stupid mischance infuriated me.
The meaninglessness of it! To be bumped off, not even in battle, but in
this stale corner of the trenches, thanks to a moment's carelessness! I
thought, too, of the man who had shot me--wondered what he was like,
whether he was a Spaniard or a foreigner, whether he knew he had got me,
and so forth. I could not feel any resentment against him. I reflected
that as he was a Fascist I would have killed him if I could, but that if
he had been taken prisoner and brought before me at this moment I would
merely have congratulated him on his good shooting. It may be, though,
that if you were really dying your thoughts would be quite different.

They had just got me on to the stretcher when my paralysed right arm
came to life and began hurting damnably. At the time I imagined that I
must have broken it in falling; but the pain reassured me, for I knew
that your sensations do not become more acute when you are dying. I
began to feel more normal and to be sorry for the four poor devils who
were sweating and slithering with the stretcher on their shoulders. It
was a mile and a half to the ambulance, and vile going, over lumpy,
slippery tracks. I knew what a sweat it was, having helped to carry a
wounded man down a day or two earlier. The leaves of the silver poplars
which, in places, fringed our trenches brushed against my face; I
thought what a good thing it was to be alive in a world where silver
poplars grow. But all the while the pain in my arm was diabolical,
making me swear and then try not to swear, because every time I breathed
too hard the blood bubbled out of my mouth.

The doctor re-bandaged the wound, gave me a shot of morphia, and sent me
off to Sietamo. The hospitals at Sietamo were hurriedly constructed
wooden huts where the wounded were, as a rule, only kept for a few hours
before being sent on to Barbastro or Lérida. I was dopey from morphia
but still in great pain, practically unable to move and swallowing blood
constantly. It was typical of Spanish hospital methods that while I was
in this state the untrained nurse tried to force the regulation hospital
meal--a huge meal of soup, eggs, greasy stew, and so forth--down my
throat and seemed surprised when I would not take it. I asked for a
cigarette, but this was one of the periods of tobacco famine and there
was not a cigarette in the place. Presently two comrades who had got
permission to leave the line for a few hours appeared at my bedside.

'Hullo! You're alive, are you? Good. We want your watch and your
revolver and your electric torch. And your knife, if you've got one.'

They made off with all my portable possessions. This always happened
when a man was wounded--everything he possessed was promptly divided up;
quite rightly, for watches, revolvers, and so forth were precious at the
front and if they went down the line in a wounded man's kit they were
certain to be stolen somewhere on the way.

By the evening enough sick and wounded had trickled in to make up a few
ambulance-loads, and they sent us on to Barbastro. What a journey! It
used to be said that in this war you got well if you were wounded in the
extremities, but always died of a wound in the abdomen. I now realized
why. No one who was liable to bleed internally could have survived those
miles of jolting over metal roads that had been smashed to pieces by
heavy lorries and never repaired since the war began. Bang, bump,
wallop! It took me back to my early childhood and a dreadful thing
called the Wiggle-Woggle at the White City Exhibition. They had
forgotten to tie us into the stretchers. I had enough strength in my
left arm to hang on, but one poor wretch was spilt on to the floor and
suffered God knows what agonies. Another, a walking case who was sitting
in the corner of the ambulance, vomited all over the place. The hospital
in Barbastro was very crowded, the beds so close together that they were
almost touching. Next morning they loaded a number of us on to the
hospital train and sent us down to Lérida.

I was five or six days in Lérida. It was a big hospital, with sick,
wounded, and ordinary civilian patients more or less jumbled up
together. Some of the men in my ward had frightful wounds. In the next
bed to me there was a youth with black hair who was suffering from some
disease or other and was being given medicine that made his urine as
green as emerald. His bed-bottle was one of the sights of the ward. An
English-speaking Dutch Communist, having heard that there was an
Englishman in the hospital, befriended me and brought me English
newspapers. He had been terribly wounded in the October fighting, and
had somehow managed to settle down at Lérida hospital and had married
one of the nurses. Thanks to his wound, one of his legs had shrivelled
till it was no thicker than my arm. Two militiamen on leave, whom I had
met my first week at the front, came in to see a wounded friend and
recognized me. They were kids of about eighteen. They stood awkwardly
beside my bed, trying to think of something to say, and then, as a way
of demonstrating that they were sorry I was wounded, suddenly took all
the tobacco out of their pockets, gave it to me, and fled before I could
give it back. How typically Spanish! I discovered afterwards that you
could not buy tobacco anywhere in the town and what they had given me
was a week's ration.

After a few days I was able to get up and walk about with my arm in a
sling. For some reason it hurt much more when it hung down. I also had,
for the time being, a good deal of internal pain from the damage I had
done myself in falling, and my voice had disappeared almost completely,
but I never had a moment's pain from the bullet wound itself. It seems
this is usually the case. The tremendous shock of a bullet prevents
sensation locally; a splinter of shell or bomb, which is jagged and
usually hits you less hard, would probably hurt like the devil. There
was a pleasant garden in the hospital grounds, and in it was a pool with
gold-fishes and some small dark grey fish--bleak, I think. I used to sit
watching them for hours. The way things were done at Lérida gave me an
insight into the hospital system on the Aragón front--whether it was the
same on other fronts I do not know. In some ways the hospitals were very
good. The doctors were able men and there seemed to be no shortage of
drugs and equipment. But there were two bad faults on account of which,
I have no doubt, hundreds or thousands of men have died who might have
been saved.

One was the fact that all the hospitals anywhere near the front line
were used more or less as casualty clearing-stations. The result was
that you got no treatment there unless you were too badly wounded to be
moved. In theory most of the wounded were sent straight to Barcelona or
Tarragona, but owing to the lack of transport they were often a week or
ten days in getting there. They were kept hanging about at Sietamo,
Barbastro, Monzon, Lérida, and other places, and meanwhile they were
getting no treatment except an occasional clean bandage, sometimes not
even that. Men with dreadful shell wounds, smashed bones, and so forth,
were swathed in a sort of casing made of bandages and plaster of Paris;
a description of the wound was written in pencil on the outside, and as
a rule the casing was not removed till the man reached Barcelona or
Tarragona ten days later. It was almost impossible to get one's wound
examined on the way; the few doctors could not cope with the work, and
they simply walked hurriedly past your bed, saying: 'Yes, yes, they'll
attend to you at Barcelona.' There were always rumours that the hospital
train was leaving for Barcelona _mañana_. The other fault was the lack
of competent nurses. Apparently there was no supply of trained nurses in
Spain, perhaps because before the war this work was done chiefly by
nuns. I have no complaint against the Spanish nurses, they always
treated me with the greatest kindness, but there is no doubt that they
were terribly ignorant. All of them knew how to take a temperature, and
some of them knew how to tie a bandage, but that was about all. The
result was that men who were too ill to fend for themselves were often
shamefully neglected. The nurses would let a man remain constipated for
a week on end, and they seldom washed those who were too weak to wash
themselves. I remember one poor devil with a smashed arm telling me that
he had been three weeks without having his face washed. Even beds were
left unmade for days together. The food in all the hospitals was very
good--too good, indeed. Even more in Spain than elsewhere it seemed to
be the tradition to stuff sick people with heavy food. At Lérida the
meals were terrific. Breakfast, at about six in the morning, consisted
of soup, an omelette, stew, bread, white wine, and coffee, and lunch was
even larger--this at a time when most of the civil population was
seriously underfed. Spaniards seem not to recognize such a thing as a
light diet. They give the same food to sick people as to well
ones--always the same rich, greasy cookery, with everything sodden in
olive oil.

One morning it was announced that the men in my ward were to be sent
down to Barcelona today. I managed to send a wire to my wife, telling
her that I was coming, and presently they packed us into buses and took
us down to the station. It was only when the train was actually starting
that the hospital orderly who travelled with us casually let fall that
we were not going to Barcelona after all, but to Tarragona. I suppose
the engine-driver had changed his mind. 'Just like Spain!' I thought.
But it was very Spanish, too, that they agreed to hold up the train
while I sent another wire, and more Spanish still that the wire never
got there.

They had put us into ordinary third-class carriages with wooden seats,
and many of the men were badly wounded and had only got out of bed for
the first time that morning. Before long, what with the heat and the
jolting, half of them were in a state of collapse and several vomited on
the floor. The hospital orderly threaded his way among the corpse-like
forms that sprawled everywhere, carrying a large goatskin bottle full of
water which he squirted into this mouth or that. It was beastly water; I
remember the taste of it still. We got into Tarragona as the sun was
getting low. The line runs along the shore a stone's throw from the sea.
As our train drew into the station a troop-train full of men from the
International Column was drawing out, and a knot of people on the bridge
were waving to them. It was a very long train, packed to bursting-point
with men, with field-guns lashed on the open trucks and more men
clustering round the guns. I remember with peculiar vividness the
spectacle of that train passing in the yellow evening light; window
after window full of dark, smiling faces, the long tilted barrels of the
guns, the scarlet scarves fluttering--all this gliding slowly past us
against a turquoise-coloured sea.

'_Extranjeros_--foreigners,' said someone. 'They're Italians.'

Obviously they were Italians. No other people could have grouped
themselves so picturesquely or returned the salutes of the crowd with so
much grace--a grace that was none the less because about half the men on
the train were drinking out of up-ended wine bottles. We heard
afterwards that these were some of the troops who won the great victory
at Guadalajara in March; they had been on leave and were being
transferred to the Aragón front. Most of them, I am afraid, were killed
at Huesca only a few weeks later. The men who were well enough to stand
had moved across the carriage to cheer the Italians as they went past. A
crutch waved out of the window; bandaged forearms made the Red Salute.
It was like an allegorical picture of war; the trainload of fresh men
gliding proudly up the line, the maimed men sliding slowly down, and all
the while the guns on the open trucks making one's heart leap as guns
always do, and reviving that pernicious feeling, so difficult to get rid
of, that war is glorious after all.

The hospital at Tarragona was a very big one and full of wounded from
all fronts. What wounds one saw there! They had a way of treating
certain wounds which I suppose was in accordance with the latest medical
practice, but which was peculiarly horrible to look at. This was to
leave the wound completely open and unbandaged, but protected from flies
by a net of butter-muslin, stretched over wires. Under the muslin you
would see the red jelly of a half-healed wound. There was one man
wounded in the face and throat who had his head inside a sort of
spherical helmet of butter-muslin; his mouth was closed up and he
breathed through a little tube that was fixed between his lips. Poor
devil, he looked so lonely, wandering to and fro, looking at you through
his muslin cage and unable to speak. I was three or four days at
Tarragona. My strength was coming back, and one day, by going slowly, I
managed to walk down as far as the beach. It was queer to see the
seaside life going on almost as usual; the smart cafés along the
promenade and the plump local bourgeoisie bathing and sunning themselves
in deck-chairs as though there had not been a war within a thousand
miles. Nevertheless, as it happened, I saw a bather drowned, which one
would have thought impossible in that shallow and tepid sea.

Finally, eight or nine days after leaving the front, I had my wound
examined. In the surgery where newly-arrived cases were examined,
doctors with huge pairs of shears were hacking away the breast-plates of
plaster in which men with smashed ribs, collar-bones, and so forth had
been cased at the dressing-stations behind the line; out of the
neck-hole of the huge clumsy breast-plate you would see protruding an
anxious, dirty face, scrubby with a week's beard. The doctor, a brisk,
handsome man of about thirty, sat me down in a chair, grasped my tongue
with a piece of rough gauze, pulled it out as far as it would go, thrust
a dentist's mirror down my throat, and told me to say 'Eh!' After doing
this till my tongue was bleeding and my eyes running with water, he told
me that one vocal cord was paralysed.

'When shall I get my voice back?' I said.

'Your voice? Oh, you'll never get your voice back,' he said cheerfully.

However, he was wrong, as it turned out. For about two months I could
not speak much above a whisper, but after that my voice became normal
rather suddenly, the other vocal cord having 'compensated'. The pain in
my arm was due to the bullet having pierced a bunch of nerves at the
back of the neck. It was a shooting pain like neuralgia, and it went on
hurting continuously for about a month, especially at night, so that I
did not get much sleep. The fingers of my right hand were also
semi-paralysed. Even now, five months afterwards, my forefinger is still
numb--a queer effect for a neck wound to have.

The wound was a curiosity in a small way and various doctors examined it
with much clicking of tongues and '_Qué suerte! Qué suerte!_' One of them
told me with an air of authority that the bullet had missed the artery
by 'about a millimetre'. I don't know how he knew. No one I met at this
time--doctors, nurses, _practicantes_, or fellow-patients--failed to
assure me that a man who is hit through the neck and survives it is the
luckiest creature alive. I could not help thinking that it would be even
luckier not to be hit at all.



Chapter 13


In Barcelona, during all those last weeks I spent there, there was a
peculiar evil feeling in the air--an atmosphere of suspicion, fear,
uncertainty, and veiled hatred. The May fighting had left ineradicable
after-effects behind it. With the fall of the Caballero Government the
Communists had come definitely into power, the charge of internal order
had been handed over to Communist ministers, and no one doubted that
they would smash their political rivals as soon as they got a quarter of
a chance. Nothing was happening as yet, I myself had not even any mental
picture of what was going to happen; and yet there was a perpetual vague
sense of danger, a consciousness of some evil thing that was impending.
However little you were actually conspiring, the atmosphere forced you
to feel like a conspirator. You seemed to spend all your time holding
whispered conversations in corners of cafés and wondering whether that
person at the next table was a police spy.

Sinister rumours of all kinds were flying round, thanks to the Press
censorship. One was that the Negrin-Prieto Government was planning to
compromise the war. At the time I was inclined to believe this, for the
Fascists were closing in on Bilbao and the Government was visibly doing
nothing to save it. Basque flags were displayed all over the town, girls
rattled collecting-boxes in the cafés, and there were the usual
broadcasts about 'heroic defenders', but the Basques were getting no
real assistance. It was tempting to believe that the Government was
playing a double game. Later events have proved that I was quite wrong
here, but it seems probable that Bilbao could have been saved if a
little more energy had been shown. An offensive on the Aragón front,
even an unsuccessful one, would have forced Franco to divert part of his
army; as it was the Government did not begin any offensive action till
it was far too late--indeed, till about the time when Bilbao fell. The
C.N.T. was distributing in huge numbers a leaflet saying: 'Be on your
guard!' and hinting that 'a certain Party' (meaning the Communists) was
plotting a _coup d'état_. There was also a widespread fear that
Catalonia was going to be invaded. Earlier, when we went back to the
front, I had seen the powerful defences that were being constructed
scores of miles behind the front line, and fresh bomb-proof shelters
were being dug all over Barcelona. There were frequent scares of
air-raids and sea-raids; more often than not these were false alarms,
but every time the sirens blew the lights all over the town blacked out
for hours on end and timid people dived for the cellars. Police spies
were everywhere. The jails were still crammed with prisoners left over
from the May fighting, and others--always, of course, Anarchist and
P.O.U.M. adherents--were disappearing into jail by ones and twos. So far
as one could discover, no one was ever tried or even charged--not even
charged with anything so definite as 'Trotskyism'; you were simply flung
into jail and kept there, usually _incommunicado_. Bob Smillie was still
in jail in Valencia. We could discover nothing except that neither the
I.L.P. representative on the spot nor the lawyer who had been engaged,
was permitted to see him. Foreigners from the International Column and
other militias were getting into jail in larger and larger numbers.
Usually they were arrested as deserters. It was typical of the general
situation that nobody now knew for certain whether a militiaman was a
volunteer or a regular soldier. A few months earlier anyone enlisting in
the militia had been told that he was a volunteer and could, if he
wished, get his discharge papers at any time when he was due for leave.
Now it appeared that the Government had changed its mind, a militiaman
was a regular soldier and counted as a deserter if he tried to go home.
But even about this no one seemed certain. At some parts of the front
the authorities were still issuing discharges. At the frontier these
were sometimes recognized, sometimes not; if not, you were promptly
thrown into jail. Later the number of foreign 'deserters' in jail
swelled into hundreds, but most of them were repatriated when a fuss was
made in their own countries.

Bands of armed Assault Guards roamed everywhere in the streets, the
Civil Guards were still holding cafés and other buildings in strategic
spots, and many of the P.S.U.C. buildings were still sandbagged and
barricaded. At various points in the town there were posts manned by
Civil Guards of Carabineros who stopped passers-by and demanded their
papers. Everyone warned me not to show my P.O.U.M. militiaman's card but
merely to show my passport and my hospital ticket. Even to be known to
have served in the P.O.U.M. militia was vaguely dangerous. P.O.U.M.
militiamen who were wounded or on leave were penalized in petty ways--it
was made difficult for them to draw their pay, for instance. _La
Batalla_ was still appearing, but it was censored almost out of
existence, and _Solidaridad_ and the other Anarchist papers were also
heavily censored. There was a new rule that censored portions of a
newspaper must not be left blank but filled up with other matter; as a
result it was often impossible to tell when something had been cut out.

The food shortage, which had fluctuated throughout the War, was in one
of its bad stages. Bread was scarce and the cheaper sorts were being
adulterated with rice; the bread the soldiers were getting in the
barracks was dreadful stuff like putty. Milk and sugar were very scarce
and tobacco almost non-existent, except for the expensive smuggled
cigarettes. There was an acute shortage of olive oil, which Spaniards
use for half a dozen different purposes. The queues of women waiting to
buy olive oil were controlled by mounted Civil Guards who sometimes
amused themselves by backing their horses into the queue and trying to
make them tread on the women's toes. A minor annoyance of the time was
the lack of small change. The silver had been withdrawn and as yet no
new coinage had been issued, so that there was nothing between the
ten-centime piece and the note for two and a half pesetas, and all notes
below ten pesetas were very scarce.* For the poorest people this meant
an aggravation of the food shortage. A woman with only a ten-peseta note
in her possession might wait for hours in a queue outside the grocery
and then be unable to buy anything after all because the grocer had no
change and she could not afford to spend the whole note.

[* Footnote: The purchasing value of the peseta was about fourpence.]

It is not easy to convey the nightmare atmosphere of that time--the
peculiar uneasiness produced by rumours that were always changing, by
censored newspapers, and the constant presence of armed men. It is not
easy to convey it because, at the moment, the thing essential to such an
atmosphere does not exist in England. In England political intolerance
is not yet taken for granted. There is political persecution in a petty
way; if I were a coal-miner I would not care to be known to the boss as
a Communist; but the 'good party man', the gangster-gramophone of
continental politics, is still a rarity, and the notion of 'liquidating'
or 'eliminating' everyone who happens to disagree with you does not yet
seem natural. It seemed only too natural in Barcelona. The 'Stalinists'
were in the saddle, and therefore it was a matter of course that every
'Trotskyist' was in danger. The thing everyone feared was a thing which,
after all, did not happen--a fresh outbreak of street-fighting, which,
as before, would be blamed on the P.O.U.M. and the Anarchists. There
were times when I caught my ears listening for the first shots. It was
as though some huge evil intelligence were brooding over the town.
Everyone noticed it and remarked upon it. And it was queer how everyone
expressed it in almost the same words: 'The atmosphere of this
place--it's horrible. Like being in a lunatic asylum.' But perhaps I
ought not to say _everyone_. Some of the English visitors who flitted
briefly through Spain, from hotel to hotel, seem not to have noticed
that there was anything wrong with the general atmosphere. The Duchess
of Atholl writes, I notice (_Sunday Express_, 17 October 1937):


I was in Valencia, Madrid, and Barcelona...perfect order prevailed in
all three towns without any display of force. All the hotels in which I
stayed were not only 'normal' and 'decent', but extremely comfortable,
in spite of the shortage of butter and coffee.


It is a peculiarity of English travellers that they do not really
believe in the existence of anything outside the smart hotels. I hope
they found some butter for the Duchess of Atholl.

I was at the Sanatorium Maurin, one of the sanatoria run by the P.O.U.M.
It was in the suburbs near Tibidabo, the queer-shaped mountain that
rises abruptly behind Barcelona and is traditionally supposed to have
been the hill from which Satan showed Jesus the countries of the earth
(hence its name). The house had previously belonged to some wealthy
bourgeois and had been seized at the time of the revolution. Most of the
men there had either been invalided out of the line or had some wound
that had permanently disabled them--amputated limbs, and so forth. There
were several other Englishmen there: Williams, with a damaged leg, and
Stafford Cottman, a boy of eighteen, who had been sent back from the
trenches with suspected tuberculosis, and Arthur Clinton, whose smashed
left arm was still strapped on to one of those huge wire contraptions,
nicknamed aeroplanes, which the Spanish hospitals were using. My wife
was still staying at the Hotel Continental, and I generally came into
Barcelona in the daytime. In the morning I used to attend the General
Hospital for electrical treatment of my arm. It was a queer business--a
series of prickly electric shocks that made the various sets of muscles
jerk up and down--but it seemed to do some good; the use of my fingers
came back and the pain grew somewhat less. Both of us had decided that
the best thing we could do was to go back to England as soon as
possible. I was extremely weak, my voice was gone, seemingly for good,
and the doctors told me that at best it would be several months before I
was fit to fight. I had got to start earning some money sooner or later,
and there did not seem much sense in staying in Spain and eating food
that was needed for other people. But my motives were mainly selfish. I
had an overwhelming desire to get away from it all; away from the
horrible atmosphere of political suspicion and hatred, from streets
thronged by armed men, from air-raids, trenches, machine-guns, screaming
trams, milkless tea, oil cookery, and shortage of cigarettes--from
almost everything that I had learnt to associate with Spain.

The doctors at the General Hospital had certified me medically unfit,
but to get my discharge I had to see a medical board at one of the
hospitals near the front and then go to Sietamo to get my papers stamped
at the P.O.U.M. militia headquarters. Kopp had just come back from the
front, full of jubilation. He had just been in action and said that
Huesca was going to be taken at last. The Government had brought troops
from the Madrid front and were concentrating thirty thousand men, with
aeroplanes in huge numbers. The Italians I had seen going up the line
from Tarragona had attacked on the Jaca road but had had heavy
casualties and lost two tanks. However, the town was bound to fall, Kopp
said. (Alas! It didn't. The attack was a frightful mess-up and led to
nothing except an orgy of lying in the newspapers.) Meanwhile Kopp had
to go down to Valencia for an interview at the Ministry of War. He had a
letter from General Pozas, now commanding the Army of the East--the
usual letter, describing Kopp as a 'person of all confidence' and
recommending him for a special appointment in the engineering section
(Kopp had been an engineer in civil life). He left for Valencia the same
day as I left for Sietamo--15 June.

It was five days before I got back to Barcelona. A lorry-load of us
reached Sietamo about midnight, and as soon as we got to the P.O.U.M.
headquarters they lined us up and began handling out rifles and
cartridges, before even taking our names. It seemed that the attack was
beginning and they were likely to call for reserves at any moment. I had
my hospital ticket in my pocket, but I could not very well refuse to go
with the others. I kipped down on the ground, with a cartridge-box for a
pillow, in a mood of deep dismay. Being wounded had spoiled my nerve for
the time being--I believe this usually happens--and the prospect of
being under fire frightened me horribly. However, there was a bit of
_mañana_, as usual, we were not called out after all, and next morning I
produced my hospital ticket and went in search of my discharge. It meant
a series of confused, tiresome journeys. As usual they bandied one to
and fro from hospital to hospital--Sietamo, Barbastro, Monzon, then back
to Sietamo to get my discharge stamped, then down the line again via
Barbastro and Lérida--and the convergence of troops on Huesca had
monopolized all the transport and disorganized everything. I remember
sleeping in queer places--once in a hospital bed, but once in a ditch,
once on a very narrow bench which I fell off in the middle of the night,
and once in a sort of municipal lodging-house in Barbastro. As soon as
you got away from the railroad there was no way of travelling except by
jumping chance lorries. You had to wait by the roadside for hours,
sometimes three or four hours at a stretch, with knots of disconsolate
peasants who carried bundles full of ducks and rabbits, waving to lorry
after lorry. When finally you struck a lorry that was not chock full of
men, loaves of bread, or ammunition-boxes the bumping over the vile
roads wallowed you to pulp. No horse has ever thrown me so high as those
lorries used to throw me. The only way of travelling was to crowd all
together and cling to one another. To my humiliation I found that I was
still too weak to climb on to a lorry without being helped.

I slept a night at Monzón Hospital, where I went to see my medical
board. In the next bed to me there was an Assault Guard, wounded over
the left eye. He was friendly and gave me cigarettes. I said: 'In
Barcelona we should have been shooting one another,' and we laughed over
this. It was queer how the general spirit seemed to change when you got
anywhere near the front line. All or nearly all of the vicious hatred of
the political parties evaporated. During all the time I was at the front
I never once remember any P.S.U.C. adherent showing me hostility because
I was P.O.U.M. That kind of thing belonged in Barcelona or in places
even remoter from the war. There were a lot of Assault Guards in
Sietamo. They had been sent on from Barcelona to take part in the attack
on Huesca. The Assault Guards were a corps not intended primarily for
the front, and many of them had not been under fire before. Down in
Barcelona they were lords of the street, but up here they were _quintos_
(rookies) and palled up with militia children of fifteen who had been in
the line for months.

At Monzón Hospital the doctor did the usual tongue-pulling and
mirror-thrusting business, assured me in the same cheerful manner as the
others that I should never have a voice again, and signed my
certificate. While I waited to be examined there was going on inside the
surgery some dreadful operation without anaesthetics--why without
anaesthetics I do not know. It went on and on, scream after scream, and
when I went in there were chairs flung about and on the floor were pools
of blood and urine.

The details of that final journey stand out in my mind with strange
clarity. I was in a different mood, a more observing mood, than I had
been in for months past. I had got my discharge, stamped with the seal
of the 29th Division, and the doctor's certificate in which I was
'declared useless'. I was free to go back to England; consequently I
felt able, almost for the first time, to look at Spain. I had a day to
put in to Barbastro, for there was only one train a day. Previously I
had seen Barbastro in brief glimpses, and it had seemed to me simply a
part of the war--a grey, muddy, cold place, full of roaring lorries and
shabby troops. It seemed queerly different now. Wandering through it I
became aware of pleasant tortuous streets, old stone bridges, wine shops
with great oozy barrels as tall as a man, and intriguing
semi-subterranean shops where men were making cartwheels, daggers,
wooden spoons, and goatskin water-bottles. I watched a man making a skin
bottle and discovered with great interest, what I had never known
before, that they are made with the fur inside and the fur is not
removed, so that you are really drinking distilled goat's hair. I had
drunk out of them for months without knowing this. And at the back of
the town there was a shallow jade-green river, and rising out of it a
perpendicular cliff of rock, with houses built into the rock, so that
from your bedroom window you could spit straight into the water a
hundred feet below. Innumerable doves lived in the holes in the cliff.
And in Lérida there were old crumbling buildings upon whose cornices
thousands upon thousands of swallows had built their nests, so that at a
little distance the crusted pattern of nests was like some florid
moulding of the rococo period. It was queer how for nearly six months
past I had had no eyes for such things. With my discharge papers in my
pocket I felt like a human being again, and also a little like a
tourist. For almost the first time I felt that I was really in Spain, in
a country that I had longed all my life to visit. In the quiet back
streets of Lérida and Barbastro I seemed to catch a momentary glimpse, a
sort of far-off rumour of the Spain that dwells in everyone's
imagination. White sierras, goatherds, dungeons of the Inquisition,
Moorish palaces, black winding trains of mules, grey olive trees and
groves of lemons, girls in black mantillas, the wines of Málaga and
Alicante, cathedrals, cardinals, bull-fights, gypsies, serenades--in
short, Spain. Of all Europe it was the country that had had most hold
upon my imagination. It seemed a pity that when at last I had managed to
come here I had seen only this north-eastern corner, in the middle of a
confused war and for the most part in winter.

It was late when I got back to Barcelona, and there were no taxis. It
was no use trying to get to the Sanatorium Maurin, which was right
outside the town, so I made for the Hotel Continental, stopping for
dinner on the way. I remember the conversation I had with a very
fatherly waiter about the oak jugs, bound with copper, in which they
served the wine. I said I would like to buy a set of them to take back
to England. The waiter was sympathetic. 'Yes, beautiful, were they not?
But impossible to buy nowadays. Nobody was manufacturing them any
longer--nobody was manufacturing anything. This war--such a pity!' We
agreed that the war was a pity. Once again I felt like a tourist. The
waiter asked me gently, had I liked Spain; would I come back to Spain?
Oh, yes, I should come back to Spain. The peaceful quality of this
conversation sticks in my memory, because of what happened immediately
afterwards.

When I got to the hotel my wife was sitting in the lounge. She got up
and came towards me in what struck me as a very unconcerned manner; then
she put an arm round my neck and, with a sweet smile for the benefit of
the other people in the lounge, hissed in my ear:

'_Get out!_'

'What?'

'Get out of here _at once!_'

'What?'

'Don't keep standing here! You must get outside quickly!'

'What? Why? What do you mean?'

She had me by the arm and was already leading me towards the stairs.
Half-way down we met a Frenchman--I am not going to give his name, for
though he had no connexion with the P.O.U.M. he was a good friend to us
all during the trouble. He looked at me with a concerned face.

'Listen! You mustn't come in here. Get out quickly and hide yourself
before they ring up the police.'

And behold! at the bottom of the stairs one of the hotel staff, who was
a P.O.U.M. member (unknown to the management, I fancy), slipped
furtively out of the lift and told me in broken English to get out. Even
now I did not grasp what had happened.

'What the devil is all this about?' I said, as soon as we were on the
pavement.

'Haven't you _heard_?'

'No. Heard what? I've heard nothing.'

'The P.O.U.M.'s been suppressed. They've seized all the buildings.
Practically everyone's in prison. And they say they're shooting people
already.'

So that was it. We had to have somewhere to talk. All the big cafés on
the Ramblas were thronged with police, but we found a quiet café in a
side street. My wife explained to me what had happened while I was away.

On 15 June the police had suddenly arrested Andres Nin in his office,
and the same evening had raided the Hotel Falcon and arrested all the
people in it, mostly militiamen on leave. The place was converted
immediately into a prison, and in a very little while it was filled to
the brim with prisoners of all kinds. Next day the P.O.U.M. was declared
an illegal organization and all its offices, book-stalls, sanatoria, Red
Aid centres, and so forth were seized. Meanwhile the police were
arresting everyone they could lay hands on who was known to have any
connexion with the P.O.U.M.Within a day or two all or almost all of the
forty members of the Executive Committee were in prison. Possibly one or
two had escaped into hiding, but the police were adopting the trick
(extensively used on both sides in this war) of seizing a man's wife as
a hostage if he disappeared. There was no way of discovering how many
people had been arrested. My wife had heard that it was about four
hundred in Barcelona alone. I have since thought that even at that time
the numbers must have been greater. And the most fantastic people had
been arrested. In some cases the police had even gone to the length of
dragging wounded militiamen out of the hospitals.

It was all profoundly dismaying. What the devil was it all about? I
could understand their suppressing the P.O.U.M., but what were they
arresting people for? For nothing, so far as one could discover.
Apparently the suppression of the P.O.U.M. had a retrospective effect;
the P.O.U.M. was now illegal, and therefore one was breaking the law by
having previously belonged to it. As usual, none of the arrested people
had been charged. Meanwhile, however, the Valencia Communist papers were
flaming with the story of a huge 'Fascist plot', radio communication
with the enemy, documents signed in invisible ink, etc., etc. I have
dealt with this story earlier. The significant thing was that it was
appearing only in the Valencia papers; I think I am right in saying that
there was not a single word about it, or about the suppression of the
P.O.U.M., in any Barcelona papers, Communist, Anarchist, or Republican.
We first learned the precise nature of the charges against the P.O.U.M.
leaders not from any Spanish paper but from the English papers that
reached Barcelona a day or two later. What we could not know at this
time was that the Government was not responsible for the charge of
treachery and espionage, and that members of the Government were later
to repudiate it. We only vaguely knew that the P.O.U.M. leaders, and
presumably all the rest of us, were accused of being in Fascist pay. And
already the rumours were flying round that people were being secretly
shot in jail. There was a lot of exaggeration about this, but it
certainly happened in some cases, and there is not much doubt that it
happened in the case of Nin. After his arrest Nin was transferred to
Valencia and thence to Madrid, and as early as 21 June the rumour
reached Barcelona that he had been shot. Later the rumour took a more
definite shape: Nin had been shot in prison by the secret police and his
body dumped into the street. This story came from several sources,
including Federica Montsenys, an ex-member of the Government. From that
day to this Nin has never been heard of alive again. When, later, the
Government were questioned by delegates from various countries, they
shilly-shallied and would say only that Nin had disappeared and they
knew nothing of his whereabouts. Some of the newspapers produced a tale
that he had escaped to Fascist territory. No evidence was given in
support of it, and Irujo, the Minister of Justice, later declared that
the Espagne news-agency had falsified his official communiqué.*
In any case it is most unlikely that a political prisoner of Nin's
importance would be allowed to escape. Unless at some future time he is
produced alive, I think we must take it that he was murdered in prison.

[* Footnote: See the reports of the Maxton delegation which I referred
to in Chapter 11.]

The tale of arrests went on and on, extending over months, until the
number of political prisoners, not counting Fascists, swelled into
thousands. One noticeable thing was the autonomy of the lower ranks of
the police. Many of the arrests were admittedly illegal, and various
people whose release had been ordered by the Chief of Police were
re-arrested at the jail gate and carried off to 'secret prisons'. A
typical case is that of Kurt Landau and his wife. They were arrested
about 17 June, and Landau immediately 'disappeared'. Five months later
his wife was still in jail, untried and without news of her husband. She
declared a hunger-strike, after which the Minister of Justice, sent word
to assure her that her husband was dead. Shortly afterwards she was
released, to be almost immediately re-arrested and flung into prison
again. And it was noticeable that the police, at any rate at first,
seemed completely indifferent as to any effect their actions might have
upon the war. They were quite ready to arrest military officers in
important posts without getting permission beforehand. About the end of
June Jose Rovira, the general commanding the 29th Division, was arrested
somewhere near the front line by a party of police who had been sent
from Barcelona. His men sent a delegation to protest at the Ministry of
War. It was found that neither the Ministry of War, nor Ortega, the
Chief of Police, had even been informed of Rovira's arrest. In the whole
business the detail that most sticks in my throat, though perhaps it is
not of great importance, is that all news of what was happening was kept
from the troops at the front. As you will have seen, neither I nor
anyone else at the front had heard anything about the suppression of the
P.O.U.M. All the P.O.U.M. militia headquarters, Red Aid centres, and so
forth were functioning as usual, and as late as 20 June and as far down
the line as Lérida, only about 100 miles from Barcelona, no one had
heard what was happening. All word of it was kept out of the Barcelona
papers (the Valencia papers, which were running the spy stories, did not
reach the Aragón front), and no doubt one reason for arresting all the
P.O.U.M. militiamen on leave in Barcelona was to prevent them from
getting back to the front with the news. The draft with which I had gone
up the line on 15 June must have been about the last to go. I am still
puzzled to know how the thing was kept secret, for the supply lorries
and so forth were still passing to and fro; but there is no doubt that
it was kept secret, and, as I have since learned from a number of
others, the men in the front line heard nothing till several days later.
The motive for all this is clear enough. The attack on Huesca was
beginning, the P.O.U.M. militia was still a separate unit, and it was
probably feared that if the men knew what was happening they would
refuse to fight. Actually nothing of the kind happened when the news
arrived. In the intervening days there must have been numbers of men who
were killed without ever learning that the newspapers in the rear were
calling them Fascists. This kind of thing is a little difficult to
forgive. I know it was the usual policy to keep bad news from the
troops, and perhaps as a rule that is justified. But it is a different
matter to send men into battle and not even tell them that behind their
backs their party is being suppressed, their leaders accused of
treachery, and their friends and relatives thrown into prison.

My wife began telling me what had happened to our various friends. Some
of the English and other foreigners had got across the frontier.
Williams and Stafford Cottman had not been arrested when the Sanatorium
Maurin was raided, and were in hiding somewhere. So was John Mc-Nair,
who had been in France and had re-entered Spain after the P.O.U.M. was
declared illegal--a rash thing to do, but he had not cared to stay in
safety while his comrades were in danger. For the rest it was simply a
chronicle of 'They've got so and so' and 'They've got so and so'. They
seemed to have 'got' nearly everyone. It took me aback to hear that they
had also 'got' George Kopp.

'What! Kopp? I thought he was in Valencia.'

It appeared that Kopp had come back to Barcelona; he had a letter from
the Ministry of War to the colonel commanding the engineering operations
on the eastern front. He knew that the P.O.U.M. had been suppressed, of
course, but probably it did not occur to him that the police could be
such fools as to arrest him when he was on his way to the front on an
urgent military mission. He had come round to the Hotel Continental to
fetch his kit-bags; my wife had been out at the time, and the hotel
people had managed to detain him with some lying story while they rang
up the police. I admit I was angry when I heard of Kopp's arrest. He was
my personal friend, I had served under him for months, I had been under
fire with him, and I knew his history. He was a man who had sacrificed
everything--family, nationality, livelihood--simply to come to Spain and
fight against Fascism. By leaving Belgium without permission and joining
a foreign army while he was on the Belgian Army reserve, and, earlier,
by helping to manufacture munitions illegally for the Spanish
Government, he had piled up years of imprisonment for himself if he
should ever return to his own country. He had been in the line since
October 1936, had worked his way up from militiaman to major, had been
in action I do not know how many times, and had been wounded once.
During the May trouble, as I had seen for myself, he had prevented
fighting locally and probably saved ten or twenty lives. And all they
could do in return was to fling him into jail. It is waste of time to be
angry, but the stupid malignity of this kind of thing does try one's
patience.

Meanwhile they had not 'got' my wife. Although she had remained at the
Continental the police had made no move to arrest her. It was fairly
obvious that she was being used as a decoy duck. A couple of nights
earlier, however, in the small hours of the morning, six of the
plain-clothes police had invaded our room at the hotel and searched it.
They had seized every scrap of paper we possessed, except, fortunately,
our passports and cheque-book. They had taken my diaries, all our books,
all the press-cuttings that had been piling up for months past (I have
often wondered what use those press-cuttings were to them), all my war
souvenirs, and all our letters. (Incidentally, they took away a number
of letters I had received from readers. Some of them had not been
answered, and of course I have not the addresses. If anyone who wrote to
me about my last book, and did not get an answer, happens to read these
lines, will he please accept this as an apology?) I learned afterwards
that the police had also seized various belongings that I had left at
the Sanatorium Maurin. They even carried off a bundle of my dirty linen.
Perhaps they thought it had messages written on it in invisible ink.

It was obvious that it would be safer for my wife to stay at the hotel,
at any rate for the time being. If she tried to disappear they would be
after her immediately. As for myself, I should have to go straight into
hiding. The prospect revolted me. In spite of the innumerable arrests it
was almost impossible for me to believe that I was in any danger. The
whole thing seemed too meaningless. It was the same refusal to take this
idiotic onslaught seriously that had led Kopp into jail. I kept saying,
but why should anyone want to arrest me? What had I done? I was not even
a party member of the P.O.U.M. Certainly I had carried arms during the
May fighting, but so had (at a guess) forty or fifty thousand people.
Besides, I was badly in need of a proper night's sleep. I wanted to risk
it and go back to the hotel. My wife would not hear of it. Patiently she
explained the state of affairs. It did not matter what I had done or not
done. This was not a round-up of criminals; it was merely a reign of
terror. I was not guilty of any definite act, but I was guilty of
'Trotskyism'. The fact that I had served in the P.O.U.M. militia was
quite enough to get me into prison. It was no use hanging on to the
English notion that you are safe so long as you keep the law.
Practically the law was what the police chose to make it. The only thing
to do was to lie low and conceal the fact that I had anything to do with
the P.O.U.M. We went through the papers in my pockets. My wife made me
tear up my militiaman's card, which had P.O.U.M. on it in big letters,
also a photo of a group of militiamen with a P.O.U.M. flag in the
background; that was the kind of thing that got you arrested nowadays. I
had to keep my discharge papers, however. Even these were a danger, for
they bore the seal of the 29th Division, and the police would probably
know that the 29th Division was the P.O.U.M.; but without them I could
be arrested as a deserter.

The thing we had got to think of now was getting out of Spain. There was
no sense in staying here with the certainty of imprisonment sooner or
later. As a matter of fact both of us would greatly have liked to stay,
just to see what happened. But I foresaw that Spanish prisons would be
lousy places (actually they were a lot worse than I imagined), once in
prison you never knew when you would get out, and I was in wretched
health, apart from the pain in my arm. We arranged to meet next day at
the British Consulate, where Cottman and McNair were also coming. It
would probably take a couple of days to get our passports in order.
Before leaving Spain you had to have your passport stamped in three
separate places--by the Chief of Police, by the French Consul, and by
the Catalan immigration authorities. The Chief of Police was the danger,
of course. But perhaps the British Consul could fix things up without
letting it be known that we had anything to do with the P.O.U.M.
Obviously there must be a list of foreign 'Trotskyist' suspects, and
very likely our names were on it, but with luck we might get to the
frontier before the list. There was sure to be a lot of muddle and
_mañana_. Fortunately this was Spain and not Germany. The Spanish secret
police had some of the spirit of the Gestapo, but not much of its
competence.

So we parted. My wife went back to the hotel and I wandered off into the
darkness to find somewhere to sleep. I remember feeling sulky and bored.
I had so wanted a night in bed! There was nowhere I could go, no house
where I could take refuge. The P.O.U.M. had practically no underground
organization. No doubt the leaders had always realized that the party
was likely to be suppressed, but they had never expected a wholesale
witch-hunt of this description. They had expected it so little, indeed,
that they were actually continuing the alterations to the P.O.U.M.
buildings (among other things they were constructing a cinema in the
Executive Building, which had previously been a bank) up to the very day
when the P.O.U.M. was suppressed. Consequently the rendezvous and
hiding-places which every revolutionary party ought to possess as a
matter of course did not exist. Goodness knows how many people--people
whose homes had been raided by the police--were sleeping in the streets
that night. I had had five days of tiresome journeys, sleeping in
impossible places, my arm was hurting damnably, and now these fools were
chasing me to and fro and I had got to sleep on the ground again. That
was about as far as my thoughts went. I did not make any of the correct
political reflections. I never do when things are happening. It seems to
be always the case when I get mixed up in war or politics--I am
conscious of nothing save physical discomfort and a deep desire for this
damned nonsense to be over. Afterwards I can see the significance of
events, but while they are happening I merely want to be out of them--an
ignoble trait, perhaps.

I walked a long way and fetched up somewhere near the General Hospital.
I wanted a place where I could lie down without some nosing policeman
finding me and demanding my papers. I tried an air-raid shelter, but it
was newly dug and dripping with damp. Then I came upon the ruins of a
church that had been gutted and burnt in the revolution. It was a mere
shell, four roofless walls surrounding piles of rubble. In the
half-darkness I poked about and found a kind of hollow where I could lie
down. Lumps of broken masonry are not good to lie on, but fortunately it
was a warm night and I managed to get several hours' sleep.



Chapter 14


The worst of being wanted by the police in a town like Barcelona is that
everything opens so late. When you sleep out of doors you always wake
about dawn, and none of the Barcelona cafés opens much before nine. It
was hours before I could get a cup of coffee or a shave. It seemed
queer, in the barber's shop, to see the Anarchist notice still on the
wall, explaining that tips were prohibited. 'The Revolution has struck
off our chains,' the notice said. I felt like telling the barbers that
their chains would soon be back again if they didn't look out.

I wandered back to the centre of the town. Over the P.O.U.M. buildings
the red flags had been torn down, Republican flags were floating in
their place, and knots of armed Civil Guards were lounging in the
doorways. At the Red Aid centre on the corner of the Plaza de Cataluña
the police had amused themselves by smashing most of the windows. The
P.O.U.M. book-stalls had been emptied of books and the notice-board
farther down the Ramblas had been plastered with an anti-P.O.U.M.
cartoon--the one representing the mask and the Fascist face beneath.
Down at the bottom of the Ramblas, near the quay, I came upon a queer
sight; a row of militiamen, still ragged and muddy from the front,
sprawling exhaustedly on the chairs placed there for the bootblacks. I
knew who they were--indeed, I recognized one of them. They were P.O.U.M.
militiamen who had come down the line on the previous day to find that
the P.O.U.M. had been suppressed, and had had to spend the night in the
streets because their homes had been raided. Any P.O.U.M. militiaman who
returned to Barcelona at this time had the choice of going straight into
hiding or into jail--not a pleasant reception after three or four months
in the line.

It was a queer situation that we were in. At night one was a hunted
fugitive, but in the daytime one could live an almost normal life. Every
house known to harbour P.O.U.M. supporters was--or at any rate was
likely to be--under observation, and it was impossible to go to a hotel
or boarding-house, because it had been decreed that on the arrival of a
stranger the hotel-keeper must inform the police immediately.
Practically this meant spending the night out of doors. In the daytime,
on the other hand, in a town the size of Barcelona, you were fairly
safe. The streets were thronged by Civil Guards, Assault Guards,
Carabineros, and ordinary police, besides God knows how many spies in
plain clothes; still, they could not stop everyone who passed, and if
you looked normal you might escape notice. The thing to do was to avoid
hanging round P.O.U.M. buildings and going to cafés and restaurants
where the waiters knew you by sight. I spent a long time that day, and
the next, in having a bath at one of the public baths. This struck me as
a good way of putting in the time and keeping out of sight.
Unfortunately the same idea occurred to a lot of people, and a few days
later--after I left Barcelona--the police raided one of the public baths
and arrested a number of 'Trotskyists' in a state of nature.

Half-way up the Ramblas I ran into one of the wounded men from the
Sanatorium Maurin. We exchanged the sort of invisible wink that people
were exchanging at that time, and managed in an unobtrusive way to meet
in a café farther up the street. He had escaped arrest when the Maurin
was raided, but, like the others, had been driven into the street. He
was in shirt-sleeves--had had to flee without his jacket--and had no
money. He described to me how one of the Civil Guards had torn the large
coloured portrait of Maurin from the wall and kicked it to pieces.
Maurin (one of the founders of the P.O.U.M.) was a prisoner in the hands
of the Fascists and at that time was believed to have been shot by them.

I met my wife at the British Consulate at ten o'clock. McNair and
Cottman turned up shortly afterwards. The first thing they told me was
that Bob Smillie was dead. He had died in prison at Valencia--of what,
nobody knew for certain. He had been buried immediately, and the I.L.P.
representative on the spot, David Murray, had been refused permission to
see his body.

Of course I assumed at once that Smillie had been shot. It was what
everyone believed at the time, but I have since thought that I may have
been wrong. Later the cause of his death was given out as appendicitis,
and we heard afterwards from another prisoner who had been released that
Smillie had certainly been ill in prison. So perhaps the appendicitis
story was true. The refusal to let Murray see his body may have been due
to pure spite. I must say this, however. Bob Smillie was only twenty-two
years old and physically he was one of the toughest people I have met.
He was, I think, the only person I knew, English or Spanish, who went
three months in the trenches without a day's illness. People so tough as
that do not usually die of appendicitis if they are properly looked
after. But when you saw what the Spanish jails were like--the makeshift
jails used for political prisoners--you realized how much chance there
was of a sick man getting proper attention. The jails were places that
could only be described as dungeons. In England you would have to go
back to the eighteenth century to find anything comparable. People were
penned together in small rooms where there was barely space for them to
lie down, and often they were kept in cellars and other dark places.
This was not as a temporary measure--there were cases of people being
kept four and five months almost without sight of daylight. And they
were fed on a filthy and insufficient diet of two plates of soup and two
pieces of bread a day. (Some months later, however, the food seems to
have improved a little.) I am not exaggerating; ask any political
suspect who was imprisoned in Spain. I have had accounts of the Spanish
jails from a number of separate sources, and they agree with one another
too well to be disbelieved; besides, I had a few glimpses into one
Spanish jail myself. Another English friend who was imprisoned later
writes that his experiences in jail 'make Smillie's case easier to
understand'. Smillie's death is not a thing I can easily forgive. Here
was this brave and gifted boy, who had thrown up his career at Glasgow
University in order to come and fight against Fascism, and who, as I saw
for myself, had done his job at the front with faultless courage and
willingness; and all they could find to do with him was to fling him
into jail and let him die like a neglected animal. I know that in the
middle of a huge and bloody war it is no use making too much fuss over
an individual death. One aeroplane bomb in a crowded street causes more
suffering than quite a lot of political persecution. But what angers one
about a death like this is its utter pointlessness. To be killed in
battle--yes, that is what one expects; but to be flung into jail, not
even for any imaginary offence, but simply owing to dull blind spite,
and then left to die in solitude--that is a different matter. I fail to
see how this kind of thing--and it is not as though Smillie's case were
exceptional--brought victory any nearer.

My wife and I visited Kopp that afternoon. You were allowed to visit
prisoners who were not _incommunicado_, though it was not safe to do so
more than once or twice. The police watched the people who came and
went, and if you visited the jails too often you stamped yourself as a
friend of 'Trotskyists' and probably ended in jail yourself. This had
already happened to a number of people.

Kopp was not _incommunicado_ and we got a permit to see him without
difficulty. As they led us through the steel doors into the jail, a
Spanish militiaman whom I had known at the front was being led out
between two Civil Guards. His eye met mine; again the ghostly wink. And
the first person we saw inside was an American militiaman who had left
for home a few days earlier; his papers were in good order, but they had
arrested him at the frontier all the same, probably because he was still
wearing corduroy breeches and was therefore identifiable as a
militiaman. We walked past one another as though we had been total
strangers. That was dreadful. I had known him for months, had shared a
dug-out with him, he had helped to carry me down the line when I was
wounded; but it was the only thing one could do. The blue-clad guards
were snooping everywhere. It would be fatal to recognize too many
people.

The so-called jail was really the ground floor of a shop. Into two rooms
each measuring about twenty feet square, close on a hundred people were
penned. The place had the real eighteenth-century Newgate Calendar
appearance, with its frowsy dirt, its huddle of human bodies, its lack
of furniture--just the bare stone floor, one bench, and a few ragged
blankets--and its murky light, for the corrugated steel shutters had
been drawn over the windows. On the grimy walls revolutionary
slogans--'_Visca P.O.U.M.!_' '_Viva la Revolucion!_' and so forth--had been
scrawled. The place had been used as a dump for political prisoners for
months past. There was a deafening racket of voices. This was the
visiting hour, and the place was so packed with people that it was
difficult to move. Nearly all of them were of the poorest of the
working-class population. You saw women undoing pitiful packets of food
which they had brought for their imprisoned men-folk. There were several
of the wounded men from the Sanatorium Maurin among the prisoners. Two
of them had amputated legs; one of them had been brought to prison
without his crutch and was hopping about on one foot. There was also a
boy of not more than twelve; they were even arresting children,
apparently. The place had the beastly stench that you always get when
crowds of people are penned together without proper sanitary
arrangements.

Kopp elbowed his way through the crowd to meet us. His plump
fresh-coloured face looked much as usual, and in that filthy place he
had kept his uniform neat and had even contrived to shave. There was
another officer in the uniform of the Popular Army among the prisoners.
He and Kopp saluted as they struggled past one another; the gesture was
pathetic, somehow. Kopp seemed in excellent spirits. 'Well, I suppose we
shall all be shot,' he said cheerfully. The word 'shot' gave me a sort
of inward shudder. A bullet had entered my own body recently and the
feeling of it was fresh in my memory; it is not nice to think of that
happening to anyone you know well. At that time I took it for granted
that all the principal people in the P.O.U.M., and Kopp among them,
_would_ be shot. The first rumour of Nin's death had just filtered
through, and we knew that the P.O.U.M. were being accused of treachery
and espionage. Everything pointed to a huge frame-up trial followed by a
massacre of leading 'Trotskyists.' It is a terrible thing to see your
friend in jail and to know yourself impotent to help him. For there was
nothing that one could do; useless even to appeal to the Belgian
authorities, for Kopp had broken the law of his own country by coming
here. I had to leave most of the talking to my wife; with my squeaking
voice I could not make myself heard in the din. Kopp was telling us
about the friends he had made among the other prisoners, about the
guards, some of whom were good fellows, but some of whom abused and beat
the more timid prisoners, and about the food, which was 'pig-wash'.
Fortunately we had thought to bring a packet of food, also cigarettes.
Then Kopp began telling us about the papers that had been taken from him
when he was arrested. Among them was his letter from the Ministry of
War, addressed to the colonel commanding engineering operations in the
Army of the East. The police had seized it and refused to give it back;
it was said to be lying in the Chief of Police's office. It might make a
very great difference if it were recovered.

I saw instantly how important this might be. An official letter of that
kind, bearing the recommendation of the Ministry of War and of General
Pozas, would establish Kopp's bona fides. But the trouble was to prove
that the letter existed; if it were opened in the Chief of Police's
office one could be sure that some nark or other would destroy it. There
was only one person who might possibly be able to get it back, and that
was the officer to whom it was addressed. Kopp had already thought of
this, and he had written a letter which he wanted me to smuggle out of
the jail and post. But it was obviously quicker and surer to go in
person. I left my wife with Kopp, rushed out, and, after a long search,
found a taxi. I knew that time was everything. It was now about half
past five, the colonel would probably leave his office at six, and by
tomorrow the letter might be God knew where--destroyed, perhaps, or lost
somewhere in the chaos of documents that was presumably piling up as
suspect after suspect was arrested. The colonel's office was at the War
Department down by the quay. As I hurried up the steps the Assault Guard
on duty at the door barred the way with his long bayonet and demanded
'papers'. I waved my discharge ticket at him; evidently he could not
read, and he let me pass, impressed by the vague mystery of 'papers'.
Inside, the place was a huge complicated warren running round a central
courtyard, with hundreds of offices on each floor; and, as this was
Spain, nobody had the vaguest idea where the office I was looking for
was. I kept repeating: '_El coronel ----, jefe de ingenieros, Ejercito de
Este!_' People smiled and shrugged their shoulders gracefully. Everyone
who had an opinion sent me in a different direction; up these stairs,
down those, along interminable passages which turned out to be blind
alleys. And time was slipping away. I had the strangest sensation of
being in a nightmare: the rushing up and down flights of stairs, the
mysterious people coming and going, the glimpses through open doors of
chaotic offices with papers strewn everywhere and typewriters clicking;
and time slipping away and a life perhaps in the balance.

However, I got there in time, and slightly to my surprise I was granted
a hearing. I did not see Colonel ----, but his aide-de-camp or
secretary, a little slip of an officer in smart uniform, with large and
squinting eyes, came out to interview me in the ante-room. I began to
pour forth my story. I had come on behalf of my superior officer. Major
Jorge Kopp, who was on an urgent mission to the front and had been
arrested by mistake. The letter to Colonel ---- was of a confidential
nature and should be recovered without delay. I had served with Kopp for
months, he was an officer of the highest character, obviously his arrest
was a mistake, the police had confused him with someone else, etc.,
etc., etc. I kept piling it on about the urgency of Kopp's mission to
the front, knowing that this was the strongest point. But it must have
sounded a strange tale, in my villainous Spanish which elapsed into
French at every crisis. The worst was that my voice gave out almost at
once and it was only by violent straining that I could produce a sort of
croak. I was in dread that it would disappear altogether and the little
officer would grow tired of trying to listen to me. I have often
wondered what he thought was wrong with my voice--whether he thought I
was drunk or merely suffering from a guilty conscience.

However, he heard me patiently, nodded his head a great number of times,
and gave a guarded assent to what I said. Yes, it sounded as though
there might have been a mistake. Clearly the matter should be looked
into. _Mañana_--. I protested. Not _mañana_! The matter was urgent; Kopp
was due at the front already. Again the officer seemed to agree. Then
came the question I was dreading:

'This Major Kopp--what force was he serving in?'

The terrible word had to come out: 'In the P.O.U.M. militia.'

'P.O.U.M.!'

I wish I could convey to you the shocked alarm in his voice. You have
got to remember how the P.O.U.M. was regarded at that moment. The
spy-scare was at its height; probably all good Republicans did believe
for a day or two that the P.O.U.M. was a huge spying organization in
German pay. To have to say such a thing to an officer in the Popular
Army was like going into the Cavalry Club immediately after the Red
Letter scare and announcing yourself a Communist. His dark eyes moved
obliquely across my face. Another long pause, then he said slowly:

'And you say you were with him at the front. Then you were serving in
the P.O.U.M. militia yourself?'

'Yes.'

He turned and dived into the colonel's room. I could hear an agitated
conversation. 'It's all up,' I thought. We should never get Kopp's
letter back. Moreover I had had to confess that I was in the P.O.U.M.
myself, and no doubt they would ring up the police and get me arrested,
just to add another Trotskyist to the bag. Presently, however, the
officer reappeared, fitting on his cap, and sternly signed to me to
follow. We were going to the Chief of Police's office. It was a long
way, twenty minutes' walk. The little officer marched stiffly in front
with a military step. We did not exchange a single word the whole way.
When we got to the Chief of Police's office a crowd of the most
dreadful-looking scoundrels, obviously police narks, informers, and
spies of every kind, were hanging about outside the door. The little
officer went in; there was a long, heated conversation. You could hear
voices furiously raised; you pictured violent gestures, shrugging of the
shoulders, hangings on the table. Evidently the police were refusing to
give the letter up. At last, however, the officer emerged, flushed, but
carrying a large official envelope. It was Kopp's letter. We had won a
tiny victory--which, as it turned out, made not the slightest
difference. The letter was duly delivered, but Kopp's military superiors
were quite unable to get him out of jail.

The officer promised me that the letter should be delivered. But what
about Kopp? I said. Could we not get him released? He shrugged his
shoulders. That was another matter. They did not know what Kopp had been
arrested for. He would only tell me that the proper inquiries would be
made. There was no more to be said; it was time to part. Both of us
bowed slightly. And then there happened a strange and moving thing. The
little officer hesitated a moment, then stepped across, and shook hands
with me.

I do not know if I can bring home to you how deeply that action touched
me. It sounds a small thing, but it was not. You have got to realize
what was the feeling of the time--the horrible atmosphere of suspicion
and hatred, the lies and rumours circulating everywhere, the posters
screaming from the hoardings that I and everyone like me was a Fascist
spy. And you have got to remember that we were standing outside the
Chief of Police's office, in front of that filthy gang of tale-bearers
and _agents provocateurs_, any one of whom might know that I was 'wanted'
by the police. It was like publicly shaking hands with a German during
the Great War. I suppose he had decided in some way that I was not
really a Fascist spy; still, it was good of him to shake hands.

I record this, trivial though it may sound, because it is somehow
typical of Spain--of the flashes of magnanimity that you get from
Spaniards in the worst of circumstances. I have the most evil memories
of Spain, but I have very few bad memories of Spaniards. I only twice
remember even being seriously angry with a Spaniard, and on each
occasion, when I look back, I believe I was in the wrong myself. They
have, there is no doubt, a generosity, a species of nobility, that do
not really belong to the twentieth century. It is this that makes one
hope that in Spain even Fascism may take a comparatively loose and
bearable form. Few Spaniards possess the damnable efficiency and
consistency that a modern totalitarian state needs. There had been a
queer little illustration of this fact a few nights earlier, when the
police had searched my wife's room. As a matter of fact that search was
a very interesting business, and I wish I had seen it, though perhaps it
is as well that I did not, for I might not have kept my temper.

The police conducted the search in the recognized Ogpu or Gestapo style.
In the small hours of the morning there was a pounding on the door, and
six men marched in, switched on the light, and immediately took up
various positions about the room, obviously agreed upon beforehand. They
then searched both rooms (there was a bathroom attached) with
inconceivable thoroughness. They sounded the walls, took up the mats,
examined the floor, felt the curtains, probed under the bath and the
radiator, emptied every drawer and suitcase and felt every garment and
held it up to the light. They impounded all papers, including the
contents of the waste-paper basket, and all our books into the bargain.
They were thrown into ecstasies of suspicion by finding that we
possessed a French translation of Hitler's _Mein Kampf_. If that had
been the only book they found our doom would have been sealed. It is
obvious that a person who reads _Mein Kampf_ must be a Fascist. The next
moment, however, they came upon a copy of Stalin's pamphlet, _Ways of
Liquidating Trotskyists and other Double Dealers_, which reassured them
somewhat. In one drawer there was a number of packets of cigarette
papers. They picked each packet to pieces and examined each paper
separately, in case there should be messages written on them. Altogether
they were on the job for nearly two hours. Yet all this time they _never
searched the bed_. My wife was lying in bed all the while; obviously
there might have been half a dozen sub-machine-guns under the mattress,
not to mention a library of Trotskyist documents under the pillow. Yet
the detectives made no move to touch the bed, never even looked
underneath it. I cannot believe that this is a regular feature of the
Ogpu routine. One must remember that the police were almost entirely
under Communist control, and these men were probably Communist Party
members themselves. But they were also Spaniards, and to turn a woman
out of bed was a little too much for them. This part of the job was
silently dropped, making the whole search meaningless.

That night McNair, Cottman, and I slept in some long grass at the edge
of a derelict building-lot. It was a cold night for the time of year and
no one slept much. I remember the long dismal hours of loitering about
before one could get a cup of coffee. For the first time since I had
been in Barcelona I went to have a look at the cathedral--a modern
cathedral, and one of the most hideous buildings in the world. It has
four crenellated spires exactly the shape of hock bottles. Unlike most
of the churches in Barcelona it was not damaged during the
revolution--it was spared because of its 'artistic value', people said.
I think the Anarchists showed bad taste in not blowing it up when they
had the chance, though they did hang a red and black banner between its
spires. That afternoon my wife and I went to see Kopp for the last time.
There was nothing that we could do for him, absolutely nothing, except
to say good-bye and leave money with Spanish friends who would take him
food and cigarettes. A little while later, however, after we had left
Barcelona, he was placed _incommunicado_ and not even food could be sent
to him. That night, walking down the Ramblas, we passed the Café Moka,
which the Civil Guards were still holding in force. On an impulse I went
in and spoke to two of them who were leaning against the counter with
their rifles slung over their shoulders. I asked them if they knew which
of their comrades had been on duty here at the time of the May fighting.
They did not know, and, with the usual Spanish vagueness, did not know
how one could find out. I said that my friend Jorge Kopp was in prison
and would perhaps be put on trial for something in connexion with the
May fighting; that the men who were on duty here would know that he had
stopped the fighting and saved some of their lives; they ought to come
forward and give evidence to that effect. One of the men I was talking
to was a dull, heavy-looking man who kept shaking his head because he
could not hear my voice in the din of the traffic. But the other was
different. He said he had heard of Kopp's action from some of his
comrades; Kopp was _buen chico_ (a good fellow). But even at the time I
knew that it was all useless. If Kopp were ever tried, it would be, as
in all such trials, with faked evidence. If he has been shot (and I am
afraid it is quite likely), that will be his epitaph: the _buen chico_
of the poor Civil Guard who was part of a dirty system but had remained
enough of a human being to know a decent action when he saw one.

It was an extraordinary, insane existence that we were leading. By night
we were criminals, but by day we were prosperous English visitors--that
was our pose, anyway. Even after a night in the open, a shave, a bath,
and a shoe-shine do wonders with your appearance. The safest thing at
present was to look as bourgeois as possible. We frequented the
fashionable residential quarter of the town, where our faces were not
known, went to expensive restaurants, and were very English with the
waiters. For the first time in my life I took to writing things on
walls. The passage-ways of several smart restaurants had '_Visca
P.O.U.M.!_' scrawled on them as large as I could write it. All the while,
though I was technically in hiding, I could not feel myself in danger.
The whole thing seemed too absurd. I had the ineradicable English belief
that 'they' cannot arrest you unless you have broken the law. It is a
most dangerous belief to have during a political pogrom. There was a
warrant out for McNair's arrest, and the chances were that the rest of
us were on the list as well. The arrests, raids, searchings were
continuing without pause; practically everyone we knew, except those who
were still at the front, was in jail by this time. The police were even
boarding the French ships that periodically took off refugees and
seizing suspected 'Trotskyists'.

Thanks to the kindness of the British consul, who must have had a very
trying time during that week, we had managed to get our passports into
order. The sooner we left the better. There was a train that was due to
leave for Port Bou at half past seven in the evening and might normally
be expected to leave at about half past eight. We arranged that my wife
should order a taxi beforehand and then pack her bags, pay her bill, and
leave the hotel at the last possible moment. If she gave the hotel
people too much notice they would be sure to send for the police. I got
down to the station at about seven to find that the train had already
gone--it had left at ten to seven. The engine-driver had changed his
mind, as usual. Fortunately we managed to warn my wife in time. There
was another train early the following morning. McNair, Cottman, and I
had dinner at a little restaurant near the station and by cautious
questioning discovered that the restaurant-keeper was a C.N.T. member
and friendly. He let us a three-bedded room and forgot to warn the
police. It was the first time in five nights that I had been able to
sleep with my clothes off.

Next morning my wife slipped out of the hotel successfully. The train
was about an hour late in starting. I filled in the time by writing a
long letter to the Ministry of War, telling them about Kopp's case--that
without a doubt he had been arrested by mistake, that he was urgently
needed at the front, that countless people would testify that he was
innocent of any offence, etc., etc., etc. I wonder if anyone read that
letter, written on pages torn out of a note-book in wobbly handwriting
(my fingers were still partly paralysed) and still more wobbly Spanish.
At any rate, neither this letter nor anything else took effect. As I
write, six months after the event, Kopp (if he has not been shot) is
still in jail, untried and uncharged. At the beginning we had two or
three letters from him, smuggled out by released prisoners and posted in
France. They all told the same story--imprisonment in filthy dark dens,
bad and insufficient food, serious illness due to the conditions of
imprisonment, and refusal of medical attention. I have had all this
confirmed from several other sources, English and French. More recently
he disappeared into one of the 'secret prisons' with which it seems
impossible to make any kind of communication. His case is the case of
scores or hundreds of foreigners and no one knows how many thousands of
Spaniards.

In the end we crossed the frontier without incident. The train had a
first class and a dining-car, the first I had seen in Spain. Until
recently there had been only one class on the trains in Catalonia. Two
detectives came round the train taking the names of foreigners, but when
they saw us in the dining-car they seemed satisfied that we were
respectable. It was queer how everything had changed. Only six months
ago, when the Anarchists still reigned, it was looking like a
proletarian that made you respectable. On the way down from Perpignan to
Cerberes a French commercial traveller in my carriage had said to me in
all solemnity: 'You mustn't go into Spain looking like that. Take off
that collar and tie. They'll tear them off you in Barcelona.' He was
exaggerating, but it showed how Catalonia was regarded. And at the
frontier the Anarchist guards had turned back a smartly dressed
Frenchman and his wife, solely--I think--because they looked too
bourgeois. Now it was the other way about; to look bourgeois was the one
salvation. At the passport office they looked us up in the card-index of
suspects, but thanks to the inefficiency of the police our names were
not listed, not even McNair's. We were searched from head to foot, but
we possessed nothing incriminating, except my discharge-papers, and the
carabineros who searched me did not know that the 29th Division was the
P.O.U.M. So we slipped through the barrier, and after just six months I
was on French soil again. My only souvenirs of Spain were a goatskin
water-bottle and one of those tiny iron lamps in which the Aragón
peasants burn olive oil-lamps almost exactly the shape of the
terra-cotta lamps that the Romans used two thousand years ago--which I
had picked up in some ruined hut, and which had somehow got stuck in my
luggage.

After all, it turned out that we had come away none too soon. The very
first newspaper we saw announced McNair's arrest for espionage. The
Spanish authorities had been a little premature in announcing this.
Fortunately, 'Trotskyism' is not extraditable.

I wonder what is the appropriate first action when you come from a
country at war and set foot on peaceful soil. Mine was to rush to the
tobacco-kiosk and buy as many cigars and cigarettes as I could stuff
into my pockets. Then we all went to the buffet and had a cup of tea,
the first tea with fresh milk in it that we had had for many months. It
was several days before I could get used to the idea that you could buy
cigarettes whenever you wanted them. I always half-expected to see the
tobacconists' doors barred and the forbidding notice '_No hay tabaco_' in
the window.

McNair and Cottman were going on to Paris. My wife and I got off the
train at Banyuls, the first station up the line, feeling that we would
like a rest. We were not too well received in Banyuls when they
discovered that we had come from Barcelona. Quite a number of times I
was involved in the same conversation: 'You come from Spain? Which side
were you fighting on? The Government? Oh!'--and then a marked coolness.
The little town seemed solidly pro-Franco, no doubt because of the
various Spanish Fascist refugees who had arrived there from time to
time. The waiter at the café I frequented was a pro-Franco Spaniard and
used to give me lowering glances as he served me with an aperitif. It
was otherwise in Perpignan, which was stiff with Government partisans
and where all the different factions were caballing against one another
almost as in Barcelona. There was one café where the word 'P.O.U.M.'
immediately procured you French friends and smiles from the waiter.

I think we stayed three days in Banyuls. It was a strangely restless
time. In this quiet fishing-town, remote from bombs, machine-guns,
food-queues, propaganda, and intrigue, we ought to have felt profoundly
relieved and thankful. We felt nothing of the kind. The things we had
seen in Spain did not recede and fall into proportion now that we were
away from them; instead they rushed back upon us and were far more vivid
than before. We thought, talked, dreamed incessantly of Spain. For
months past we had been telling ourselves that 'when we get out of
Spain' we would go somewhere beside the Mediterranean and be quiet for a
little while and perhaps do a little fishing, but now that we were here
it was merely a bore and a disappointment. It was chilly weather, a
persistent wind blew off the sea, the water was dull and choppy, round
the harbour's edge a scum of ashes, corks, and fish-guts bobbed against
the stones. It sounds like lunacy, but the thing that both of us wanted
was to be back in Spain. Though it could have done no good to anybody,
might indeed have done serious harm, both of us wished that we had
stayed to be imprisoned along with the others. I suppose I have failed
to convey more than a little of what those months in Spain meant to me.
I have recorded some of the outward events, but I cannot record the
feeling they have left me with. It is all mixed up with sights, smells,
and sounds that cannot be conveyed in writing: the smell of the
trenches, the mountain dawns stretching away into inconceivable
distances, the frosty crackle of bullets, the roar and glare of bombs;
the clear cold light of the Barcelona mornings, and the stamp of boots
in the barrack yard, back in December when people still believed in the
revolution; and the food-queues and the red and black flags and the
faces of Spanish militiamen; above all the faces of militiamen--men whom
I knew in the line and who are now scattered Lord knows where, some
killed in battle, some maimed, some in prison--most of them, I hope,
still safe and sound. Good luck to them all; I hope they win their war
and drive all the foreigners out of Spain, Germans, Russians, and
Italians alike. This war, in which I played so ineffectual a part, has
left me with memories that are mostly evil, and yet I do not wish that I
had missed it. When you have had a glimpse of such a disaster as
this--and however it ends the Spanish war will turn out to have been an
appalling disaster, quite apart from the slaughter and physical
suffering--the result is not necessarily disillusionment and cynicism.
Curiously enough the whole experience has left me with not less but more
belief in the decency of human beings. And I hope the account I have
given is not too misleading. I believe that on such an issue as this no
one is or can be completely truthful. It is difficult to be certain
about anything except what you have seen with your own eyes, and
consciously or unconsciously everyone writes as a partisan. In case I
have not said this somewhere earlier in the book I will say it now:
beware of my partisanship, my mistakes of fact, and the distortion
inevitably caused by my having seen only one corner of events. And
beware of exactly the same things when you read any other book on this
period of the Spanish war.

Because of the feeling that we ought to be doing something, though
actually there was nothing we could do, we left Banyuls earlier than we
had intended. With every mile that you went northward France grew
greener and softer. Away from the mountain and the vine, back to the
meadow and the elm. When I had passed through Paris on my way to Spain
it had seemed to me decayed and gloomy, very different from the Paris I
had known eight years earlier, when living was cheap and Hitler was not
heard of. Half the cafés I used to know were shut for lack of custom,
and everyone was obsessed with the high cost of living and the fear of
war. Now, after poor Spain, even Paris seemed gay and prosperous. And
the Exhibition was in full swing, though we managed to avoid visiting
it.

And then England--southern England, probably the sleekest landscape in
the world. It is difficult when you pass that way, especially when you
are peacefully recovering from sea-sickness with the plush cushions of a
boat-train carriage under your bum, to believe that anything is really
happening anywhere. Earthquakes in Japan, famines in China, revolutions
in Mexico? Don't worry, the milk will be on the doorstep tomorrow
morning, the _New Statesman_ will come out on Friday. The industrial
towns were far away, a smudge of smoke and misery hidden by the curve of
the earth's surface. Down here it was still the England I had known in
my childhood: the railway-cuttings smothered in wild flowers, the deep
meadows where the great shining horses browse and meditate, the
slow-moving streams bordered by willows, the green bosoms of the elms,
the larkspurs in the cottage gardens; and then the huge peaceful
wilderness of outer London, the barges on the miry river, the familiar
streets, the posters telling of cricket matches and Royal weddings, the
men in bowler hats, the pigeons in Trafalgar Square, the red buses, the
blue policemen--all sleeping the deep, deep sleep of England, from which
I sometimes fear that we shall never wake till we are jerked out of it
by the roar of bombs.

THE END

Project Gutenberg Australia

Title:      Coming Up For Air
Author:     George Orwell


'He's dead, but he won't lie down'

Popular song



PART I



1


The idea really came to me the day I got my new false teeth.

I remember the morning well.  At about a quarter to eight I'd
nipped out of bed and got into the bathroom just in time to shut
the kids out.  It was a beastly January morning, with a dirty
yellowish-grey sky.  Down below, out of the little square of
bathroom window, I could see the ten yards by five of grass, with
a privet hedge round it and a bare patch in the middle, that we call
the back garden.  There's the same back garden, same privets, and
same grass, behind every house in Ellesmere Road.  Only difference--
where there are no kids there's no bare patch in the middle.

I was trying to shave with a bluntish razor-blade while the water
ran into the bath.  My face looked back at me out of the mirror,
and underneath, in a tumbler of water on the little shelf over the
washbasin, the teeth that belonged in the face.  It was the
temporary set that Warner, my dentist, had given me to wear while
the new ones were being made.  I haven't such a bad face, really.
It's one of those bricky-red faces that go with butter-coloured
hair and pale-blue eyes.  I've never gone grey or bald, thank God,
and when I've got my teeth in I probably don't look my age, which
is forty-five.

Making a mental note to buy razor-blades, I got into the bath and
started soaping.  I soaped my arms (I've got those kind of pudgy
arms that are freckled up to the elbow) and then took the back-
brush and soaped my shoulder-blades, which in the ordinary way I
can't reach.  It's a nuisance, but there are several parts of my
body that I can't reach nowadays.  The truth is that I'm inclined
to be a little bit on the fat side.  I don't mean that I'm like
something in a sideshow at a fair.  My weight isn't much over
fourteen stone, and last time I measured round my waist it was
either forty-eight or forty-nine, I forget which.  And I'm not what
they call 'disgustingly' fat, I haven't got one of those bellies
that sag half-way down to the knees.  It's merely that I'm a little
bit broad in the beam, with a tendency to be barrel-shaped.  Do you
know the active, hearty kind of fat man, the athletic bouncing type
that's nicknamed Fatty or Tubby and is always the life and soul of
the party?  I'm that type.  'Fatty' they mostly call me.  Fatty
Bowling.  George Bowling is my real name.

But at that moment I didn't feel like the life and soul of the
party.  And it struck me that nowadays I nearly always do have a
morose kind of feeling in the early mornings, although I sleep well
and my digestion's good.  I knew what it was, of course--it was
those bloody false teeth.  The things were magnified by the water
in the tumbler, and they were grinning at me like the teeth in a
skull.  It gives you a rotten feeling to have your gums meet, a
sort of pinched-up, withered feeling like when you've bitten into
a sour apple.  Besides, say what you will, false teeth are a
landmark.  When your last natural tooth goes, the time when you can
kid yourself that you're a Hollywood sheik, is definitely at an
end.  And I was fat as well as forty-five.  As I stood up to soap
my crutch I had a look at my figure.  It's all rot about fat men
being unable to see their feet, but it's a fact that when I stand
upright I can only see the front halves of mine.  No woman, I
thought as I worked the soap round my belly, will ever look twice
at me again, unless she's paid to.  Not that at that moment I
particularly wanted any woman to look twice at me.

But it struck me that this morning there were reasons why I ought
to have been in a better mood.  To begin with I wasn't working
today.  The old car, in which I 'cover' my district (I ought to
tell you that I'm in the insurance business.  The Flying
Salamander.  Life, fire, burglary, twins, shipwreck--everything),
was temporarily in dock, and though I'd got to look in at the
London office to drop some papers, I was really taking the day off
to go and fetch my new false teeth.  And besides, there was another
business that had been in and out of my mind for some time past.
This was that I had seventeen quid which nobody else had heard
about--nobody in the family, that is.  It had happened this way.
A chap in our firm, Mellors by name, had got hold of a book called
Astrology applied to Horse-racing which proved that it's all a
question of influence of the planets on the colours the jockey is
wearing.  Well, in some race or other there was a mare called
Corsair's Bride, a complete outsider, but her jockey's colour was
green, which it seemed was just the colour for the planets that
happened to be in the ascendant.  Mellors, who was deeply bitten
with this astrology business, was putting several quid on the horse
and went down on his knees to me to do the same.  In the end,
chiefly to shut him up, I risked ten bob, though I don't bet as a
general rule.  Sure enough Corsair's Bride came home in a walk.  I
forget the exact odds, but my share worked out at seventeen quid.
By a kind of instinct--rather queer, and probably indicating
another landmark in my life--I just quietly put the money in the
bank and said nothing to anybody.  I'd never done anything of this
kind before.  A good husband and father would have spent it on a
dress for Hilda (that's my wife) and boots for the kids.  But I'd
been a good husband and father for fifteen years and I was
beginning to get fed up with it.

After I'd soaped myself all over I felt better and lay down in the
bath to think about my seventeen quid and what to spend it on.  The
alternatives, it seemed to me, were either a week-end with a woman
or dribbling it quietly away on odds and ends such as cigars and
double whiskies.  I'd just turned on some more hot water and was
thinking about women and cigars when there was a noise like a herd
of buffaloes coming down the two steps that lead to the bathroom.
It was the kids, of course.  Two kids in a house the size of ours
is like a quart of beer in a pint mug.  There was a frantic
stamping outside and then a yell of agony.

'Dadda!  I wanna come in!'

'Well, you can't.  Clear out!'

'But dadda!  I wanna go somewhere!'

'Go somewhere else, then.  Hop it.  I'm having my bath.'

'Dad-DA!  I wanna GO SOME--WHERE!'

No use!  I knew the danger signal.  The W.C. is in the bathroom--it
would be, of course, in a house like ours.  I hooked the plug out
of the bath and got partially dry as quickly as I could.  As I
opened the door, little Billy--my youngest, aged seven--shot past
me, dodging the smack which I aimed at his head.  It was only when
I was nearly dressed and looking for a tie that I discovered that
my neck was still soapy.

It's a rotten thing to have a soapy neck.  It gives you a disgusting
sticky feeling, and the queer thing is that, however carefully you
sponge it away, when you've once discovered that your neck is soapy
you feel sticky for the rest of the day.  I went downstairs in a bad
temper and ready to make myself disagreeable.

Our dining-room, like the other dining-rooms in Ellesmere Road, is
a poky little place, fourteen feet by twelve, or maybe it's twelve
by ten, and the Japanese oak sideboard, with the two empty
decanters and the silver egg-stand that Hilda's mother gave us for
a wedding present, doesn't leave much room.  Old Hilda was glooming
behind the teapot, in her usual state of alarm and dismay because
the News Chronicle had announced that the price of butter was going
up, or something.  She hadn't lighted the gas-fire, and though the
windows were shut it was beastly cold.  I bent down and put a match
to the fire, breathing rather loudly through my nose (bending
always makes me puff and blow) as a kind of hint to Hilda.  She
gave me the little sidelong glance that she always gives me when
she thinks I'm doing something extravagant.

Hilda is thirty-nine, and when I first knew her she looked just
like a hare.  So she does still, but she's got very thin and rather
wizened, with a perpetual brooding, worried look in her eyes, and
when she's more upset than usual she's got a trick of humping her
shoulders and folding her arms across her breast, like an old gypsy
woman over her fire.  She's one of those people who get their main
kick in life out of foreseeing disasters.  Only petty disasters,
of course.  As for wars, earthquakes, plagues, famines, and
revolutions, she pays no attention to them.  Butter is going up,
and the gas-bill is enormous, and the kids' boots are wearing out,
and there's another instalment due on the radio--that's Hilda's
litany.  She gets what I've finally decided is a definite pleasure
out of rocking herself to and fro with her arms across her breast,
and glooming at me, 'But, George, it's very SERIOUS!  I don't know
what we're going to DO!  I don't know where the money's coming
from!  You don't seem to realize how serious it IS!' and so on and
so forth.  It's fixed firmly in her head that we shall end up in
the workhouse.  The funny thing is that if we ever do get to the
workhouse Hilda won't mind it a quarter as much as I shall, in fact
she'll probably rather enjoy the feeling of security.

The kids were downstairs already, having washed and dressed at
lightning speed, as they always do when there's no chance to keep
anyone else out of the bathroom.  When I got to the breakfast table
they were having an argument which went to the tune of 'Yes, you
did!' 'No, I didn't!' 'Yes, you did!' 'No, I didn't!' and looked
like going on for the rest of the morning, until I told them to
cheese it.  There are only the two of them, Billy, aged seven, and
Lorna, aged eleven.  It's a peculiar feeling that I have towards
the kids.  A great deal of the time I can hardly stick the sight of
them.  As for their conversation, it's just unbearable.  They're at
that dreary bread-and-butter age when a kid's mind revolves round
things like rulers, pencil-boxes, and who got top marks in French.
At other times, especially when they're asleep, I have quite a
different feeling.  Sometimes I've stood over their cots, on summer
evenings when it's light, and watched them sleeping, with their
round faces and their tow-coloured hair, several shades lighter
than mine, and it's given me that feeling you read about in the
Bible when it says your bowels yearn.  At such times I feel that
I'm just a kind of dried-up seed-pod that doesn't matter twopence
and that my sole importance has been to bring these creatures into
the world and feed them while they're growing.  But that's only at
moments.  Most of the time my separate existence looks pretty
important to me, I feel that there's life in the old dog yet and
plenty of good times ahead, and the notion of myself as a kind of
tame dairy-cow for a lot of women and kids to chase up and down
doesn't appeal to me.

We didn't talk much at breakfast.  Hilda was in her 'I don't know
what we're going to DO!' mood, partly owing to the price of butter
and partly because the Christmas holidays were nearly over and
there was still five pounds owing on the school fees for last term.
I ate my boiled egg and spread a piece of bread with Golden Crown
marmalade.  Hilda will persist in buying the stuff.  It's
fivepence-halfpenny a pound, and the label tells you, in the
smallest print the law allows, that it contains 'a certain
proportion of neutral fruit-juice'.  This started me off, in the
rather irritating way I have sometimes, talking about neutral
fruit-trees, wondering what they looked like and what countries
they grew in, until finally Hilda got angry.  It's not that she
minds me chipping her, it's only that in some obscure way she
thinks it's wicked to make jokes about anything you save money on.

I had a look at the paper, but there wasn't much news.  Down in
Spain and over in China they were murdering one another as usual,
a woman's legs had been found in a railway waiting-room, and King
Zog's wedding was wavering in the balance.  Finally, at about ten
o'clock, rather earlier than I'd intended, I started out for town.
The kids had gone off to play in the public gardens.  It was a
beastly raw morning.  As I stepped out of the front door a nasty
little gust of wind caught the soapy patch on my neck and made me
suddenly feel that my clothes didn't fit and that I was sticky all
over.



2


Do you know the road I live in--Ellesmere Road, West Bletchley?
Even if you don't, you know fifty others exactly like it.

You know how these streets fester all over the inner-outer suburbs.
Always the same.  Long, long rows of little semi-detached houses--
the numbers in Ellesmere Road run to 212 and ours is 191--as much
alike as council houses and generally uglier.  The stucco front,
the creosoted gate, the privet hedge, the green front door.  The
Laurels, the Myrtles, the Hawthorns, Mon Abri, Mon Repos, Belle
Vue.  At perhaps one house in fifty some anti-social type who'll
probably end in the workhouse has painted his front door blue
instead of green.

That sticky feeling round my neck had put me into a demoralized
kind of mood.  It's curious how it gets you down to have a sticky
neck.  It seems to take all the bounce out of you, like when you
suddenly discover in a public place that the sole of one of your
shoes is coming off.  I had no illusions about myself that morning.
It was almost as if I could stand at a distance and watch myself
coming down the road, with my fat, red face and my false teeth and
my vulgar clothes.  A chap like me is incapable of looking like a
gentleman.  Even if you saw me at two hundred yards' distance you'd
know immediately--not, perhaps, that I was in the insurance
business, but that I was some kind of tout or salesman.  The
clothes I was wearing were practically the uniform of the tribe.
Grey herring-bone suit, a bit the worse for wear, blue overcoat
costing fifty shillings, bowler hat, and no gloves.  And I've got
the look that's peculiar to people who sell things on commission, a
kind of coarse, brazen look.  At my best moments, when I've got a
new suit or when I'm smoking a cigar, I might pass for a bookie or
a publican, and when things are very bad I might be touting vacuum
cleaners, but at ordinary times you'd place me correctly.  'Five to
ten quid a week', you'd say as soon as you saw me.  Economically
and socially I'm about at the average level of Ellesmere Road.

I had the street pretty much to myself.  The men had bunked to
catch the 8.21 and the women were fiddling with the gas-stoves.
When you've time to look about you, and when you happen to be in
the right mood, it's a thing that makes you laugh inside to walk
down these streets in the inner-outer suburbs and to think of the
lives that go on there.  Because, after all, what IS a road like
Ellesmere Road?  Just a prison with the cells all in a row.  A line
of semidetached torture-chambers where the poor little five-to-ten-
pound-a-weekers quake and shiver, every one of them with the boss
twisting his tail and his wife riding him like the nightmare and
the kids sucking his blood like leeches.  There's a lot of rot
talked about the sufferings of the working class.  I'm not so sorry
for the proles myself.  Did you ever know a navvy who lay awake
thinking about the sack?  The prole suffers physically, but he's a
free man when he isn't working.  But in every one of those little
stucco boxes there's some poor bastard who's NEVER free except when
he's fast asleep and dreaming that he's got the boss down the
bottom of a well and is bunging lumps of coal at him.

Of course, the basic trouble with people like us, I said to myself,
is that we all imagine we've got something to lose.  To begin with,
nine-tenths of the people in Ellesmere Road are under the
impression that they own their houses.  Ellesmere Road, and the
whole quarter surrounding it, until you get to the High Street, is
part of a huge racket called the Hesperides Estate, the property of
the Cheerful Credit Building Society.  Building societies are
probably the cleverest racket of modern times.  My own line,
insurance, is a swindle, I admit, but it's an open swindle with the
cards on the table.  But the beauty of the building society
swindles is that your victims think you're doing them a kindness.
You wallop them, and they lick your hand.  I sometimes think I'd
like to have the Hesperides Estate surmounted by an enormous statue
to the god of building societies.  It would be a queer sort of god.
Among other things it would be bisexual.  The top half would be a
managing director and the bottom half would be a wife in the family
way.  In one hand it would carry an enormous key--the key of the
workhouse, of course--and in the other--what do they call those
things like French horns with presents coming out of them?--a
cornucopia, out of which would be pouring portable radios, life-
insurance policies, false teeth, aspirins, French letters, and
concrete garden rollers.

As a matter of fact, in Ellesmere Road we don't own our houses,
even when we've finished paying for them.  They're not freehold,
only leasehold.  They're priced at five-fifty, payable over a
period of sixteen years, and they're a class of house, which, if
you bought them for cash down, would cost round about three-eighty.
That represents a profit of a hundred and seventy for the Cheerful
Credit, but needless to say that Cheerful Credit makes a lot more
out of it than that.  Three-eighty includes the builder's profit,
but the Cheerful Credit, under the name of Wilson & Bloom, builds
the houses itself and scoops the builder's profit.  All it has to
pay for is the materials.  But it also scoops the profit on the
materials, because under the name of Brookes & Scatterby it sells
itself the bricks, tiles, doors, window-frames, sand, cement, and,
I think, glass.  And it wouldn't altogether surprise me to learn
that under yet another alias it sells itself the timber to make the
doors and window-frames.  Also--and this was something which we
really might have foreseen, though it gave us all a knock when we
discovered it--the Cheerful Credit doesn't always keep to its end
of the bargain.  When Ellesmere Road was built it gave on some open
fields--nothing very wonderful, but good for the kids to play in--
known as Platt's Meadows.  There was nothing in black and white,
but it had always been understood that Platt's Meadows weren't to
be built on.  However, West Bletchley was a growing suburb,
Rothwell's jam factory had opened in '28 and the Anglo-American
All-Steel Bicycle factory started in '33, and the population was
increasing and rents were going up.  I've never seen Sir Herbert
Crum or any other of the big noises of the Cheerful Credit in the
flesh, but in my mind's eye I could see their mouths watering.
Suddenly the builders arrived and houses began to go up on Platt's
Meadows.  There was a howl of agony from the Hesperides, and a
tenants' defence association was set up.  No use!  Crum's lawyers
had knocked the stuffing out of us in five minutes, and Platt's
Meadows were built over.  But the really subtle swindle, the one
that makes me feel old Crum deserved his baronetcy, is the mental
one.  Merely because of the illusion that we own our houses and
have what's called 'a stake in the country', we poor saps in the
Hesperides, and in all such places, are turned into Crum's devoted
slaves for ever.  We're all respectable householders--that's to say
Tories, yes-men, and bumsuckers.  Daren't kill the goose that lays
the gilded eggs!  And the fact that actually we aren't householders,
that we're all in the middle of paying for our houses and eaten up
with the ghastly fear that something might happen before we've made
the last payment, merely increases the effect. We're all bought, and
what's more we're bought with our own money.  Every one of those poor
downtrodden bastards, sweating his guts out to pay twice the proper
price for a brick doll's house that's called Belle Vue because
there's no view and the bell doesn't ring--every one of those poor
suckers would die on the field of battle to save his country from
Bolshevism.

I turned down Walpole Road and got into the High Street.  There's a
train to London at 10.14.  I was just passing the Sixpenny Bazaar
when I remembered the mental note I'd made that morning to buy a
packet of razor-blades.  When I got to the soap counter the floor-
manager, or whatever his proper title is, was cursing the girl in
charge there.  Generally there aren't many people in the Sixpenny
at that hour of the morning.  Sometimes if you go in just after
opening-time you see all the girls lined up in a row and given
their morning curse, just to get them into trim for the day.  They
say these big chain-stores have chaps with special powers of
sarcasm and abuse who are sent from branch to branch to ginger the
girls up.  The floor-manager was an ugly little devil, under-sized,
with very square shoulders and a spiky grey moustache.  He'd just
pounced on her about something, some mistake in the change
evidently, and was going for her with a voice like a circular saw.

'Ho, no!  Course you couldn't count it!  COURSE you couldn't.  Too
much trouble, that'd be.  Ho, no!'

Before I could stop myself I'd caught the girl's eye.  It wasn't
so nice for her to have a fat middle-aged bloke with a red face
looking on while she took her cursing.  I turned away as quickly as
I could and pretended to be interested in some stuff at the next
counter, curtain rings or something.  He was on to her again.  He
was one of those people who turn away and then suddenly dart back
at you, like a dragon-fly.

'COURSE you couldn't count it!  Doesn't matter to YOU if we're two
bob out.  Doesn't matter at all.  What's two bob to YOU?  Couldn't
ask YOU to go to the trouble of counting it properly.  Ho, no!
Nothing matters 'ere 'cept YOUR convenience.  You don't think about
others, do you?'

This went on for about five minutes in a voice you could hear half
across the shop.  He kept turning away to make her think he'd
finished with her and then darting back to have another go.  As I
edged a bit farther off I had a glance at them.  The girl was a kid
about eighteen, rather fat, with a sort of moony face, the kind
that would never get the change right anyway.  She'd turned pale
pink and she was wriggling, actually wriggling with pain.  It was
just the same as if he'd been cutting into her with a whip.  The
girls at the other counters were pretending not to hear.  He was an
ugly, stiff-built little devil, the sort of cock-sparrow type of
man that sticks his chest out and puts his hands under his
coattails--the type that'd be a sergeant-major only they aren't
tall enough.  Do you notice how often they have under-sized men for
these bullying jobs?  He was sticking his face, moustaches and all,
almost into hers so as to scream at her better.  And the girl all
pink and wriggling.

Finally he decided that he'd said enough and strutted off like an
admiral on the quarter-deck, and I came up to the counter for my
razor-blades.  He knew I'd heard every word, and so did she, and
both of them knew I knew they knew.  But the worst of it was that
for my benefit she'd got to pretend that nothing had happened and
put on the standoffish keep-your-distance attitude that a shopgirl's
supposed to keep up with male customers.  Had to act the grown-up
young lady half a minute after I'd seen her cursed like a skivvy!
Her face was still pink and her hands were trembling.  I asked her
for penny blades and she started fumbling in the threepenny tray.
Then the little devil of a floor-manager turned our way and for a
moment both of us thought he was coming back to begin again.  The
girl flinched like a dog that sees the whip.  But she was looking at
me out of the corner of her eye.  I could see that because I'd seen
her cursed she hated me like the devil. Queer!

I cleared out with my razor-blades.  Why do they stand it? I was
thinking.  Pure funk, of course.  One back-answer and you get the
sack.  It's the same everywhere.  I thought of the lad that
sometimes serves me at the chain-store grocery we deal at.  A great
hefty lump of twenty, with cheeks like roses and enormous fore-
arms, ought to be working in a blacksmith's shop.  And there he is
in his white jacket, bent double across the counter, rubbing his
hands together with his 'Yes, sir!  Very true, sir!  Pleasant
weather for the time of the year, sir!  What can I have the
pleasure of getting you today, sir?' practically asking you to kick
his bum.  Orders, of course.  The customer is always right.  The
thing you can see in his face is mortal dread that you might report
him for impertinence and get him sacked.  Besides, how's he to know
you aren't one of the narks the company sends round?  Fear!  We
swim in it.  It's our element.  Everyone that isn't scared stiff of
losing his job is scared stiff of war, or Fascism, or Communism, or
something.  Jews sweating when they think of Hitler.  It crossed my
mind that that little bastard with the spiky moustache was probably
a damn sight more scared for his job than the girl was.  Probably
got a family to support.  And perhaps, who knows, at home he's meek
and mild, grows cucumbers in the back garden, lets his wife sit on
him and the kids pull his moustache.  And by the same token you
never read about a Spanish Inquisitor or one of these higher-ups in
the Russian Ogpu without being told that in private life he was
such a good kind man, best of husbands and fathers, devoted to his
tame canary, and so forth.

The girl at the soap counter was looking after me as I went out of
the door.  She'd have murdered me if she could.  How she hated me
because of what I'd seen!  Much more than she hated the floor-
manager.



3


There was a bombing plane flying low overhead.  For a minute or two
it seemed to be keeping pace with the train.  Two vulgar kind of
blokes in shabby overcoats, obviously commercials of the lowest
type, newspaper canvassers probably, were sitting opposite me.  One
of them was reading the Mail and the other was reading the Express.
I could see by their manner that they'd spotted me for one of their
kind.  Up at the other end of the carriage two lawyers' clerks with
black bags were keeping up a conversation full of legal baloney
that was meant to impress the rest of us and show that they didn't
belong to the common herd.

I was watching the backs of the houses sliding past.  The line from
West Bletchley runs most of the way through slums, but it's kind of
peaceful, the glimpses you get of little backyards with bits of
flowers stuck in boxes and the flat roofs where the women peg out
the washing and the bird-cage on the wall.  The great black bombing
plane swayed a little in the air and zoomed ahead so that I
couldn't see it.  I was sitting with my back to the engine.  One of
the commercials cocked his eye at it for just a second.  I knew
what he was thinking.  For that matter it's what everybody else is
thinking.  You don't have to be a highbrow to think such thoughts
nowadays.  In two years' time, one year's time, what shall we be
doing when we see one of those things?  Making a dive for the
cellar, wetting our bags with fright.

The commercial bloke put down his Daily Mail.

'Templegate's winner come in,' he said.

The lawyers' clerks were sprouting some learned rot about fee-
simple and peppercorns.  The other commercial felt in his waistcoat
pocket and took out a bent Woodbine.  He felt in the other pocket
and then leaned across to me.

'Got a match, Tubby?'

I felt for my matches.  'Tubby', you notice.  That's interesting,
really.  For about a couple of minutes I stopped thinking about
bombs and began thinking about my figure as I'd studied it in my
bath that morning.

It's quite true I'm tubby, in fact my upper half is almost exactly
the shape of a tub.  But what's interesting, I think, is that
merely because you happen to be a little bit fat, almost anyone,
even a total, stranger, will take it for granted to give you a
nickname that's an insulting comment on your personal appearance.
Suppose a chap was a hunchback or had a squint or a hare-lip--would
you give him a nickname to remind him of it?  But every fat man's
labelled as a matter of course.  I'm the type that people
automatically slap on the back and punch in the ribs, and nearly
all of them think I like it.  I never go into the saloon bar of the
Crown at Pudley (I pass that way once a week on business) without
that ass Waters, who travels for the Seafoam Soap people but who's
more or less a permanency in the saloon bar of the Crown, prodding
me in the ribs and singing out 'Here a sheer hulk lies poor Tom
Bowling!' which is a joke the bloody fools in the bar never get
tired of.  Waters has got a finger like a bar of iron.  They all
think a fat man doesn't have any feelings.

The commercial took another of my matches, to pick his teeth with,
and chucked the box back.  The train whizzed on to an iron bridge.
Down below I got a glimpse of a baker's van and a long string of
lorries loaded with cement.  The queer thing, I was thinking, is
that in a way they're right about fat men.  It's a fact that a fat
man, particularly a man who's been fat from birth--from childhood,
that's to say--isn't quite like other men.  He goes through his
life on a different plane, a sort of light-comedy plane, though in
the case of blokes in side-shows at fairs, or in fact anyone over
twenty stone, it isn't so much light comedy as low farce.  I've
been both fat and thin in my life, and I know the difference
fatness makes to your outlook.  It kind of prevents you from taking
things too hard.  I doubt whether a man who's never been anything
but fat, a man who's been called Fatty ever since he could walk,
even knows of the existence of any really deep emotions.  How could
he?  He's got no experience of such things.  He can't ever be
present at a tragic scene, because a scene where there's a fat man
present isn't tragic, it's comic.  Just imagine a fat Hamlet, for
instance!  Or Oliver Hardy acting Romeo.  Funnily enough I'd been
thinking something of the kind only a few days earlier when I was
reading a novel I'd got out of Boots.  Wasted Passion, it was
called.  The chap in the story finds out that his girl has gone off
with another chap.  He's one of these chaps you read about in
novels, that have pale sensitive faces and dark hair and a private
income.  I remember more or less how the passage went:


David paced up and down the room, his hands pressed to his
forehead.  The news seemed to have stunned him.  For a long time
he could not believe it.  Sheila untrue to him!  It could not be!
Suddenly realization rushed over him, and he saw the fact in all
its stark horror.  It was too much.  He flung himself down in a
paroxysm of weeping.


Anyway, it went something like that.  And even at the time it
started me thinking.  There you have it, you see.  That's how
people--some people--are expected to behave.  But how about a chap
like me?  Suppose Hilda went off for a week-end with somebody else-
-not that I'd care a damn, in fact it would rather please me to
find that she'd still got that much kick left in her--but suppose I
did care, would I fling myself down in a paroxysm of weeping?
Would anyone expect me to?  You couldn't, with a figure like mine.
It would be downright obscene.

The train was running along an embankment.  A little below us you
could see the roofs of the houses stretching on and on, the little
red roofs where the bombs are going to drop, a bit lighted up at
this moment because a ray of sunshine was catching them.  Funny how
we keep on thinking about bombs.  Of course there's no question
that it's coming soon.  You can tell how close it is by the cheer-
up stuff they're talking about it in the newspaper.  I was reading
a piece in the News Chronicle the other day where it said that
bombing planes can't do any damage nowadays.  The anti-aircraft
guns have got so good that the bomber has to stay at twenty
thousand feet.  The chap thinks, you notice, that if an aeroplane's
high enough the bombs don't reach the ground.  Or more likely what
he really meant was that they'll miss Woolwich Arsenal and only hit
places like Ellesmere Road.

But taking it by and large, I thought, it's not so bad to be fat.
One thing about a fat man is that he's always popular.  There's
really no kind of company, from bookies to bishops, where a fat man
doesn't fit in and feel at home.  As for women, fat men have more
luck with them than people seem to think.  It's all bunk to
imagine, as some people do, that a woman looks on a fat man as just
a joke.  The truth is that a woman doesn't look on ANY man as a
joke if he can kid her that he's in love with her.

Mind you, I haven't always been fat.  I've been fat for eight or
nine years, and I suppose I've developed most of the characteristics.
But it's also a fact that internally, mentally, I'm not altogether
fat.  No!  Don't mistake me.  I'm not trying to put myself over as a
kind of tender flower, the aching heart behind the smiling face and
so forth.  You couldn't get on in the insurance business if you were
anything like that.  I'm vulgar, I'm insensitive, and I fit in with
my environment.  So long as anywhere in the world things are being
sold on commission and livings are picked up by sheer brass and lack
of finer feelings, chaps like me will be doing it.  In almost all
circumstances I'd manage to make a living--always a living and never
a fortune--and even in war, revolution, plague, and famine I'd back
myself to stay alive longer than most people.  I'm that type.  But
also I've got something else inside me, chiefly a hangover from the
past.  I'll tell you about that later.  I'm fat, but I'm thin
inside.  Has it ever struck you that there's a thin man inside every
fat man, just as they say there's a statue inside every block of
stone?

The chap who'd borrowed my matches was having a good pick at his
teeth over the Express.

'Legs case don't seem to get much forrader,' he said.

'They'll never get 'im,' said the other. ''Ow could you identify a
pair of legs?  They're all the bleeding same, aren't they?'

'Might trace 'im through the piece of paper 'e wrapped 'em up in,'
said the first.

Down below you could see the roofs of the houses stretching on and
on, twisting this way and that with the streets, but stretching on
and on, like an enormous plain that you could have ridden over.
Whichever way you cross London it's twenty miles of houses almost
without a break.  Christ! how can the bombers miss us when they
come?  We're just one great big bull's-eye.  And no warning,
probably.  Because who's going to be such a bloody fool as to
declare war nowadays?  If I was Hitler I'd send my bombers across
in the middle of a disarmament conference.  Some quiet morning,
when the clerks are streaming across London Bridge, and the
canary's singing, and the old woman's pegging the bloomers on the
line--zoom, whizz, plonk!  Houses going up into the air, bloomers
soaked with blood, canary singing on above the corpses.

Seems a pity somehow, I thought.  I looked at the great sea of
roofs stretching on and on.  Miles and miles of streets, fried-fish
shops, tin chapels, picture houses, little printing-shops up back
alleys, factories, blocks of flats, whelk stalls, dairies, power
stations--on and on and on.  Enormous!  And the peacefulness of it!
Like a great wilderness with no wild beasts.  No guns firing,
nobody chucking pineapples, nobody beating anybody else up with a
rubber truncheon.  If you come to think of it, in the whole of
England at this moment there probably isn't a single bedroom window
from which anyone's firing a machine-gun.

But how about five years from now?  Or two years?  Or one year?



4


I'd dropped my papers at the office.  Warner is one of these cheap
American dentists, and he has his consulting-room, or 'parlour' as
he likes to call it, halfway up a big block of offices, between a
photographer and a rubber-goods wholesaler.  I was early for my
appointment, but it was time for a bit of grub.  I don't know what
put it into my head to go into a milk-bar.  They're places I
generally avoid.  We five-to-ten-pound-a-weekers aren't well served
in the way of eating-places in London.  If your idea of the amount
to spend on a meal is one and threepence, it's either Lyons, the
Express Dairy, or the A.B.C., or else it's the kind of funeral
snack they serve you in the saloon bar, a pint of bitter and a slab
of cold pie, so cold that it's colder than the beer.  Outside the
milk-bar the boys were yelling the first editions of the evening
papers.

Behind the bright red counter a girl in a tall white cap was
fiddling with an ice-box, and somewhere at the back a radio was
playing, plonk-tiddle-tiddle-plonk, a kind of tinny sound.  Why the
hell am I coming here? I thought to myself as I went in.  There's a
kind of atmosphere about these places that gets me down.  Everything
slick and shiny and streamlined; mirrors, enamel, and chromium plate
whichever direction you look in.  Everything spent on the decorations
and nothing on the food.  No real food at all.  Just lists of stuff
with American names, sort of phantom stuff that you can't taste and
can hardly believe in the existence of.  Everything comes out of a
carton or a tin, or it's hauled out of a refrigerator or squirted
out of a tap or squeezed out of a tube.  No comfort, no privacy.
Tall stools to sit on, a kind of narrow ledge to eat off, mirrors
all round you.  A sort of propaganda floating round, mixed up with
the noise of the radio, to the effect that food doesn't matter,
comfort doesn't matter, nothing matters except slickness and
shininess and streamlining.  Everything's streamlined nowadays, even
the bullet Hitler's keeping for you.  I ordered a large coffee and a
couple of frankfurters.  The girl in the white cap jerked them at me
with about as much interest as you'd throw ants' eggs to a goldfish.

Outside the door a newsboy yelled 'StarnoosstanNERD!'  I saw the
poster flapping against his knees:  LEGS.  FRESH DISCOVERIES.  Just
'legs', you notice.  It had got down to that.  Two days earlier
they'd found a woman's legs in a railway waiting-room, done up in a
brown-paper parcel, and what with successive editions of the
papers, the whole nation was supposed to be so passionately
interested in these blasted legs that they didn't need any further
introduction.  They were the only legs that were news at the
moment.  It's queer, I thought, as I ate a bit of roll, how dull
the murders are getting nowadays.  All this cutting people up and
leaving bits of them about the countryside.  Not a patch on the old
domestic poisoning dramas, Crippen, Seddon, Mrs Maybrick; the truth
being, I suppose, that you can't do a good murder unless you
believe you're going to roast in hell for it.

At this moment I bit into one of my frankfurters, and--Christ!

I can't honestly say that I'd expected the thing to have a pleasant
taste.  I'd expected it to taste of nothing, like the roll.  But
this--well, it was quite an experience.  Let me try and describe it
to you.

The frankfurter had a rubber skin, of course, and my temporary
teeth weren't much of a fit.  I had to do a kind of sawing movement
before I could get my teeth through the skin.  And then suddenly--
pop!  The thing burst in my mouth like a rotten pear.  A sort of
horrible soft stuff was oozing all over my tongue.  But the taste!
For a moment I just couldn't believe it.  Then I rolled my tongue
round it again and had another try.  It was FISH!  A sausage, a
thing calling itself a frankfurter, filled with fish!  I got up and
walked straight out without touching my coffee.  God knows what
that might have tasted of.

Outside the newsboy shoved the Standard into my face and yelled,
'Legs!  'Orrible revelations!  All the winners!  Legs!  Legs!'  I
was still rolling the stuff round my tongue, wondering where I
could spit it out.  I remembered a bit I'd read in the paper
somewhere about these food-factories in Germany where everything's
made out of something else.  Ersatz, they call it.  I remembered
reading that THEY were making sausages out of fish, and fish, no
doubt, out of something different.  It gave me the feeling that I'd
bitten into the modern world and discovered what it was really made
of.  That's the way we're going nowadays.  Everything slick and
streamlined, everything made out of something else.  Celluloid,
rubber, chromium-steel everywhere, arc-lamps blazing all night,
glass roofs over your head, radios all playing the same tune, no
vegetation left, everything cemented over, mock-turtles grazing
under the neutral fruit-trees.  But when you come down to brass
tacks and get your teeth into something solid, a sausage for
instance, that's what you get.  Rotten fish in a rubber skin.
Bombs of filth bursting inside your mouth.

When I'd got the new teeth in I felt a lot better.  They sat nice
and smooth over the gums, and though very likely it sounds absurd
to say that false teeth can make you feel younger, it's a fact that
they did so.  I tried a smile at myself in a shop window.  They
weren't half bad.  Warner, though cheap, is a bit of an artist and
doesn't aim at making you look like a toothpaste advert.  He's got
huge cabinets full of false teeth--he showed them to me once--all
graded according to size and colour, and he picks them out like a
jeweller choosing stones for a necklace.  Nine people out of ten
would have taken my teeth for natural.

I caught a full-length glimpse of myself in another window I was
passing, and it struck me that really I wasn't such a bad figure of
a man.  A bit on the fat side, admittedly, but nothing offensive,
only what the tailors call a 'full figure', and some women like a
man to have a red face.  There's life in the old dog yet, I
thought.  I remembered my seventeen quid, and definitely made up my
mind that I'd spend it on a woman.  There was time to have a pint
before the pubs shut, just to baptize the teeth, and feeling rich
because of my seventeen quid I stopped at a tobacconist's and
bought myself a sixpenny cigar of a kind I'm rather partial to.
They're eight inches long and guaranteed pure Havana leaf all
through.  I suppose cabbages grow in Havana the same as anywhere
else.

When I came out of the pub I felt quite different.

I'd had a couple of pints, they'd warmed me up inside, and the
cigar smoke oozing round my new teeth gave me a fresh, clean,
peaceful sort of feeling.  All of a sudden I felt kind of
thoughtful and philosophic.  It was partly because I didn't have
any work to do.  My mind went back to the thoughts of war I'd been
having earlier that morning, when the bomber flew over the train.
I felt in a kind of prophetic mood, the mood in which you foresee
the end of the world and get a certain kick out of it.

I was walking westward up the Strand, and though it was coldish I
went slowly to get the pleasure of my cigar.  The usual crowd that
you can hardly fight your way through was streaming up the
pavement, all of them with that insane fixed expression on their
faces that people have in London streets, and there was the usual
jam of traffic with the great red buses nosing their way between
the cars, and the engines roaring and horns tooting.  Enough noise
to waken the dead, but not to waken this lot, I thought.  I felt as
if I was the only person awake in a city of sleep-walkers.  That's
an illusion, of course.  When you walk through a crowd of strangers
it's next door to impossible not to imagine that they're all
waxworks, but probably they're thinking just the same about you.
And this kind of prophetic feeling that keeps coming over me
nowadays, the feeling that war's just round the corner and that
war's the end of all things, isn't peculiar to me.  We've all got
it, more or less.  I suppose even among the people passing at that
moment there must have been chaps who were seeing mental pictures
of the shellbursts and the mud.  Whatever thought you think there's
always a million people thinking it at the same moment.  But that
was how I felt.  We're all on the burning deck and nobody knows it
except me.  I looked at the dumb-bell faces streaming past.  Like
turkeys in November, I thought.  Not a notion of what's coming to
them.  It was as if I'd got X-rays in my eyes and could see the
skeletons walking.

I looked forward a few years.  I saw this street as it'll be in
five years' time, say, or three years' time (1941 they say it's
booked for), after the fighting's started.

No, not all smashed to pieces.  Only a little altered, kind of
chipped and dirty-looking, the shop-windows almost empty and so
dusty that you can't see into them.  Down a side street there's an
enormous bomb-crater and a block of buildings burnt out so that it
looks like a hollow tooth.  Thermite.  It's all curiously quiet,
and everyone's very thin.  A platoon of soldiers comes marching up
the street.  They're all as thin as rakes and their boots are
dragging.  The sergeant's got corkscrew moustaches and holds
himself like a ramrod, but he's thin too and he's got a cough that
almost tears him open.  Between his coughs he's trying to bawl at
them in the old parade-ground style.  'Nah then, Jones!  Lift yer
'ed up!  What yer keep starin' at the ground for?  All them fag-
ends was picked up years ago.'  Suddenly a fit of coughing catches
him.  He tries to stop it, can't, doubles up like a ruler, and
almost coughs his guts out.  His face turns pink and purple, his
moustache goes limp, and the water runs out of his eyes.

I can hear the air-raid sirens blowing and the loud-speakers
bellowing that our glorious troops have taken a hundred thousand
prisoners.  I see a top-floor-back in Birmingham and a child of
five howling and howling for a bit of bread.  And suddenly the
mother can't stand it any longer, and she yells at it, 'Shut your
trap, you little bastard!' and then she ups the child's frock and
smacks its bottom hard, because there isn't any bread and isn't
going to be any bread.  I see it all.  I see the posters and the
food-queues, and the castor oil and the rubber truncheons and the
machine-guns squirting out of bedroom windows.

Is it going to happen?  No knowing.  Some days it's impossible to
believe it.  Some days I say to myself that it's just a scare got
up by the newspapers.  Some days I know in my bones there's no
escaping it.

When I got down near Charing Cross the boys were yelling a later
edition of the evening papers.  There was some more drivel about
the murder.  LEGS.  FAMOUS SURGEON'S STATEMENT.  Then another
poster caught my eye:  KING ZOG'S WEDDING POSTPONED.  King Zog!
What a name!  It's next door to impossible to believe a chap with a
name like that isn't a jet-black Negro.

But just at that moment a queer thing happened.  King Zog's name--
but I suppose, as I'd already seen the name several times that day,
it was mixed up with some sound in the traffic or the smell of
horse-dung or something--had started memories in me.

The past is a curious thing.  It's with you all the time.  I
suppose an hour never passes without your thinking of things that
happened ten or twenty years ago, and yet most of the time it's got
no reality, it's just a set of facts that you've learned, like a
lot of stuff in a history book.  Then some chance sight or sound or
smell, especially smell, sets you going, and the past doesn't
merely come back to you, you're actually IN the past.  It was like
that at this moment.

I was back in the parish church at Lower Binfield, and it was
thirty-eight years ago.  To outward appearances, I suppose, I was
still walking down the Strand, fat and forty-five, with false teeth
and a bowler hat, but inside me I was Georgie Bowling, aged seven,
younger son of Samuel Bowling, corn and seed merchant, of 57 High
Street, Lower Binfield.  And it was Sunday morning, and I could
smell the church.  How I could smell it!  You know the smell
churches have, a peculiar, dank, dusty, decaying, sweetish sort of
smell.  There's a touch of candle-grease in it, and perhaps a whiff
of incense and a suspicion of mice, and on Sunday mornings it's a
bit overlaid by yellow soap and serge dresses, but predominantly
it's that sweet, dusty, musty smell that's like the smell of death
and life mixed up together.  It's powdered corpses, really.

In those days I was about four feet high.  I was standing on the
hassock so as to see over the pew in front, and I could feel
Mother's black serge dress under my hand.  I could also feel my
stockings pulled up over my knees--we used to wear them like that
then--and the saw edge of the Eton collar they used to buckle me
into on Sunday mornings.  And I could hear the organ wheezing and
two enormous voices bellowing out the psalm.  In our church there
were two men who led the singing, in fact they did so much of the
singing that nobody else got much of a chance.  One was Shooter,
the fishmonger, and the other was old Wetherall, the joiner and
undertaker.  They used to sit opposite one another on either side
of the nave, in the pews nearest the pulpit.  Shooter was a short
fat man with a very pink, smooth face, a big nose, drooping
moustache, and a chin that kind of fell away beneath his mouth.
Wetherall was quite different.  He was a great, gaunt, powerful old
devil of about sixty, with a face like a death's-head and stiff
grey hair half an inch long all over his head.  I've never seen a
living man who looked so exactly like a skeleton.  You could see
every line of the skull in his face, his skin was like parchment,
and his great lantern jaw full of yellow teeth worked up and down
just like the jaw of a skeleton in an anatomical museum.  And yet
with all his leanness he looked as strong as iron, as though he'd
live to be a hundred and make coffins for everyone in that church
before he'd finished.  Their voices were quite different, too.
Shooter had a kind of desperate, agonized bellow, as though someone
had a knife at his throat and he was just letting out his last yell
for help.  But Wetherall had a tremendous, churning, rumbling noise
that happened deep down inside him, like enormous barrels being
rolled to and fro underground.  However much noise he let out, you
always knew he'd got plenty more in reserve.  The kids nicknamed
him Rumbletummy.

They used to get up a kind of antiphonal effect, especially in the
psalms.  It was always Wetherall who had the last word.  I suppose
really they were friends in private life, but in my kid's way I
used to imagine that they were deadly enemies and trying to shout
one another down.  Shooter would roar out 'The Lord is my
shepherd', and then Wetherall would come in with 'Therefore can I
lack nothing', drowning him completely.  You always knew which of
the two was master.  I used especially to look forward to that
psalm that has the bit about Sihon king of the Amorites and Og the
king of Bashan (this was what King Zog's name had reminded me of).
Shooter would start off with 'Sihon king of the Amorites', then
perhaps for half a second you could hear the rest of the
congregation singing the 'and', and then Wetherall's enormous bass
would come in like a tidal wave and swallow everybody up with 'Og
the king of Bashan'.  I wish I could make you hear the tremendous,
rumbling, subterranean barrel-noise that he could get into that
word 'Og'.  He even used to clip off the end of the 'and', so that
when I was a very small kid I used to think it was Dog the king of
Bashan.  But later, when I got the names right, I formed a picture
in my mind's eye of Sihon and Og.  I saw them as a couple of those
great Egyptian statues that I'd seen pictures of in the penny
encyclopedia, enormous stone statues thirty feet high, sitting on
their thrones opposite one another, with their hands on their knees
and a faint mysterious smile on their faces.

How it came back to me!  That peculiar feeling--it was only a
feeling, you couldn't describe it as an activity--that we used to
call 'Church'.  The sweet corpsy smell, the rustle of Sunday
dresses, the wheeze of the organ and the roaring voices, the spot
of light from the hole in the window creeping slowly up the nave.
In some way the grown-ups could put it across that this extraordinary
performance was necessary.  You took it for granted, just as you
took the Bible, which you got in big doses in those days.  There
were texts on every wall and you knew whole chapters of the O.T. by
heart.  Even now my head's stuffed full of bits out of the Bible.
And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord.
And Asher abode in his breeches.  Followed them from Dan until thou
come unto Beersheba.  Smote him under the fifth rib, so that he
died.  You never understood it, you didn't try to or want to, it was
just a kind of medicine, a queer-tasting stuff that you had to
swallow and knew to be in some way necessary.  An extraordinary
rigmarole about people with names like Shimei and Nebuchadnezzar and
Ahithophel and Hashbadada; people with long stiff garments and
Assyrian beards, riding up and down on camels among temples and
cedar trees and doing extraordinary things.  Sacrificing burnt
offerings, walking about in fiery furnaces, getting nailed on
crosses, getting swallowed by whales.  And all mixed up with the
sweet graveyard smell and the serge dresses and the wheeze of the
organ.

That was the world I went back to when I saw the poster about King
Zog.  For a moment I didn't merely remember it, I was IN it.  Of
course such impressions don't last more than a few seconds.  A
moment later it was as though I'd opened my eyes again, and I was
forty-five and there was a traffic jam in the Strand.  But it had
left a kind of after-effect behind.  Sometimes when you come out of
a train of thought you feel as if you were coming up from deep
water, but this time it was the other way about, it was as though
it was back in 1900 that I'd been breathing real air.  Even now,
with my eyes open, so to speak, all those bloody fools hustling to
and fro, and the posters and the petrol-stink and the roar of the
engines, seemed to me less real than Sunday morning in Lower
Binfield thirty-eight years ago.

I chucked away my cigar and walked on slowly.  I could smell the
corpse-smell.  In a manner of speaking I can smell it now.  I'm
back in Lower Binfield, and the year's 1900.  Beside the horse-
trough in the market-place the carrier's horse is having its nose-
bag.  At the sweet-shop on the corner Mother Wheeler is weighing
out a ha'porth of brandy balls.  Lady Rampling's carriage is
driving by, with the tiger sitting behind in his pipeclayed
breeches with his arms folded.  Uncle Ezekiel is cursing Joe
Chamberlain.  The recruiting-sergeant in his scarlet jacket, tight
blue overalls, and pillbox hat, is strutting up and down twisting
his moustache.  The drunks are puking in the yard behind the
George.  Vicky's at Windsor, God's in heaven, Christ's on the
cross, Jonah's in the whale, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego are in
the fiery furnace, and Sihon king of the Amorites and Og the king
of Bashan are sitting on their thrones looking at one another--not
doing anything exactly, just existing, keeping their appointed
place, like a couple of fire-dogs, or the Lion and the Unicorn.

Is it gone for ever?  I'm not certain.  But I tell you it was a
good world to live in.  I belong to it.  So do you.




PART II



1


The world I momentarily remembered when I saw King Zog's name on
the poster was so different from the world I live in now that you
might have a bit of difficulty in believing I ever belonged to it.

I suppose by this time you've got a kind of picture of me in your
mind--a fat middle-aged bloke with false teeth and a red face--and
subconsciously you've been imagining that I was just the same even
when I was in my cradle.  But forty-five years is a long time, and
though some people don't change and develop, others do.  I've
changed a great deal, and I've had my ups and downs, mostly ups.
It may seem queer, but my father would probably be rather proud of
me if he could see me now.  He'd think it a wonderful thing that a
son of his should own a motor-car and live in a house with a
bathroom.  Even now I'm a little above my origin, and at other
times I've touched levels that we should never have dreamed of in
those old days before the war.

Before the war!  How long shall we go on saying that, I wonder?
How long before the answer will be 'Which war?'  In my case the
never-never land that people are thinking of when they say 'before
the war' might almost be before the Boer War.  I was born in '93,
and I can actually remember the outbreak of the Boer War, because
of the first-class row that Father and Uncle Ezekiel had about it.
I've several other memories that would date from about a year
earlier than that.

The very first thing I remember is the smell of sainfoin chaff.
You went up the stone passage that led from the kitchen to the
shop, and the smell of sainfoin got stronger all the way.  Mother
had fixed a wooden gate in the doorway to prevent Joe and myself
(Joe was my elder brother) from getting into the shop.  I can still
remember standing there clutching the bars, and the smell of
sainfoin mixed up with the damp plastery smell that belonged to the
passage.  It wasn't till years later that I somehow managed to
crash the gate and get into the shop when nobody was there.  A
mouse that had been having a go at one of the meal-bins suddenly
plopped out and ran between my feet.  It was quite white with meal.
This must have happened when I was about six.

When you're very young you seem to suddenly become conscious of
things that have been under your nose for a long time past.  The
things round about you swim into your mind one at a time, rather as
they do when you're waking from sleep.  For instance, it was only
when I was nearly four that I suddenly realized that we owned a
dog.  Nailer, his name was, an old white English terrier of the
breed that's gone out nowadays.  I met him under the kitchen table
and in some way seemed to grasp, having only learnt it that moment,
that he belonged to us and that his name was Nailer.  In the same
way, a bit earlier, I'd discovered that beyond the gate at the end
of the passage there was a place where the smell of sainfoin came
from.  And the shop itself, with the huge scales and the wooden
measures and the tin shovel, and the white lettering on the window,
and the bullfinch in its cage--which you couldn't see very well
even from the pavement, because the window was always dusty--all
these things dropped into place in my mind one by one, like bits of
a jig-saw puzzle.

Time goes on, you get stronger on your legs, and by degrees you
begin to get a grasp of geography.  I suppose Lower Binfield was
just like any other market town of about two thousand inhabitants.
It was in Oxfordshire--I keep saying WAS, you notice, though after
all the place still exists--about five miles from the Thames.  It
lay in a bit of a valley, with a low ripple of hills between itself
and the Thames, and higher hills behind.  On top of the hills there
were woods in sort of dim blue masses among which you could see a
great white house with a colonnade.  This was Binfield House ('The
Hall', everybody called it), and the top of the hill was known as
Upper Binfield, though there was no village there and hadn't been
for a hundred years or more.  I must have been nearly seven before
I noticed the existence of Binfield House.  When you're very small
you don't look into the distance.  But by that time I knew every
inch of the town, which was shaped roughly like a cross with the
market-place in the middle.  Our shop was in the High Street a
little before you got to the market-place, and on the corner there
was Mrs Wheeler's sweet-shop where you spent a halfpenny when you
had one.  Mother Wheeler was a dirty old witch and people suspected
her of sucking the bull's-eyes and putting them back in the bottle,
though this was never proved.  Farther down there was the barber's
shop with the advert for Abdulla cigarettes--the one with the
Egyptian soldiers on it, and curiously enough they're using the
same advert to this day--and the rich boozy smell of bay rum and
latakia.  Behind the houses you could see the chimneys of the
brewery.  In the middle of the market-place there was the stone
horse-trough, and on top of the water there was always a fine film
of dust and chaff.

Before the war, and especially before the Boer War, it was summer
all the year round.  I'm quite aware that that's a delusion.  I'm
merely trying to tell you how things come back to me.  If I shut my
eyes and think of Lower Binfield any time before I was, say, eight,
it's always in summer weather that I remember it.  Either it's the
market-place at dinner-time, with a sort of sleepy dusty hush over
everything and the carrier's horse with his nose dug well into his
nose-bag, munching away, or it's a hot afternoon in the great green
juicy meadows round the town, or it's about dusk in the lane behind
the allotments, and there's a smell of pipe-tobacco and night-
stocks floating through the hedge.  But in a sense I do remember
different seasons, because all my memories are bound up with things
to eat, which varied at different times of the year.  Especially
the things you used to find in the hedges.  In July there were
dewberries--but they're very rare--and the blackberries were
getting red enough to eat.  In September there were sloes and
hazel-nuts.  The best hazelnuts were always out of reach.  Later on
there were beech-nuts and crab-apples.  Then there were the kind of
minor foods that you used to eat when there was nothing better
going.  Haws--but they're not much good--and hips, which have a
nice sharp taste if you clean the hairs out of them.  Angelica is
good in early summer, especially when you're thirsty, and so are
the stems of various grasses.  Then there's sorrel, which is good
with bread and butter, and pig-nuts, and a kind of wood shamrock
which has a sour taste.  Even plantain seeds are better than
nothing when you're a long way from home and very hungry.

Joe was two years older than myself.  When we were very small
Mother used to pay Katie Simmons eighteen pence a week to take us
out for walks in the afternoons.  Katie's father worked in the
brewery and had fourteen children, so that the family were always
on the lookout for odd jobs.  She was only twelve when Joe was
seven and I was five, and her mental level wasn't very different
from ours.  She used to drag me by the arm and call me 'Baby', and
she had just enough authority over us to prevent us from being run
over by dogcarts or chased by bulls, but so far as conversation
went we were almost on equal terms.  We used to go for long,
trailing kind of walks--always, of course, picking and eating
things all the way--down the lane past the allotments, across
Roper's Meadows, and down to the Mill Farm, where there was a pool
with newts and tiny carp in it (Joe and I used to go fishing there
when we were a bit older), and back by the Upper Binfield Road so
as to pass the sweet-shop that stood on the edge of the town.  This
shop was in such a bad position that anyone who took it went
bankrupt, and to my own knowledge it was three times a sweet-shop,
once a grocer's, and once a bicycle-repair shop, but it had a
peculiar fascination for children.  Even when we had no money, we'd
go that way so as to glue our noses against the window.  Katie
wasn't in the least above sharing a farthing's worth of sweets and
quarrelling over her share.  You could buy things worth having for
a farthing in those days.  Most sweets were four ounces a penny,
and there was even some stuff called Paradise Mixture, mostly
broken sweets from other bottles, which was six.  Then there were
Farthing Everlastings, which were a yard long and couldn't be
finished inside half an hour.  Sugar mice and sugar pigs were eight
a penny, and so were liquorice pistols, popcorn was a halfpenny for
a large bag, and a prize packet which contained several different
kinds of sweets, a gold ring, and sometimes a whistle, was a penny.
You don't see prize packets nowadays.  A whole lot of the kinds of
sweets we had in those days have gone out.  There was a kind of
flat white sweet with mottoes printed on them, and also a kind of
sticky pink stuff in an oval matchwood box with a tiny tin spoon to
eat it with, which cost a halfpenny.  Both of those have disappeared.
So have Caraway Comfits, and so have chocolate pipes and sugar
matches, and even Hundreds and Thousands you hardly ever see.
Hundreds and Thousands were a great standby when you'd only a
farthing.  And what about Penny Monsters?  Does one ever see a Penny
Monster nowadays?  It was a huge bottle, holding more than a quart
of fizzy lemonade, all for a penny.  That's another thing that the
war killed stone dead.

It always seems to be summer when I look back.  I can feel the
grass round me as tall as myself, and the heat coming out of the
earth.  And the dust in the lane, and the warm greeny light coming
through the hazel boughs.  I can see the three of us trailing
along, eating stuff out of the hedge, with Katie dragging at my arm
and saying 'Come on, Baby!' and sometimes yelling ahead to Joe,
'Joe!  You come back 'ere this minute!  You'll catch it!'  Joe was
a hefty boy with a big, lumpy sort of head and tremendous calves,
the kind of boy who's always doing something dangerous.  At seven
he'd already got into short trousers, with the thick black
stockings drawn up over the knee and the great clumping boots that
boys had to wear in those days.  I was still in frocks--a kind of
holland overall that Mother used to make for me.  Katie used to
wear a dreadful ragged parody of a grown-up dress that descended
from sister to sister in her family.  She had a ridiculous great
hat with her pigtails hanging down behind it, and a long, draggled
skirt which trailed on the ground, and button boots with the heels
trodden down.  She was a tiny thing, not much taller than Joe, but
not bad at 'minding' children.  In a family like that a child is
'minding' other children about as soon as it's weaned.  At times
she'd try to be grown-up and ladylike, and she had a way of cutting
you short with a proverb, which to her mind was something
unanswerable.  If you said 'Don't care', she'd answer immediately:


'Don't care was made to care,
Don't care was hung,
Don't care was put in a pot
And boiled till he was done.'


Or if you called her names it would be 'Hard words break no bones',
or, when you'd been boasting, 'Pride comes before a fall'.  This
came very true one day when I was strutting along pretending to be
a soldier and fell into a cowpat.  Her family lived in a filthy
little rat-hole of a place in the slummy street behind the brewery.
The place swarmed with children like a kind of vermin.  The whole
family had managed to dodge going to school, which was fairly easy
to do in those days, and started running errands and doing other
odd jobs as soon as they could walk.  One of the elder brothers got
a month for stealing turnips.  She stopped taking us out for walks
a year later when Joe was eight and getting too tough for a girl to
handle.  He'd discovered that in Katie's home they slept five in a
bed, and used to tease the life out of her about it.

Poor Katie!  She had her first baby when she was fifteen.  No one
knew who was the father, and probably Katie wasn't too certain
herself.  Most people believe it was one of her brothers.  The
workhouse people took the baby, and Katie went into service in
Walton.  Some time afterwards she married a tinker, which even by
the standards of her family was a come-down.  The last time I saw
her was in 1913.  I was biking through Walton, and I passed some
dreadful wooden shacks beside the railway line, with fences round
them made out of barrel-staves, where the gypsies used to camp at
certain times of the year, when the police would let them.  A
wrinkled-up hag of a woman, with her hair coming down and a smoky
face, looking at least fifty years old, came out of one of the huts
and began shaking out a rag mat.  It was Katie, who must have been
twenty-seven.



2


Thursday was market day.  Chaps with round red faces like pumpkins
and dirty smocks and huge boots covered with dry cow-dung, carrying
long hazel switches, used to drive their brutes into the market-
place early in the morning.  For hours there'd be a terrific
hullabaloo: dogs barking, pigs squealing, chaps in tradesmen's vans
who wanted to get through the crush cracking their whips and
cursing, and everyone who had anything to do with the cattle
shouting and throwing sticks.  The big noise was always when they
brought a bull to market.  Even at that age it struck me that most
of the bulls were harmless law-abiding brutes that only wanted to
get to their stalls in peace, but a bull wouldn't have been
regarded as a bull if half the town hadn't had to turn out and
chase it.  Sometimes some terrified brute, generally a half-grown
heifer, used to break loose and charge down a side street, and then
anyone who happened to be in the way would stand in the middle of
the road and swing his arms backwards like the sails of a windmill,
shouting, 'Woo! Woo!'  This was supposed to have a kind of hypnotic
effect on an animal and certainly it did frighten them.

Half-way through the morning some of the farmers would come into
the shop and run samples of seed through their fingers.  Actually
Father did very little business with the farmers, because he had no
delivery van and couldn't afford to give long credits.  Mostly he
did a rather petty class of business, poultry food and fodder for
the tradesmen's horses and so forth.  Old Brewer, of the Mill Farm,
who was a stingy old bastard with a grey chin-beard, used to stand
there for half an hour, fingering samples of chicken corn and
letting them drop into his pocket in an absent-minded manner, after
which, of course, he finally used to make off without buying
anything.  In the evenings the pubs were full of drunken men.  In
those days beer cost twopence a pint, and unlike the beer nowadays
it had some guts in it.  All through the Boer War the recruiting
sergeant used to be in the four-ale bar of the George every
Thursday and Saturday night, dressed up to the nines and very free
with his money.  Sometimes next morning you'd see him leading off
some great sheepish, red-faced lump of a farm lad who'd taken the
shilling when he was too drunk to see and found in the morning that
it would cost him twenty pounds to get out of it.  People used to
stand in their doorways and shake their heads when they saw them go
past, almost as if it had been a funeral.  'Well now!  Listed for a
soldier!  Just think of it!  A fine young fellow like that!'  It
just shocked them.  Listing for a soldier, in their eyes, was the
exact equivalent of a girl's going on the streets.  Their attitude
to the war, and to the Army, was very curious.  They had the good
old English notions that the red-coats are the scum of the earth
and anyone who joins the Army will die of drink and go straight to
hell, but at the same time they were good patriots, stuck Union
Jacks in their windows, and held it as an article of faith that the
English had never been beaten in battle and never could be.  At
that time everyone, even the Nonconformists, used to sing
sentimental songs about the thin red line and the soldier boy who
died on the battlefield far away.  These soldier boys always used
to die 'when the shot and shell were flying', I remember.  It
puzzled me as a kid.  Shot I could understand, but it produced a
queer picture in my mind to think of cockle-shells flying through
the air.  When Mafeking was relieved the people nearly yelled the
roof off, and there were at any rate times when they believed the
tales about the Boers chucking babies into the air and skewering
them on their bayonets.  Old Brewer got so fed up with the kids
yelling 'Krooger!' after him that towards the end of the war he
shaved his beard off.  The people's attitude towards the Government
was really the same.  They were all true-blue Englishmen and swore
that Vicky was the best queen that ever lived and foreigners were
dirt, but at the same time nobody ever thought of paying a tax, not
even a dog-licence, if there was any way of dodging it.

Before and after the war Lower Binfield was a Liberal constituency.
During the war there was a by-election which the Conservatives won.
I was too young to grasp what it was all about, I only knew that I
was a Conservative because I liked the blue streamers better than
the red ones, and I chiefly remember it because of a drunken man
who fell on his nose on the pavement outside the George.  In the
general excitement nobody took any notice of him, and he lay there
for hours in the hot sun with his blood drying round him, and when
it dried it was purple.  By the time the 1906 election came along I
was old enough to understand it, more or less, and this time I was
a Liberal because everybody else was.  The people chased the
Conservative candidate half a mile and threw him into a pond full
of duckweed.  People took politics seriously in those days.  They
used to begin storing up rotten eggs weeks before an election.

Very early in life, when the Boer War broke out, I remember the big
row between Father and Uncle Ezekiel.  Uncle Ezekiel had a little
boot-shop in one of the streets off the High Street, and also did
some cobbling.  It was a small business and tended to get smaller,
which didn't matter greatly because Uncle Ezekiel wasn't married.
He was only a half-brother and much older than Father, twenty years
older at least, and for the fifteen years or so that I knew him he
always looked exactly the same.  He was a fine-looking old chap,
rather tall, with white hair and the whitest whiskers I ever saw--
white as thistledown.  He had a way of slapping his leather apron
and standing up very straight--a reaction from bending over the
last, I suppose--after which he'd bark his opinions straight in
your face, ending up with a sort of ghostly cackle.  He was a real
old nineteenth-century Liberal, the kind that not only used to ask
you what Gladstone said in '78 but could tell you the answer, and
one of the very few people in Lower Binfield who stuck to the same
opinions all through the war.  He was always denouncing Joe
Chamberlain and some gang of people that he referred to as 'the
Park Lane riff-raff'.  I can hear him now, having one of his
arguments with Father.  'Them and their far-flung Empire!  Can't
fling it too far for me.  He-he-he!'  And then Father's voice, a
quiet, worried, conscientious kind of voice, coming back at him
with the white man's burden and our dooty to the pore blacks whom
these here Boars treated something shameful.  For a week or so
after Uncle Ezekiel gave it out that he was a pro-Boer and a Little
Englander they were hardly on speaking terms.  They had another row
when the atrocity stories started.  Father was very worried by the
tales he'd heard, and he tackled Uncle Ezekiel about it.  Little
Englander or no, surely he couldn't think it right for these here
Boars to throw babies in the air and catch them on their bayonets,
even if they WERE only nigger babies?  But Uncle Ezekiel just
laughed in his face.  Father had got it all wrong!  It wasn't the
Boars who threw babies in the air, it was the British soldiers!
He kept grabbing hold of me--I must have been about five--to
illustrate.  'Throw them in the air and skewer them like frogs, I
tell you!  Same as I might throw this youngster here!'  And then
he'd swing me up and almost let go of me, and I had a vivid picture
of myself flying through the air and landing plonk on the end of a
bayonet.

Father was quite different from Uncle Ezekiel.  I don't know much
about my grandparents, they were dead before I was born, I only
know that my grandfather had been a cobbler and late in life he
married the widow of a seedsman, which was how we came to have the
shop.  It was a job that didn't really suit Father, though he knew
the business inside out and was everlastingly working.  Except on
Sunday and very occasionally on week-day evenings I never remember
him without meal on the backs of his hands and in the lines of his
face and in what was left of his hair.  He'd married when he was in
his thirties and must have been nearly forty when I first remember
him.  He was a small man, a sort of grey, quiet little man, always
in shirtsleeves and white apron and always dusty-looking because of
the meal.  He had a round head, a blunt nose, a rather bushy
moustache, spectacles, and butter-coloured hair, the same colour
as mine, but he'd lost most of it and it was always mealy.  My
grandfather had bettered himself a good deal by marrying the
seedsman's widow, and Father had been educated at Walton Grammar
School, where the farmers and the better-off tradesmen sent their
sons, whereas Uncle Ezekiel liked to boast that he'd never been to
school in his life and had taught himself to read by a tallow
candle after working hours.  But he was a much quicker-witted man
than Father, he could argue with anybody, and he used to quote
Carlyle and Spencer by the yard.  Father had a slow sort of mind,
he'd never taken to 'book-learning', as he called it, and his
English wasn't good.  On Sunday afternoons, the only time when he
really took things easy, he'd settle down by the parlour fireplace
to have what he called a 'good read' at the Sunday paper.  His
favourite paper was The People--Mother preferred the News of the
World, which she considered had more murders in it.  I can see them
now.  A Sunday afternoon--summer, of course, always summer--a smell
of roast pork and greens still floating in the air, and Mother on
one side of the fireplace, starting off to read the latest murder
but gradually falling asleep with her mouth open, and Father on the
other, in slippers and spectacles, working his way slowly through
the yards of smudgy print.  And the soft feeling of summer all
round you, the geranium in the window, a starling cooing somewhere,
and myself under the table with the B.O.P., making believe that the
tablecloth is a tent.  Afterwards, at tea, as he chewed his way
through the radishes and spring onions, Father would talk in a
ruminative kind of way about the stuff he'd been reading, the fires
and shipwrecks and scandals in high society, and these here new
flying machines and the chap (I notice that to this day he turns up
in the Sunday papers about once in three years) who was swallowed
by a whale in the Red Sea and taken out three days later, alive but
bleached white by the whale's gastric juice.  Father was always a
bit sceptical of this story, and of the new flying machines,
otherwise he believed everything he read.  Until 1909 no one in
Lower Binfield believed that human beings would ever learn to fly.
The official doctrine was that if God had meant us to fly He'd have
given us wings.  Uncle Ezekiel couldn't help retorting that if God
had meant us to ride He'd have given us wheels, but even he didn't
believe in the new flying machines.

It was only on Sunday afternoons, and perhaps on the one evening a
week when he looked in at the George for a half-pint, that Father
turned his mind to such things.  At other times he was always more
or less overwhelmed by business.  There wasn't really such a lot to
do, but he seemed to be always busy, either in the loft behind the
yard, struggling about with sacks and bales, or in the kind of
dusty little cubby-hole behind the counter in the shop, adding
figures up in a notebook with a stump of pencil.  He was a very
honest man and a very obliging man, very anxious to provide good
stuff and swindle nobody, which even in those days wasn't the best
way to get on in business.  He would have been just the man for
some small official job, a postmaster, for instance, or station-
master of a country station.  But he hadn't either the cheek and
enterprise to borrow money and expand the business, or the
imagination to think of new selling-lines.  It was characteristic
of him that the only streak of imagination he ever showed, the
invention of a new seed mixture for cage-birds (Bowling's Mixture
it was called, and it was famous over a radius of nearly five
miles) was really due to Uncle Ezekiel.  Uncle Ezekiel was a bit of
a bird-fancier and had quantities of goldfinches in his dark little
shop.  It was his theory that cage-birds lose their colour because
of lack of variation in their diet.  In the yard behind the shop
Father had a tiny plot of ground in which he used to grow about
twenty kinds of weed under wire-netting, and he used to dry them
and mix their seeds with ordinary canary seed.  Jackie, the
bullfinch who hung in the shop-window, was supposed to be an
advertisement for Bowling's Mixture.  Certainly, unlike most
bullfinches in cages, Jackie never turned black.

Mother was fat ever since I remember her.  No doubt it's from her
that I inherit my pituitary deficiency, or whatever it is that
makes you get fat.

She was a largish woman, a bit taller than Father, with hair a good
deal fairer than his and a tendency to wear black dresses.  But
except on Sundays I never remember her without an apron.  It would
be an exaggeration, but not a very big one, to say that I never
remember her when she wasn't cooking.  When you look back over a
long period you seem to see human beings always fixed in some
special place and some characteristic attitude.  It seems to you
that they were always doing exactly the same thing.  Well, just as
when I think of Father I remember him always behind the counter,
with his hair all mealy, adding up figures with a stump of pencil
which he moistens between his lips, and just as I remember Uncle
Ezekiel, with his ghostly white whiskers, straightening himself out
and slapping his leather apron, so when I think of Mother I
remember her at the kitchen table, with her forearms covered with
flour, rolling out a lump of dough.

You know the kind of kitchen people had in those days.  A huge
place, rather dark and low, with a great beam across the ceiling
and a stone floor and cellars underneath.  Everything enormous, or
so it seemed to me when I was a kid.  A vast stone sink which
didn't have a tap but an iron pump, a dresser covering one wall and
going right up to the ceiling, a gigantic range which burned half a
ton a month and took God knows how long to blacklead.  Mother at
the table rolling out a huge flap of dough.  And myself crawling
round, messing about with bundles of firewood and lumps of coal and
tin beetle-traps (we had them in all the dark corners and they used
to be baited with beer) and now and again coming up to the table to
try and cadge a bit of food.  Mother 'didn't hold with' eating
between meals.  You generally got the same answer:  'Get along with
you, now!  I'm not going to have you spoiling your dinner.  Your
eye's bigger than your belly.'  Very occasionally, however, she'd
cut you off a thin strip of candied peel.

I used to like to watch Mother rolling pastry.  There's always a
fascination in watching anybody do a job which he really
understands.  Watch a woman--a woman who really knows how to cook,
I mean--rolling dough.  She's got a peculiar, solemn, indrawn air,
a satisfied kind of air, like a priestess celebrating a sacred
rite.  And in her own mind, of course, that's exactly what she is.
Mother had thick, pink, strong forearms which were generally
mottled with flour.  When she was cooking, all her movements were
wonderfully precise and firm.  In her hands egg-whisks and mincers
and rolling-pins did exactly what they were meant to do.  When you
saw her cooking you knew that she was in a world where she
belonged, among things she really understood.  Except through the
Sunday papers and an occasional bit of gossip the outside world
didn't really exist for her.  Although she read more easily than
Father, and unlike him used to read novelettes as well as
newspapers, she was unbelievably ignorant.  I realized this even by
the time I was ten years old.  She certainly couldn't have told you
whether Ireland was east or west of England, and I doubt whether
any time up to the outbreak of the Great War she could have told
you who was Prime Minister.  Moreover she hadn't the smallest wish
to know such things.  Later on when I read books about Eastern
countries where they practise polygamy, and the secret harems where
the women are locked up with black eunuchs mounting guard over
them, I used to think how shocked Mother would have been if she'd
heard of it.  I can almost hear her voice--'Well, now!  Shutting
their wives up like that!  The IDEA!'  Not that she'd have known
what a eunuch was.  But in reality she lived her life in a space
that must have been as small and almost as private as the average
zenana.  Even in our own house there were parts where she never set
foot.  She never went into the loft behind the yard and very seldom
into the shop.  I don't think I ever remember her serving a
customer.  She wouldn't have known where any of the things were
kept, and until they were milled into flour she probably didn't
know the difference between wheat and oats.  Why should she?  The
shop was Father's business, it was 'the man's work', and even about
the money side of it she hadn't very much curiosity.  Her job, 'the
woman's work', was to look after the house and the meals and the
laundry and the children.  She'd have had a fit if she'd seen
Father or anyone else of the male sex trying to sew on a button for
himself.

So far as the meals and so forth went, ours was one of those houses
where everything goes like clockwork.  Or no, not like clockwork,
which suggests something mechanical.  It was more like some kind of
natural process.  You knew that breakfast would be on the table
tomorrow morning in much the same way as you knew the sun would
rise.  All through her life Mother went to bed at nine and got up
at five, and she'd have thought it vaguely wicked--sort of decadent
and foreign and aristocratic--to keep later hours.  Although she
didn't mind paying Katie Simmons to take Joe and me out for walks,
she would never tolerate the idea of having a woman in to help with
the housework.  It was her firm belief that a hired woman always
sweeps the dirt under the dresser.  Our meals were always ready on
the tick.  Enormous meals--boiled beef and dumplings, roast beef
and Yorkshire, boiled mutton and capers, pig's head, apple pie,
spotted dog, and jam roly-poly--with grace before and after.  The
old ideas about bringing up children still held good, though they
were going out fast.  In theory children were still thrashed and
put to bed on bread and water, and certainly you were liable to be
sent away from table if you made too much noise eating, or choked,
or refused something that was 'good for you', or 'answered back'.
In practice there wasn't much discipline in our family, and of the
two Mother was the firmer.  Father, though he was always quoting
'Spare the rod and spoil the child', was really much too weak with
us, especially with Joe, who was a hard case from the start.  He
was always 'going to' give Joe a good hiding, and he used to tell
us stories, which I now believe were lies, about the frightful
thrashings his own father used to give him with a leather strap,
but nothing ever came of it.  By the time Joe was twelve he was too
strong for Mother to get him across her knee, and after that there
was no doing anything with him.

At that time it was still thought proper for parents to say 'don't'
to their children all day long.  You'd often hear a man boasting
that he'd 'thrash the life out of' his son if he caught him
smoking, or stealing apples, or robbing a bird's nest.  In some
families these thrashings actually took place.  Old Lovegrove, the
saddler, caught his two sons, great lumps aged sixteen and fifteen,
smoking in the garden shed and walloped them so that you could hear
it all over the town.  Lovegrove was a very heavy smoker.  The
thrashings never seemed to have any effect, all boys stole apples,
robbed birds' nests, and learned to smoke sooner or later, but the
idea was still knocking around that children should be treated
rough.  Practically everything worth doing was forbidden, in theory
anyway.  According to Mother, everything that a boy ever wants to
do was 'dangerous'.  Swimming was dangerous, climbing trees was
dangerous, and so were sliding, snowballing, hanging on behind
carts, using catapults and squailers, and even fishing.  All
animals were dangerous, except Nailer, the two cats, and Jackie the
bullfinch.  Every animal had its special recognized methods of
attacking you.  Horses bit, bats got into your hair, earwigs got
into your ears, swans broke your leg with a blow of their wings,
bulls tossed you, and snakes 'stung'.  All snakes stung, according
to Mother, and when I quoted the penny encyclopedia to the effect
that they didn't sting but bit, she only told me not to answer
back.  Lizards, slow-worms, toads, frogs, and newts also stung.
All insects stung, except flies and blackbeetles.  Practically all
kinds of food, except the food you had at meals, were either
poisonous or 'bad for you'.  Raw potatoes were deadly poison, and
so were mushrooms unless you bought them at the greengrocer's.  Raw
gooseberries gave you colic and raw raspberries gave you a skin-
rash.  If you had a bath after a meal you died of cramp, if you cut
yourself between the thumb and forefinger you got lockjaw, and if
you washed your hands in the water eggs were boiled in you got
warts.  Nearly everything in the shop was poisonous, which was why
Mother had put the gate in the doorway.  Cowcake was poisonous, and
so was chicken corn, and so were mustard seed and Karswood poultry
spice.  Sweets were bad for you and eating between meals was bad
for you, though curiously enough there were certain kinds of eating
between meals that Mother always allowed.  When she was making plum
jam she used to let us eat the syrupy stuff that was skimmed off
the top, and we used to gorge ourselves with it till we were sick.
Although nearly everything in the world was either dangerous or
poisonous, there were certain things that had mysterious virtues.
Raw onions were a cure for almost everything.  A stocking tied
round your neck was a cure for a sore throat.  Sulphur in a dog's
drinking water acted as a tonic, and old Nailer's bowl behind the
back door always had a lump of sulphur in it which stayed there
year after year, never dissolving.

We used to have tea at six.  By four Mother had generally finished
the housework, and between four and six she used to have a quiet
cup of tea and 'read her paper', as she called it.  As a matter of
fact she didn't often read the newspaper except on Sundays.  The
week-day papers only had the day's news, and it was only
occasionally that there was a murder.  But the editors of the
Sunday papers had grasped that people don't really mind whether
their murders are up to date and when there was no new murder on
hand they'd hash up an old one, sometimes going as far back as Dr
Palmer and Mrs Manning.  I think Mother thought of the world
outside Lower Binfleld chiefly as a place where murders were
committed.  Murders had a terrible fascination for her, because, as
she often said, she just didn't know how people could BE so wicked.
Cutting their wives' throats, burying their fathers under cement
floors, throwing babies down wells!  How anyone could DO such
things!  The Jack the Ripper scare had happened about the time when
Father and Mother were married, and the big wooden shutters we used
to draw over the shop windows every night dated from then.
Shutters for shop windows were going out, most of the shops in the
High Street didn't have them, but Mother felt safe behind them.
All along, she said, she'd had a dreadful feeling that Jack the
Ripper was hiding in Lower Binfield.  The Crippen case--but that
was years later, when I was almost grown up--upset her badly.  I
can hear her voice now.  'Gutting his poor wife up and burying her
in the coal cellar!  The IDEA!  What I'd do to that man if I got
hold of him!'  And curiously enough, when she thought of the
dreadful wickedness of that little American doctor who dismembered
his wife (and made a very neat job of it by taking all the bones
out and chucking the head into the sea, if I remember rightly) the
tears actually came into her eyes.

But what she mostly read on week-days was Hilda's Home Companion.
In those days it was part of the regular furnishing of any home
like ours, and as a matter of fact it still exists, though it's
been a bit crowded out by the more streamlined women's papers that
have come up since the war.  I had a look at a copy only the other
day.  It's changed, but less than most things.  There are still the
same enormous serial stories that go on for six months (and it all
comes right in the end with orange blossoms to follow), and the
same Household Hints, and the same ads for sewing-machines and
remedies for bad legs.  It's chiefly the print and the illustrations
that have changed.  In those days the heroine had to look like an
egg-timer and now she has to look like a cylinder.  Mother was a slow
reader and believed in getting her threepennyworth out of Hilda's
Home Companion.  Sitting in the old yellow armchair beside the
hearth, with her feet on the iron fender and the little pot of
strong tea stewing on the hob, she'd work her way steadily from
cover to cover, right through the serial, the two short stories,
the Household Hints, the ads for Zam-Buk, and the answers to
correspondents.  Hilda's Home Companion generally lasted her the
week out, and some weeks she didn't even finish it.  Sometimes the
heat of the fire, or the buzzing of the bluebottles on summer
afternoons, would send her off into a doze, and at about a quarter
to six she'd wake up with a tremendous start, glance at the clock on
the mantelpiece, and then get into a stew because tea was going to
be late.  But tea was never late.

In those days--till 1909, to be exact--Father could still afford an
errand boy, and he used to leave the shop to him and come in to tea
with the backs of his hands all mealy.  Then Mother would stop
cutting slices of bread for a moment and say, 'If you'll give us
grace, Father', and Father, while we all bent our heads on our
chests, would mumble reverently, 'Fwat we bout to receive--Lord
make us truly thankful--Amen.'  Later on, when Joe was a bit older,
it would be 'YOU give us grace today, Joe', and Joe would pipe it
out.  Mother never said grace: it had to be someone of the male
sex.

There were always bluebottles buzzing on summer afternoons.  Ours
wasn't a sanitary house, precious few houses in Lower Binfield
were.  I suppose the town must have contained five hundred houses
and there certainly can't have been more than ten with bathrooms or
fifty with what we should now describe as a W.C.  In summer our
backyard always smelt of dustbins.  And all houses had insects in
them.  We had blackbeetles in the wainscoting and crickets
somewhere behind the kitchen range, besides, of course, the meal-
worms in the shop.  In those days even a house-proud woman like
Mother didn't see anything to object to in blackbeetles.  They were
as much a part of the kitchen as the dresser or the rolling-pin.
But there were insects and insects.  The houses in the bad street
behind the brewery, where Katie Simmons lived, were overrun by
bugs.  Mother or any of the shopkeepers' wives would have died of
shame if they'd had bugs in the house.  In fact it was considered
proper to say that you didn't even know a bug by sight.

The great blue flies used to come sailing into the larder and sit
longingly on the wire covers over the meat.  'Drat the flies!'
people used to say, but the flies were an act of God and apart from
meat-covers and fly-papers you couldn't do much about them.  I said
a little while back that the first thing I remember is the smell of
sainfoin, but the smell of dustbins is also a pretty early memory.
When I think of Mother's kitchen, with the stone floor and the
beetle-traps and the steel fender and the blackleaded range, I
always seem to hear the bluebottles buzzing and smell the dustbin,
and also old Nailer, who carried a pretty powerful smell of dog.
And God knows there are worse smells and sounds.  Which would you
sooner listen to, a bluebottle or a bombing plane?



3


Joe started going to Walton Grammar School two years before I did.
Neither us went there till we were nine.  It meant a four-mile bike
ride morning and evening, and Mother was scared of allowing us
among the traffic, which by that time included a very few motor-
cars.

For several years we went to the dame-school kept by old Mrs
Howlett.  Most of the shopkeepers' children went there, to save
them from the shame and come-down of going to the board school,
though everyone knew that Mother Howlett was an old imposter and
worse than useless as a teacher.  She was over seventy, she was
very deaf, she could hardly see through her spectacles, and all she
owned in the way of equipment was a cane, a blackboard, a few dog-
eared grammar books, and a couple of dozen smelly slates.  She
could just manage the girls, but the boys simply laughed at her and
played truant as often as they felt like it.  Once there was a
frightful scandal cause a boy put his hand up a girl's dress, a
thing I didn't understand at the time.  Mother Howlett succeeded in
hushing it up.  When you did something particularly bad her formula
was 'I'll tell your father', and on very rare occasions she did so.
But we were quite sharp enough to see that she daren't do it too
often, and even when she let out at you with the cane she was so
old and clumsy that it was easy to dodge.

Joe was only eight when he got in with a tough gang of boys who
called themselves the Black Hand.  The leader was Sid Lovegrove,
the saddler's younger son, who was about thirteen, and there were
two other shopkeepers' sons, an errand boy from the brewery, and
two farm lads who sometimes managed to cut work and go off with
the gang for a couple of hours.  The farm lads were great lumps
bursting out of corduroy breeches, with very broad accents and
rather looked down on by the rest of the gang, but they were
tolerated because they knew twice as much about animals as any of
the others.  One of them, nicknamed Ginger, would even catch a
rabbit in his hands occasionally.  If he saw one lying in the grass
he used to fling himself on it like a spread-eagle.  There was a
big social distinction between the shopkeepers' sons and the sons
of labourers and farm-hands, but the local boys didn't usually pay
much attention to it till they were about sixteen.  The gang had a
secret password and an 'ordeal' which included cutting your finger
and eating an earthworm, and they gave themselves out to be
frightful desperadoes.  Certainly they managed to make a nuisance
of themselves, broke windows chased cows, tore the knockers off
doors, and stole fruit by the hundredweight.  Sometimes in winter
they managed to borrow a couple of ferrets and go ratting, when the
farmers would let them.  They all had catapults and squailers, and
they were always saving up to buy a saloon pistol, which in those
days cost five shillings, but the savings never amounted to more
than about threepence.  In summer they used to go fishing and bird-
nesting.  When Joe was at Mrs Howlett's he used to cut school at
least once a week, and even at the Grammar School he managed it
about once a fortnight.  There was a boy at the Grammar School, an
auctioneer's son, who could copy any handwriting and for a penny
he'd forge a letter from your mother saying you'd been ill
yesterday.  Of course I was wild to join the Black Hand, but Joe
always choked me off and said they didn't want any blasted kids
hanging round.

It was the thought of going fishing that really appealed to me.  At
eight years old I hadn't yet been fishing, except with a penny net,
with which you can sometimes catch a stickleback.  Mother was
always terrified of letting us go anywhere near water.  She
'forbade' fishing, in the way in which parents in those days
'forbade' almost everything, and I hadn't yet grasped that grownups
can't see round corners.  But the thought of fishing sent me wild
with excitement.  Many a time I'd been past the pool at the Mill
Farm and watched the small carp basking on the surface, and
sometimes under the willow tree at the corner a great diamond-
shaped carp that to my eyes looked enormous--six inches long, I
suppose--would suddenly rise to the surface, gulp down a grub, and
sink again.  I'd spent hours gluing my nose against the window of
Wallace's in the High Street, where fishing tackle and guns and
bicycles were sold.  I used to lie awake on summer mornings
thinking of the tales Joe had told me about fishing, how you mixed
bread paste, how your float gives a bob and plunges under and you
feel the rod bending and the fish tugging at the line.  Is it any
use talking about it, I wonder--the sort of fairy light that fish
and fishing tackle have in a kid's eyes?  Some kids feel the same
about guns and shooting, some feel it about motor-bikes or
aeroplanes or horses.  It's not a thing that you can explain or
rationalize, it's merely magic.  One morning--it was in June and I
must have been eight--I knew that Joe was going to cut school and
go out fishing, and I made up my mind to follow.  In some way Joe
guessed what I was thinking about, and he started on me while we
were dressing.

'Now then, young George!  Don't you get thinking you're coming with
the gang today.  You stay back home.'

'No, I didn't.  I didn't think nothing about it.'

'Yes, you did!  You thought you were coming with the gang.'

'No, I didn't!'

'Yes, you did!'

'No, I didn't!'

'Yes, you did!  You stay back home.  We don't want any bloody kids
along.'

Joe had just learned the word 'bloody' and was always using it.
Father overheard him once and swore that he'd thrash the life out
of Joe, but as usual he didn't do so.  After breakfast Joe started
off on his bike, with his satchel and his Grammar School cap, five
minutes early as he always did when he meant to cut school, and
when it was time for me to leave for Mother Howlett's I sneaked off
and hid in the lane behind the allotments.  I knew the gang were
going to the pond at the Mill Farm, and I was going to follow them
if they murdered me for it.  Probably they'd give me a hiding, and
probably I wouldn't get home to dinner, and then Mother would know
that I'd cut school and I'd get another hiding, but I didn't care.
I was just desperate to go fishing with the gang.  I was cunning,
too.  I allowed Joe plenty of time to make a circuit round and get
to the Mill Farm by road, and then I followed down the lane and
skirted round the meadows on the far side of the hedge, so as to
get almost to the pond before the gang saw me.  It was a wonderful
June morning.  The buttercups were up to my knees.  There was a
breath of wind just stirring the tops of the elms, and the great
green clouds of leaves were sort of soft and rich like silk.  And
it was nine in the morning and I was eight years old, and all round
me it was early summer, with great tangled hedges where the wild
roses were still in bloom, and bits of soft white cloud drifting
overhead, and in the distance the low hills and the dim blue masses
of the woods round Upper Binfield.  And I didn't give a damn for
any of it.  All I was thinking of was the green pool and the carp
and the gang with their hooks and lines and bread paste.  It was as
though they were in paradise and I'd got to join them.  Presently I
managed to sneak up on them--four of them, Joe and Sid Lovegrove
and the errand boy and another shopkeeper's son, Harry Barnes I
think his name was.

Joe turned and saw me.  'Christ!' he said.  'It's the kid.'  He
walked up to me like a tom-cat that's going to start a fight.  'Now
then, you!  What'd I tell you?  You get back 'ome double quick.'

Both Joe and I were inclined to drop our aitches if we were at all
excited.  I backed away from him.

'I'm not going back 'ome.'

'Yes you are.'

'Clip his ear, Joe,' said Sid.  'We don't want no kids along.'

'ARE you going back 'ome?' said Joe.

'No.'

'Righto, my boy!  Right-HO!'

Then he started on me.  The next minute he was chasing me round,
catching me one clip after another.  But I didn't run away from the
pool, I ran in circles.  Presently he'd caught me and got me down,
and then he knelt on my upper arms and began screwing my ears,
which was his favourite torture and one I couldn't stand.  I was
blubbing by this time, but still I wouldn't give in and promise to
go home.  I wanted to stay and go fishing with the gang.  And
suddenly the others swung round in my favour and told Joe to get up
off my chest and let me stay if I wanted to.  So I stayed after
all.

The others had some hooks and lines and floats and a lump of bread
paste in a rag, and we all cut ourselves willow switches from the
tree at the corner of the pool.  The farmhouse was only about two
hundred yards away, and you had to keep out of sight because old
Brewer was very down on fishing.  Not that it made any difference
to him, he only used the pool for watering his cattle, but he hated
boys.  The others were still jealous of me and kept telling me to
get out of the light and reminding me that I was only a kid and
knew nothing about fishing.  They said that I was making such a
noise I'd scare all the fish away, though actually I was making
about half as much noise as anyone else there.  Finally they
wouldn't let me sit beside them and sent me to another part of the
pool where the water was shallower and there wasn't so much shade.
They said a kid like me was sure to keep splashing the water and
frighten the fish away.  It was a rotten part of the pool, a part
where no fish would ordinarily come.  I knew that.  I seemed to
know by a kind of instinct the places where a fish would lie.
Still, I was fishing at last.  I was sitting on the grass bank with
the rod in my hands, with the flies buzzing round, and the smell of
wild peppermint fit to knock you down, watching the red float on
the green water, and I was happy as a tinker although the tear-
marks mixed up with dirt were still all over my face.

Lord knows how long we sat there.  The morning stretched out and
out, and the sun got higher and higher, and nobody had a bite.  It
was a hot still day, too clear for fishing.  The floats lay on the
water with never a quiver.  You could see deep down into the water
as though you were looking into a kind of dark green glass.  Out in
the middle of the pool you could see the fish lying just under the
surface, sunning themselves, and sometimes in the weeds near the
side a newt would come gliding upwards and rest there with his
fingers on the weeds and his nose just out of the water.  But the
fish weren't biting.  The others kept shouting that they'd got a
nibble, but it was always a lie.  And the time stretched out and
out and it got hotter and hotter, and the flies ate you alive, and
the wild peppermint under the bank smelt like Mother Wheeler's
sweet-shop.  I was getting hungrier and hungrier, all the more
because I didn't know for certain where my dinner was coming from.
But I sat as still as a mouse and never took my eyes off the float.
The others had given me a lump of bait about the size of a marble,
telling me that would have to do for me, but for a long time I
didn't even dare to re-bait my hook, because every time I pulled my
line up they swore I was making enough noise to frighten every fish
within five miles.

I suppose we must have been there about two hours when suddenly my
float gave a quiver.  I knew it was a fish.  It must have been a
fish that was just passing accidentally and saw my bait.  There's
no mistaking the movement your float gives when it's a real bite.
It's quite different from the way it moves when you twitch your
line accidentally.  The next moment it gave a sharp bob and almost
went under.  I couldn't hold myself in any longer.  I yelled to the
others:

'I've got a bite!'

'Rats!' yelled Sid Lovegrove instantly.

But the next moment there wasn't any doubt about it.  The float
dived straight down, I could still see it under the water, kind of
dim red, and I felt the rod tighten in my hand.  Christ, that
feeling!  The line jerking and straining and a fish on the other
end of it!  The others saw my rod bending, and the next moment
they'd all flung their rods down and rushed round to me.  I gave a
terrific haul and the fish--a great huge silvery fish--came flying
up through the air.  The same moment all of us gave a yell of
agony.  The fish had slipped off the hook and fallen into the wild
peppermint under the bank.  But he'd fallen into shallow water
where he couldn't turn over, and for perhaps a second he lay there
on his side helpless.  Joe flung himself into the water, splashing
us all over, and grabbed him in both hands.  'I got 'im!' he
yelled.  The next moment he'd flung the fish on to the grass and we
were all kneeling round it.  How we gloated!  The poor dying brute
flapped up and down and his scales glistened all the colours of the
rainbow.  It was a huge carp, seven inches long at least, and must
have weighed a quarter of a pound.  How we shouted to see him!  But
the next moment it was as though a shadow had fallen across us.  We
looked up, and there was old Brewer standing over us, with his tall
billycock hat--one of those hats they used to wear that were a
cross between a top hat and a bowler--and his cowhide gaiters and a
thick hazel stick in his hand.

We suddenly cowered like partridges when there's a hawk overhead.
He looked from one to other of us.  He had a wicked old mouth with
no teeth in it, and since he'd shaved his beard off his chin looked
like a nutcracker.

'What are you boys doing here?' he said.

There wasn't much doubt about what we were doing.  Nobody answered.

'I'll learn 'ee come fishing in my pool!' he suddenly roared, and
the next moment he was on us, whacking out in all directions.

The Black Hand broke and fled.  We left all the rods behind and
also the fish.  Old Brewer chased us half across the meadow.  His
legs were stiff and he couldn't move fast, but he got in some good
swipes before we were out of his reach.  We left him in the middle
of the field, yelling after us that he knew all our names and was
going to tell our fathers.  I'd been at the back and most of the
wallops had landed on me.  I had some nasty red weals on the calves
of my legs when we got to the other side of the hedge.

I spent the rest of the day with the gang.  They hadn't made up
their mind whether I was really a member yet, but for the time
being they tolerated me.  The errand boy, who'd had the morning off
on some lying pretext or other, had to go back to the brewery.  The
rest of us went for a long, meandering, scrounging kind of walk,
the sort of walk that boys go for when they're away from home all
day, and especially when they're away without permission.  It was
the first real boy's walk I'd had, quite different from the walks
we used to go with Katie Simmons.  We had our dinner in a dry ditch
on the edge of the town, full of rusty cans and wild fennel.  The
others gave me bits of their dinner, and Sid Lovegrove had a penny,
so someone fetched a Penny Monster which we had between us.  It was
very hot, and the fennel smelt very strong, and the gas of the
Penny Monster made us belch.  Afterwards we wandered up the dusty
white road to Upper Binfield, the first time I'd been that way, I
believe, and into the beech woods with the carpets of dead leaves
and the great smooth trunks that soar up into the sky so that the
birds in the upper branches look like dots.  You could go wherever
you liked in the woods in those days.  Binfield House, was shut up,
they didn't preserve the pheasants any longer, and at the worst
you'd only meet a carter with a load of wood.  There was a tree
that had been sawn down, and the rings of the trunk looked like a
target, and we had shots at it with stones.  Then the others had
shots at birds with their catapults, and Sid Lovegrove swore he'd
hit a chaffinch and it had stuck in a fork in the tree.  Joe said
he was lying, and they argued and almost fought.  Then we went down
into a chalk hollow full of beds of dead leaves and shouted to hear
the echo.  Someone shouted a dirty word, and then we said over all
the dirty words we knew, and the others jeered at me because I only
knew three.  Sid Lovegrove said he knew how babies were born and it
was just the same as rabbits except that the baby came out of the
woman's navel.  Harry Barnes started to carve the word ---- on a
beech tree, but got fed up with it after the first two letters.
Then we went round by the lodge of Binfield House.  There was a
rumour that somewhere in the grounds there was a pond with enormous
fish in it, but no one ever dared go inside because old Hodges, the
lodge-keeper who acted as a kind of caretaker, was 'down' on boys.
He was digging in his vegetable garden by the lodge when we passed.
We cheeked him over the fence until he chased us off, and then we
went down to the Walton Road and cheeked the carters, keeping on
the other side of the hedge so that they couldn't reach us with
their whips.  Beside the Walton Road there was a place that had
been a quarry and then a rubbish dump, and finally had got
overgrown with blackberry bushes.  There were great mounds of rusty
old tin cans and bicycle frames and saucepans with holes in them
and broken bottles with weeds growing all over them, and we spent
nearly an hour and got ourselves filthy from head to foot routing
out iron fence posts, because Harry Barnes swore that the
blacksmith in Lower Binfield would pay sixpence a hundredweight for
old iron.  Then Joe found a late thrush's nest with half-fledged
chicks in it in a blackberry bush.  After a lot of argument about
what to do with them we took the chicks out, had shots at them with
stones, and finally stamped on them.  There were four of them, and
we each had one to stamp on.  It was getting on towards tea-time
now.  We knew that old Brewer would be as good as his word and
there was a hiding ahead of us, but we were getting too hungry to
stay out much longer.  Finally we trailed home, with one more row
on the way, because when we were passing the allotments we saw a
rat and chased it with sticks, and old Bennet the station-master,
who worked at his allotment every night and was very proud of it,
came after us in a tearing rage because we'd trampled on his onion-
bed.

I'd walked ten miles and I wasn't tired.  All day I'd trailed after
the gang and tried to do everything they did, and they'd called me
'the kid' and snubbed me as much as they could, but I'd more or
less kept my end up.  I had a wonderful feeling inside me, a
feeling you can't know about unless you've had it--but if you're a
man you'll have had it some time.  I knew that I wasn't a kid any
longer, I was a boy at last.  And it's a wonderful thing to be a
boy, to go roaming where grown-ups can't catch you, and to chase
rats and kill birds and shy stones and cheek carters and shout
dirty words.  It's a kind of strong, rank feeling, a feeling of
knowing everything and fearing nothing, and it's all bound up with
breaking rules and killing things.  The white dusty roads, the hot
sweaty feeling of one's clothes, the smell of fennel and wild
peppermint, the dirty words, the sour stink of the rubbish dump,
the taste of fizzy lemonade and the gas that made one belch, the
stamping on the young birds, the feel of the fish straining on the
line--it was all part of it.  Thank God I'm a man, because no woman
ever has that feeling.

Sure enough, old Brewer had sent round and told everybody.  Father
looked very glum, fetched a strap out of the shop, and said he was
going to 'thrash the life out of' Joe.  But Joe struggled and
yelled and kicked, and in the end Father didn't get in more than a
couple of whacks at him.  However, he got a caning from the
headmaster of the Grammar School next day.  I tried to struggle
too, but I was small enough for Mother to get me across her knee,
and she gave me what-for with the strap.  So I'd had three hidings
that day, one from Joe, one from old Brewer, and one from Mother.
Next day the gang decided that I wasn't really a member yet and
that I'd got to go through the 'ordeal' (a word they'd got out of
the Red Indian stories) after all.  They were very strict in
insisting that you had to bite the worm before you swallowed it.
Moreover, because I was the youngest and they were jealous of me
for being the only one to catch anything, they all made out
afterwards that the fish I'd caught wasn't really a big one.  In a
general way the tendency of fish, when people talk about them, is
to get bigger and bigger, but this one got smaller and smaller,
until to hear the others talk you'd have thought it was no bigger
than a minnow.

But it didn't matter.  I'd been fishing.  I'd seen the float dive
under the water and felt the fish tugging at the line, and however
many lies they told they couldn't take that away from me.



4


For the next seven years, from when I was eight to when I was
fifteen, what I chiefly remember is fishing.

Don't think that I did nothing else.  It's only that when you look
back over a long period of time, certain things seem to swell up
till they overshadow everything else.  I left Mother Howlett's and
went to the Grammar School, with a leather satchel and a black cap
with yellow stripes, and got my first bicycle and a long time
afterwards my first long trousers.  My first bike was a fixed-
wheel--free-wheel bikes were very expensive then.  When you went
downhill you put your feet up on the front rests and let the pedals
go whizzing round.  That was one of the characteristic sights of
the early nineteen-hundreds--a boy sailing downhill with his head
back and his feet up in the air.  I went to the Grammar School in
fear and trembling, because of the frightful tales Joe had told me
about old Whiskers (his name was Wicksey) the headmaster, who was
certainly a dreadful-looking little man, with a face just like a
wolf, and at the end of the big schoolroom he had a glass case with
canes in it, which he'd sometimes take out and swish through the
air in a terrifying manner.  But to my surprise I did rather well
at school.  It had never occurred to me that I might be cleverer
than Joe, who was two years older than me and had bullied me ever
since he could walk.  Actually Joe was an utter dunce, got the cane
about once a week, and stayed somewhere near the bottom of the
school till he was sixteen.  My second term I took a prize in
arithmetic and another in some queer stuff that was mostly
concerned with pressed flowers and went by the name of Science, and
by the time I was fourteen Whiskers was talking about scholarships
and Reading University.  Father, who had ambitions for Joe and me
in those days, was very anxious that I should go to 'college'.
There was an idea floating round that I was to be a schoolteacher
and Joe was to be an auctioneer.

But I haven't many memories connected with school.  When I've mixed
with chaps from the upper classes, as I did during the war, I've
been struck by the fact that they never really get over that
frightful drilling they go through at public schools.  Either it
flattens them out into half-wits or they spend the rest of their
lives kicking against it.  It wasn't so with boys of our class, the
sons of shopkeepers and farmers.  You went to the Grammar School
and you stayed there till you were sixteen, just to show that you
weren't a prole, but school was chiefly a place that you wanted to
get away from.  You'd no sentiment of loyalty, no goofy feeling
about the old grey stones (and they WERE old, right enough, the
school had been founded by Cardinal Wolsey), and there was no Old
Boy's tie and not even a school song.  You had your half-holidays
to yourself, because games weren't compulsory and as often as not
you cut them.  We played football in braces, and though it was
considered proper to play cricket in a belt, you wore your ordinary
shirt and trousers.  The only game I really cared about was the
stump cricket we used to play in the gravel yard during the break,
with a bat made out of a bit of packing case and a compo ball.

But I remember the smell of the big schoolroom, a smell of ink and
dust and boots, and the stone in the yard that had been a mounting
block and was used for sharpening knives on, and the little baker's
shop opposite where they sold a kind of Chelsea bun, twice the size
of the Chelsea buns you get nowadays, which were called Lardy
Busters and cost a halfpenny.  I did all the things you do at
school.  I carved my name on a desk and got the cane for it--you
were always caned for it if you were caught, but it was the
etiquette that you had to carve your name.  And I got inky fingers
and bit my nails and made darts out of penholders and played
conkers and passed round dirty stories and learned to masturbate
and cheeked old Blowers, the English master, and bullied the life
out of little Willy Simeon, the undertaker's son, who was half-
witted and believed everything you told him.  Our favourite trick
was to send him to shops to buy things that didn't exist.  All the
old gags--the ha'porth of penny stamps, the rubber hammer, the
left-handed screwdriver, the pot of striped paint--poor Willy fell
for all of them.  We had grand sport one afternoon, putting him in
a tub and telling him to lift himself up by the handles.  He ended
up in an asylum, poor Willy.  But it was in the holidays that one
really lived.

There were good things to do in those days.  In winter we used to
borrow a couple of ferrets--Mother would never let Joe and me keep
them at home, 'nasty smelly things' she called them--and go round
the farms and ask leave to do a bit of ratting.  Sometimes they let
us, sometimes they told us to hook it and said we were more trouble
than the rats.  Later in winter we'd follow the threshing machine
and help kill the rats when they threshed the stacks.  One winter,
1908 it must have been, the Thames flooded and then froze and there
was skating for weeks on end, and Harry Barnes broke his collar-
bone on the ice.  In early spring we went after squirrels with
squailers, and later on we went birdnesting.  We had a theory that
birds can't count and it's all right if you leave one egg, but we
were cruel little beasts and sometimes we'd just knock the nest
down and trample on the eggs or chicks.  There was another game we
had when the toads were spawning.  We used to catch toads, ram the
nozzle of a bicycle pump up their backsides, and blow them up till
they burst.  That's what boys are like, I don't know why.  In
summer we used to bike over the Burford Weir and bathe.  Wally
Lovegrove, Sid's young cousin, was drowned in 1906.  He got tangled
in the weeds at the bottom, and when the drag-hooks brought his
body to the surface his face was jet black.

But fishing was the real thing.  We went many a time to old
Brewer's pool, and took tiny carp and tench out of it, and once a
whopping eel, and there were other cow-ponds that had fish in them
and were within walking distance on Saturday afternoons.  But after
we got bicycles we started fishing in the Thames below Burford
Weir.  It seemed more grown-up than fishing in cow-ponds.  There
were no farmers chasing you away, and there are thumping fish in
the Thames--though, so far as I know, nobody's ever been known to
catch one.

It's queer, the feeling I had for fishing--and still have, really.
I can't call myself a fisherman.  I've never in my life caught a
fish two feet long, and it's thirty years now since I've had a rod
in my hands.  And yet when I look back the whole of my boyhood from
eight to fifteen seems to have revolved round the days when we went
fishing.  Every detail has stuck clear in my memory.  I can
remember individual days and individual fish, there isn't a cow-
pond or a backwater that I can't see a picture of if I shut my eyes
and think.  I could write a book on the technique of fishing.  When
we were kids we didn't have much in the way of tackle, it cost too
much and most of our threepence a week (which was the usual pocket-
money in those days) went on sweets and Lardy Busters.  Very small
kids generally fish with a bent pin, which is too blunt to be much
use, but you can make a pretty good hook (though of course it's got
no barb) by bending a needle in a candle flame with a pair of
pliers.  The farm lads knew how to plait horsehair so that it was
almost as good as gut, and you can take a small fish on a single
horsehair.  Later we got to having two-shilling fishing-rods and
even reels of sorts.  God, what hours I've spent gazing into
Wallace's window!  Even the .410 guns and saloon pistols didn't
thrill me so much as the fishing tackle.  And the copy of Gamage's
catalogue that I picked up somewhere, on a rubbish dump I think,
and studied as though it had been the Bible!  Even now I could give
you all the details about gut-substitute and gimp and Limerick
hooks and priests and disgorgers and Nottingham reels and God knows
how many other technicalities.

Then there were the kinds of bait we used to use.  In our shop
there were always plenty of mealworms, which were good but not very
good.  Gentles were better.  You had to beg them off old Gravitt,
the butcher, and the gang used to draw lots or do enamena-mina-mo
to decide who should go and ask, because Gravitt wasn't usually too
pleasant about it.  He was a big, rough-faced old devil with a
voice like a mastiff, and when he barked, as he generally did when
speaking to boys, all the knives and steels on his blue apron would
give a jingle.  You'd go in with an empty treacle-tin in your hand,
hang round till any customers had disappeared and then say very
humbly:

'Please, Mr Gravitt, y'got any gentles today?'

Generally he'd roar out:  'What!  Gentles!  Gentles in my shop!
Ain't seen such a thing in years.  Think I got blow-flies in my
shop?'

He had, of course.  They were everywhere.  He used to deal with
them with a strip of leather on the end of a stick, with which he
could reach out to enormous distances and smack a fly into paste.
Sometimes you had to go away without any gentles, but as a rule
he'd shout after you just as you were going:

''Ere!  Go round the backyard an' 'ave a look.  P'raps you might
find one or two if you looked careful.'

You used to find them in little clusters everywhere.  Gravitt's
backyard smelt like a battlefield.  Butchers didn't have
refrigerators in those days.  Gentles live longer if you keep them
in sawdust.

Wasp grubs are good, though it's hard to make them stick on the
hook, unless you bake them first.  When someone found a wasps' nest
we'd go out at night and pour turpentine down it and plug up the
hole with mud.  Next day the wasps would all be dead and you could
dig out the nest and take the grubs.  Once something went wrong,
the turps missed the hole or something, and when we took the plug
out the wasps, which had been shut up all night, came out all
together with a zoom.  We weren't very badly stung, but it was a
pity there was no one standing by with a stopwatch.  Grasshoppers
are about the best bait there is, especially for chub.  You stick
them on the hook without any shot and just flick them to and fro on
the surface--'dapping', they call it.  But you can never get more
than two or three grasshoppers at a time.  Greenbottle flies, which
are also damned difficult to catch, are the best bait for dace,
especially on clear days.  You want to put them on the hook alive,
so that they wriggle.  A chub will even take a wasp, but it's a
ticklish job to put a live wasp on the hook.

God knows how many other baits there were.  Bread paste you make by
squeezing water through white bread in a rag.  Then there are
cheese paste and honey paste and paste with aniseed in it.  Boiled
wheat isn't bad for roach.  Redworms are good for gudgeon.  You
find them in very old manure heaps.  And you also find another kind
of worm called a brandling, which is striped and smells like an
earwig, and which is very good bait for perch.  Ordinary earthworms
are good for perch.  You have to put them in moss to keep them
fresh and lively.  If you try to keep them in earth they die.
Those brown flies you find on cowdung are pretty good for roach.
You can take a chub on a cherry, so they say, and I've seen a roach
taken with a currant out of a bun.

In those days, from the sixteenth of June (when the coarse-fishing
season starts) till midwinter I wasn't often without a tin of worms
or gentles in my pocket.  I had some fights with Mother about it,
but in the end she gave in, fishing came off the list of forbidden
things and Father even gave me a two-shilling fishing-rod for
Christmas in 1903.  Joe was barely fifteen when he started going
after girls, and from then on he seldom came out fishing, which he
said was a kid's game.  But there were about half a dozen others
who were as mad on fishing as I was.  Christ, those fishing days!
The hot sticky afternoons in the schoolroom when I've sprawled
across my desk, with old Blowers's voice grating away about
predicates and subjunctives and relative clauses, and all that's in
my mind is the backwater near Burford Weir and the green pool under
the willows with the dace gliding to and fro.  And then the
terrific rush on bicycles after tea, to Chamford Hill and down to
the river to get in an hour's fishing before dark.  The still
summer evening, the faint splash of the weir, the rings on the
water where the fish are rising, the midges eating you alive, the
shoals of dace swarming round your hook and never biting.  And the
kind of passion with which you'd watch the black backs of the fish
swarming round, hoping and praying (yes, literally praying) that
one of them would change his mind and grab your bait before it got
too dark.  And then it was always 'Let's have five minutes more',
and then 'Just five minutes more', until in the end you had to walk
your bike into the town because Towler, the copper, was prowling
round and you could be 'had up' for riding without a light.  And
the times in the summer holidays when we went out to make a day of
it with boiled eggs and bread and butter and a bottle of lemonade,
and fished and bathed and then fished again and did occasionally
catch something.  At night you'd come home with filthy hands so
hungry that you'd eaten what was left of your bread paste, with
three or four smelly dace wrapped up in your handkerchief.  Mother
always refused to cook the fish I brought home.  She would never
allow that river fish were edible, except trout and salmon.  'Nasty
muddy things', she called them.  The fish I remember best of all
are the ones I didn't catch.  Especially the monstrous fish you
always used to see when you went for a walk along the towpath on
Sunday afternoons and hadn't a rod with you.  There was no fishing
on Sundays, even the Thames Conservancy Board didn't allow it.  On
Sundays you had to go for what was called a 'nice walk' in your
thick black suit and the Eton collar that sawed your head off.  It
was on a Sunday that I saw a pike a yard long asleep in shallow
water by the bank and nearly got him with a stone.  And sometimes
in the green pools on the edge of the reeds you'd see a huge Thames
trout go sailing past.  The trout grow to vast sizes in the Thames,
but they're practically never caught.  They say that one of the
real Thames fishermen, the old bottle-nosed blokes that you see
muffled up in overcoats on camp-stools with twenty-foot roach-poles
at all seasons of the year, will willingly give up a year of his
life to catching a Thames trout.  I don't blame them, I see their
point entirely, and still better I saw it then.

Of course other things were happening.  I grew three inches in a
year, got my long trousers, won some prizes at school, went to
Confirmation classes, told dirty stories, took to reading, and had
crazes for white mice, fretwork, and postage stamps.  But it's
always fishing that I remember.  Summer days, and the flat water-
meadows and the blue hills in the distance, and the willows up the
backwater and the pools underneath like a kind of deep green glass.
Summer evenings, the fish breaking the water, the nightjars hawking
round your head, the smell of nightstocks and latakia.  Don't
mistake what I'm talking about.  It's not that I'm trying to put
across any of that poetry of childhood stuff.  I know that's all
baloney.  Old Porteous (a friend of mine, a retired schoolmaster,
I'll tell you about him later) is great on the poetry of childhood.
Sometimes he reads me stuff about it out of books.  Wordsworth.
Lucy Gray.  There was a time when meadow, grove, and all that.
Needless to say he's got no kids of his own.  The truth is that
kids aren't in any way poetic, they're merely savage little
animals, except that no animal is a quarter as selfish.  A boy
isn't interested in meadows, groves, and so forth.  He never looks
at a landscape, doesn't give a damn for flowers, and unless they
affect him in some way, such as being good to eat, he doesn't know
one plant from another.  Killing things--that's about as near to
poetry as a boy gets.  And yet all the while there's that peculiar
intensity, the power of longing for things as you can't long when
you're grown up, and the feeling that time stretches out and out in
front of you and that whatever you're doing you could go on for
ever.

I was rather an ugly little boy, with butter-coloured hair which
was always cropped short except for a quiff in front.  I don't
idealize my childhood, and unlike many people I've no wish to be
young again.  Most of the things I used to care for would leave me
something more than cold.  I don't care if I never see a cricket
ball again, and I wouldn't give you threepence for a hundredweight
of sweets.  But I've still got, I've always had, that peculiar
feeling for fishing.  You'll think it damned silly, no doubt, but
I've actually half a wish to go fishing even now, when I'm fat and
forty-five and got two kids and a house in the suburbs.  Why?
Because in a manner of speaking I AM sentimental about my
childhood--not my own particular childhood, but the civilization
which I grew up in and which is now, I suppose, just about at its
last kick.  And fishing is somehow typical of that civilization.
As soon as you think of fishing you think of things that don't
belong to the modern world.  The very idea of sitting all day under
a willow tree beside a quiet pool--and being able to find a quiet
pool to sit beside--belongs to the time before the war, before the
radio, before aeroplanes, before Hitler.  There's a kind of
peacefulness even in the names of English coarse fish.  Roach,
rudd, dace, bleak, barbel, bream, gudgeon, pike, chub, carp, tench.
They're solid kind of names.  The people who made them up hadn't
heard of machine-guns, they didn't live in terror of the sack or
spend their time eating aspirins, going to the pictures, and
wondering how to keep out of the concentration camp.

Does anyone go fishing nowadays, I wonder?  Anywhere within a
hundred miles of London there are no fish left to catch.  A few
dismal fishing-clubs plant themselves in rows along the banks of
canals, and millionaires go trout-fishing in private waters round
Scotch hotels, a sort of snobbish game of catching hand-reared fish
with artificial flies.  But who fishes in mill-streams or moats or
cow-ponds any longer?  Where are the English coarse fish now?  When
I was a kid every pond and stream had fish in it.  Now all the
ponds are drained, and when the streams aren't poisoned with
chemicals from factories they're full of rusty tins and motor-bike
tyres.

My best fishing-memory is about some fish that I never caught.
That's usual enough, I suppose.

When I was about fourteen Father did a good turn of some kind to
old Hodges, the caretaker at Binfield House.  I forget what it was--
gave him some medicine that cured his fowls of the worms, or
something.  Hodges was a crabby old devil, but he didn't forget a
good turn.  One day a little while afterwards when he'd been down
to the shop to buy chicken-corn he met me outside the door and
stopped me in his surly way.  He had a face like something carved
out of a bit of root, and only two teeth, which were dark brown and
very long.

'Hey, young 'un!  Fisherman, ain't you?'

'Yes.'

'Thought you was.  You listen, then.  If so be you wanted to, you
could bring your line and have a try in that they pool up ahind the
Hall.  There's plenty bream and jack in there.  But don't you tell
no one as I told you.  And don't you go for to bring any of them
other young whelps, or I'll beat the skin off their backs.'

Having said this he hobbled off with his sack of corn over his
shoulder, as though feeling that he'd said too much already.  The
next Saturday afternoon I biked up to Binfield House with my
pockets full of worms and gentles, and looked for old Hodges at the
lodge.  At that time Binfield House had already been empty for ten
or twenty years.  Mr Farrel, the owner, couldn't afford to live in
it and either couldn't or wouldn't let it.  He lived in London on
the rent of his farms and let the house and grounds go to the
devil.  All the fences were green and rotting, the park was a mass
of nettles, the plantations were like a jungle, and even the
gardens had gone back to meadow, with only a few old gnarled rose-
bushes to show you where the beds had been.  But it was a very
beautiful house, especially from a distance.  It was a great white
place with colonnades and long-shaped windows, which had been
built, I suppose, about Queen Anne's time by someone who'd
travelled in Italy.  If I went there now I'd probably get a certain
kick out of wandering round the general desolation and thinking
about the life that used to go on there, and the people who built
such places because they imagined that the good days would last for
ever.  As a boy I didn't give either the house or the grounds a
second look.  I dug out old Hodges, who'd just finished his dinner
and was a bit surly, and got him to show me the way down to the
pool.  It was several hundred yards behind the house and completely
hidden in the beech woods, but it was a good-sized pool, almost a
lake, about a hundred and fifty yards across.  It was astonishing,
and even at that age it astonished me, that there, a dozen miles
from Reading and not fifty from London, you could have such
solitude.  You felt as much alone as if you'd been on the banks of
the Amazon.  The pool was ringed completely round by the enormous
beech trees, which in one place came down to the edge and were
reflected in the water.  On the other side there was a patch of
grass where there was a hollow with beds of wild peppermint, and up
at one end of the pool an old wooden boathouse was rotting among
the bulrushes.

The pool was swarming with bream, small ones, about four to six
inches long.  Every now and again you'd see one of them turn half
over and gleam reddy brown under the water.  There were pike there
too, and they must have been big ones.  You never saw them, but
sometimes one that was basking among the weeds would turn over and
plunge with a splash that was like a brick being bunged into the
water.  It was no use trying to catch them, though of course I
always tried every time I went there.  I tried them with dace and
minnows I'd caught in the Thames and kept alive in a jam-jar, and
even with a spinner made out of a bit of tin.  But they were gorged
with fish and wouldn't bite, and in any case they'd have broken any
tackle I possessed.  I never came back from the pool without at
least a dozen small bream.  Sometimes in the summer holidays I went
there for a whole day, with my fishing-rod and a copy of Chums or
the Union Jack or something, and a hunk of bread and cheese which
Mother had wrapped up for me.  And I've fished for hours and then
lain in the grass hollow and read the Union Jack, and then the
smell of my bread paste and the plop of a fish jumping somewhere
would send me wild again, and I'd go back to the water and have
another go, and so on all through a summer's day.  And the best of
all was to be alone, utterly alone, though the road wasn't a
quarter of a mile away.  I was just old enough to know that it's
good to be alone occasionally.  With the trees all round you it was
as though the pool belonged to you, and nothing ever stirred except
the fish ringing the water and the pigeons passing overhead.  And
yet, in the two years or so that I went fishing there, how many
times did I really go, I wonder?  Not more than a dozen.  It was a
three-mile bike ride from home and took up a whole afternoon at
least.  And sometimes other things turned up, and sometimes when
I'd meant to go it rained.  You know the way things happen.

One afternoon the fish weren't biting and I began to explore at the
end of the pool farthest from Binfield House.  There was a bit of
an overflow of water and the ground was boggy, and you had to fight
your way through a sort of jungle of blackberry bushes and rotten
boughs that had fallen off the trees.  I struggled through it for
about fifty yards, and then suddenly there was a clearing and I
came to another pool which I had never known existed.  It was a
small pool not more than twenty yards wide, and rather dark because
of the boughs that overhung it.  But it was very clear water and
immensely deep.  I could see ten or fifteen feet down into it.  I
hung about for a bit, enjoying the dampness and the rotten boggy
smell, the way a boy does.  And then I saw something that almost
made me jump out of my skin.

It was an enormous fish.  I don't exaggerate when I say it was
enormous.  It was almost the length of my arm.  It glided across
the pool, deep under water, and then became a shadow and
disappeared into the darker water on the other side.  I felt as if
a sword had gone through me.  It was far the biggest fish I'd ever
seen, dead or alive.  I stood there without breathing, and in a
moment another huge thick shape glided through the water, and then
another and then two more close together.  The pool was full of
them.  They were carp, I suppose.  Just possibly they were bream or
tench, but more probably carp.  Bream or tench wouldn't grow so
huge.  I knew what had happened.  At some time this pool had been
connected with the other, and then the stream had dried up and the
woods had closed round the small pool and it had just been
forgotten.  It's a thing that happens occasionally.  A pool gets
forgotten somehow, nobody fishes in it for years and decades and
the fish grow to monstrous sizes.  The brutes that I was watching
might be a hundred years old.  And not a soul in the world knew
about them except me.  Very likely it was twenty years since anyone
had so much as looked at the pool, and probably even old Hodges and
Mr Farrel's bailiff had forgotten its existence.

Well, you can imagine what I felt.  After a bit I couldn't even
bear the tantalization of watching.  I hurried back to the other
pool and got my fishing things together.  It was no use trying for
those colossal brutes with the tackle I had.  They'd snap it as if
it had been a hair.  And I couldn't go on fishing any longer for
the tiny bream.  The sight of the big carp had given me a feeling
in my stomach almost as if I was going to be sick.  I got on to my
bike and whizzed down the hill and home.  It was a wonderful secret
for a boy to have.  There was the dark pool hidden away in the
woods and the monstrous fish sailing round it--fish that had never
been fished for and would grab the first bait you offered them.  It
was only a question of getting hold of a line strong enough to hold
them.  Already I'd made all the arrangements.  I'd buy the tackle
that would hold them if I had to steal the money out of the till.
Somehow, God knew how, I'd get hold of half a crown and buy a
length of silk salmon line and some thick gut or gimp and Number 5
hooks, and come back with cheese and gentles and paste and
mealworms and brandlings and grasshoppers and every mortal bait a
carp might look at.  The very next Saturday afternoon I'd come back
and try for them.

But as it happened I never went back.  One never does go back.  I
never stole the money out of the till or bought the bit of salmon
line or had a try for those carp.  Almost immediately afterwards
something turned up to prevent me, but if it hadn't been that it
would have been something else.  It's the way things happen.

I know, of course, that you think I'm exaggerating about the size
of those fish.  You think, probably, that they were just medium-
sized fish (a foot long, say) and that they've swollen gradually in
my memory.  But it isn't so.  People tell lies about the fish
they've caught and still more about the fish that are hooked and
get away, but I never caught any of these or even tried to catch
them, and I've no motive for lying.  I tell you they were enormous.



5


Fishing!

Here I'll make a confession, or rather two.  The first is that when
I look back through my life I can't honestly say that anything I've
ever done has given me quite such a kick as fishing.  Everything
else has been a bit of a flop in comparison, even women.  I don't
set up to be one of those men that don't care about women.  I've
spent plenty of time chasing them, and I would even now if I had
the chance.  Still, if you gave me the choice of having any woman
you care to name, but I mean ANY woman, or catching a ten-pound
carp, the carp would win every time.  And the other confession is
that after I was sixteen I never fished again.

Why?  Because that's how things happen.  Because in this life we
lead--I don't mean human life in general, I mean life in this
particular age and this particular country--we don't do the things
we want to do.  It isn't because we're always working.  Even a
farm-hand or a Jew tailor isn't always working.  It's because
there's some devil in us that drives us to and fro on everlasting
idiocies.  There's time for everything except the things worth
doing.  Think of something you really care about.  Then add hour to
hour and calculate the fraction of your life that you've actually
spent in doing it.  And then calculate the time you've spent on
things like shaving, riding to and fro on buses, waiting in
railway, junctions, swapping dirty stories, and reading the
newspapers.

After I was sixteen I didn't go fishing again.  There never seemed
to be time.  I was at work, I was chasing girls, I was wearing my
first button boots and my first high collars (and for the collars
of 1909 you needed a neck like a giraffe), I was doing correspondence
courses in salesmanship and accountancy and 'improving my mind'.
The great fish were gliding round in the pool behind Binfield House.
Nobody knew about them except me.  They were stored away in my mind;
some day, some bank holiday perhaps, I'd go back and catch them.
But I never went back.  There was time for everything except that.
Curiously enough, the only time between then and now when I did very
nearly go fishing was during the war.

It was in the autumn of 1916, just before I was wounded.  We'd come
out of trenches to a village behind the line, and though it was
only September we were covered with mud from head to foot.  As
usual we didn't know for certain how long we were going to stay
there or where we were going afterwards.  Luckily the C.O. was a
bit off-colour, a touch of bronchitis or something, and so didn't
bother about driving us through the usual parades, kit-inspections,
football matches, and so forth which were supposed to keep up the
spirits of the troops when they were out of the line.  We spent the
first day sprawling about on piles of chaff in the barns where we
were billeted and scraping the mud off our putties, and in the
evening some of the chaps started queueing up for a couple of
wretched worn-out whores who were established in a house at the end
of the village.  In the morning, although it was against orders to
leave the village, I managed to sneak off and wander round the
ghastly desolation that had once been fields.  It was a damp,
wintry kind of morning.  All round, of course, were the awful muck
and litter of war, the sort of filthy sordid mess that's actually
worse than a battlefield of corpses.  Trees with boughs torn off
them, old shell-holes that had partly filled up again, tin cans,
turds, mud, weeds, clumps of rusty barbed wire with weeds growing
through them.  You know the feeling you had when you came out of
the line.  A stiffened feeling in all your joints, and inside you
a kind of emptiness, a feeling that you'd never again have any
interest in anything.  It was partly fear and exhaustion but mainly
boredom.  At that time no one saw any reason why the war shouldn't
go on for ever.  Today or tomorrow or the day after you were going
back to the line, and maybe next week a shell would blow you to
potted meat, but that wasn't so bad as the ghastly boredom of the
war stretching out for ever.

I was wandering up the side of a hedge when I ran into a chap in
our company whose surname I don't remember but who was nicknamed
Nobby.  He was a dark, slouching, gypsy-looking chap, a chap who
even in uniform always gave the impression that he was carrying a
couple of stolen rabbits.  By trade he was a coster and he was a
real Cockney, but one of those Cockneys that make part of their
living by hop-picking, bird-catching, poaching, and fruit-stealing
in Kent and Essex.  He was a great expert on dogs, ferrets, cage-
birds, fighting-cocks, and that kind of thing.  As soon as he saw
me he beckoned to me with his head.  He had a sly, vicious way of
talking:

''Ere, George!'  (The chaps still called me George--I hadn't got
fat in those days.)  'George!  Ja see that clump of poplars acrost
the field?'

'Yes.'

'Well, there's a pool on t'other side of it, and it's full of
bleeding great fish.'

'Fish?  Garn!'

'I tell you it's bleeding full of 'em.  Perch, they are.  As good
fish as ever I got my thumbs on.  Com'n see f'yerself, then.'

We trudged over the mud together.  Sure enough, Nobby was right.
On the other side of the poplars there was a dirty-looking pool
with sandy banks.  Obviously it had been a quarry and had got
filled up with water.  And it was swarming with perch.  You could
see their dark blue stripy backs gliding everywhere just under
water, and some of them must have weighed a pound.  I suppose in
two years of war they hadn't been disturbed and had had time to
multiply.  Probably you can't imagine what the sight of those perch
had done to me.  It was as though they'd suddenly brought me to
life.  Of course there was only one thought in both our minds--how
to get hold of a rod and line.

'Christ!' I said.  'We'll have some of those.'

'You bet we f-- well will.  C'mon back to the village and let's get
'old of some tackle.'

'O.K.  You want to watch out, though.  If the sergeant gets to know
we'll cop it.'

'Oh, f-- the sergeant.  They can 'ang, drore, and quarter me if
they want to.  I'm going to 'ave some of them bleeding fish.'

You can't know how wild we were to catch those fish.  Or perhaps
you can, if you've ever been at war.  You know the frantic boredom
of war and the way you'll clutch at almost any kind of amusement.
I've seen two chaps in a dugout fight like devils over half a
threepenny magazine.  But there was more to it than that.  It was
the thought of escaping, for perhaps a whole day, right out of the
atmosphere of war.  To be sitting under the poplar trees, fishing
for perch, away from the Company, away from the noise and the stink
and the uniforms and the officers and the saluting and the
sergeant's voice!  Fishing is the opposite of war.  But it wasn't
at all certain that we could bring it off.  That was the thought
that sent us into a kind of fever.  If the sergeant found out he'd
stop us as sure as fate, and so would any of the officers, and the
worst of all was that there was no knowing how long we were going
to stay at the village.  We might stay there a week, we might march
off in two hours.  Meanwhile we'd no fishing tackle of any kind,
not even a pin or a bit of string.  We had to start from scratch.
And the pool was swarming with fish!  The first thing was a rod.
A willow wand is best, but of course there wasn't a willow tree
anywhere this side of the horizon.  Nobby shinned up one of the
poplars and cut off a small bough which wasn't actually good but
was better than nothing.  He trimmed it down with his jack-knife
till it looked something like a fishing-rod, and then we hid it in
the weeds near the bank and managed to sneak back into the village
without being seen.

The next thing was a needle to make a hook.  Nobody had a needle.
One chap had some darning needles, but they were too thick and had
blunt ends.  We daren't let anyone know what we wanted it for, for
fear the sergeant should hear about it.  At last we thought of the
whores at the end of the village.  They were pretty sure to have a
needle.  When we got there--you had to go round to the back door
through a mucky courtyard--the house was shut up and the whores
were having a sleep which they'd no doubt earned.  We stamped and
yelled and banged on the door until after about ten minutes a fat
ugly woman in a wrapper came down and screamed at us in French.
Nobby shouted at her:

'Needle!  Needle!  You got a needle!'

Of course she didn't know what he was talking about.  Then Nobby
tried pidgin English, which he expected her as a foreigner to
understand:

'Wantee needle!  Sewee clothee!  Likee thisee!'

He made gestures which were supposed to represent sewing.  The
whore misunderstood him and opened the door a bit wider to let us
in.  Finally we made her understand and got a needle from her.
By this time it was dinner time.

After dinner the sergeant came round the barn where we were
billeted looking for men for a fatigue.  We managed to dodge him
just in time by getting under a pile of chaff.  When he was gone we
got a candle alight, made the needle red-hot, and managed to bend
it into a kind of hook.  We didn't have any tools except jack-
knives, and we burned our fingers badly.  The next thing was a
line.  Nobody had any string except thick stuff, but at last we
came across a fellow who had a reel of sewing thread.  He didn't
want to part with it and we had to give him a whole packet of fags
for it.  The thread was much too thin, but Nobby cut it into three
lengths, tied them to a nail in the wall, and carefully plaited
them.  Meanwhile after searching all over the village I'd managed
to find a cork, and I cut it in half and stuck a match through it
to make afloat.  By this time it was evening and getting on towards
dark.

We'd got the essentials now, but we could do with some gut.  There
didn't seem much hope of getting any until we thought of the
hospital orderly.  Surgical gut wasn't part of his equipment, but
it was just possible that he might have some.  Sure enough, when we
asked him, we found he'd a whole hank of medical gut in his
haversack.  It had taken his fancy in some hospital or other and
he'd pinched it.  We swapped another packet of fags for ten lengths
of gut.  It was rotten brittle stuff, in pieces about six inches
long.  After dark Nobby soaked them till they were pliable and tied
them end to end.  So now we'd got everything--hook, rod, line,
float, and gut.  We could dig up worms anywhere.  And the pool was
swarming with fish!  Huge great stripy perch crying out to be
caught!  We lay down to kip in such a fever that we didn't even
take our boots off.  Tomorrow!  If we could just have tomorrow!  If
the war would forget about us for just a day!  We made up our minds
that as soon as roll-call was over we'd hook it and stay away all
day, even if they gave us Field Punishment No. 1 for it when we
came back.

Well, I expect you can guess the rest.  At roll-call orders were to
pack all kits and be ready to march in twenty minutes.  We marched
nine miles down the road and then got on to lorries and were off to
another part of the line.  As for the pool under the poplar trees,
I never saw or heard of it again.  I expect it got poisoned with
mustard gas later on.

Since then I've never fished.  I never seemed to get the chance.
There was the rest of the war, and then like everyone else I was
fighting for a job, and then I'd got a job and the job had got me.
I was a promising young fellow in an insurance office--one of those
keen young businessmen with firm jaws and good prospects that you
used to read about in the Clark's College adverts--and then I was
the usual down-trodden five-to-ten-pounds-a-weeker in a semidetached
villa in the inner-outer suburbs.  Such people don't go fishing, any
more than stockbrokers go out picking primroses. It wouldn't be
suitable.  Other recreations are provided for them.

Of course I have my fortnight's holiday every summer.  You know
the kind of holiday.  Margate, Yarmouth, Eastbourne, Hastings,
Bournemouth, Brighton.  There's a slight variation according to
whether or not we're flush that year.  With a woman like Hilda
along, the chief feature of a holiday is endless mental arithmetic
to decide how much the boarding-house keeper is swindling you.
That and telling the kids, No, they can't have a new sandbucket.
A few years back we were at Bournemouth.  One fine afternoon we
loitered down the pier, which must be about half a mile long, and
all the way along it chaps were fishing with stumpy sea-rods with
little bells on the end and their lines stretching fifty yards out
to sea.  It's a dull kind of fishing, and they weren't catching
anything.  Still, they were fishing.  The kids soon got bored and
clamoured to go back to the beach, and Hilda saw a chap sticking a
lobworm on his hook and said it made her feel sick, but I kept
loitering up and down for a little while longer.  And suddenly
there was a tremendous ringing from a bell and a chap was winding
in his line.  Everyone stopped to watch.  And sure enough, in it
came, the wet line and the lump of lead and on the end a great
flat-fish (a flounder, I think) dangling and wriggling.  The chap
dumped it on to the planks of the pier, and it flapped up and down,
all wet and gleaming, with its grey warty back and its white belly
and the fresh salty smell of the sea.  And something kind of moved
inside me.

As we moved off I said casually, just to test Hilda's reaction:

'I've half a mind to do a bit of fishing myself while we're here.'

'What!  YOU go fishing, George?  But you don't even know how, do
you?'

'Oh, I used to be a great fisherman,' I told her.

She was vaguely against it, as usual, but didn't have many ideas
one way or the other, except that if I went fishing she wasn't
coming with me to watch me put those nasty squashy things on the
hook.  Then suddenly she got on to the fact that if I was to go
fishing the set-out-that I'd need, rod and reel and so forth, would
cost round about a quid.  The rod alone would cost ten bob.
Instantly she flew into a temper.  You haven't seen old Hilda when
there's talk of wasting ten bob.  She burst out at me:

'The IDEA of wasting all that money on a thing like that!  Absurd!
And how they DARE charge ten shillings for one of those silly
little fishing-rods!  It's disgraceful.  And fancy you going
fishing at your age!  A great big grown-up man like you.  Don't be
such a BABY, George.'

Then the kids got on to it.  Lorna sidled up to me and asked in
that silly pert way she has, 'Are you a baby, Daddy?' and little
Billy, who at that time didn't speak quite plain, announced to the
world in general, 'Farver's a baby.'  Then suddenly they were both
dancing round me, rattling their sandbuckets and chanting:

'Farver's a baby!  Farver's a baby!'

Unnatural little bastards!



6


And besides fishing there was reading.

I've exaggerated if I've given the impression that fishing was the
ONLY thing I cared about.  Fishing certainly came first, but
reading was a good second.  I must have been either ten or eleven
when I started reading--reading voluntarily, I mean.  At that age
it's like discovering a new world.  I'm a considerable reader even
now, in fact there aren't many weeks in which I don't get through a
couple of novels.  I'm what you might call the typical Boots
Library subscriber, I always fall for the best-seller of the moment
(The Good Companions, Bengal Lancer, Hatter's Castle--I fell for
every one of them), and I've been a member of the Left Book Club
for a year or more.  And in 1918, when I was twenty-five, I had a
sort of debauch of reading that made a certain difference to my
outlook.  But nothing is ever like those first years when you
suddenly discover that you can open a penny weekly paper and plunge
straight into thieves' kitchens and Chinese opium dens and
Polynesian islands and the forests of Brazil.

It was from when I was eleven to when I was about sixteen that I
got my biggest kick out of reading.  At first it was always the
boys' penny weeklies--little thin papers with vile print and an
illustration in three colours on the cover--and a bit later it was
books.  Sherlock Holmes, Dr Nikola, The Iron Pirate, Dracula,
Raffles.  And Nat Gould and Ranger Gull and a chap whose name I
forget who wrote boxing stories almost as rapidly as Nat Gould
wrote racing ones.  I suppose if my parents had been a little
better educated I'd have had 'good' books shoved down my throat,
Dickens and Thackeray and so forth, and in fact they did drive us
through Quentin Durward at school and Uncle Ezekiel sometimes tried
to incite me to read Ruskin and Carlyle.  But there were practically
no books in our house.  Father had never read a book in his life,
except the Bible and Smiles's Self Help, and I didn't of my own
accord read a 'good' book till much later.  I'm not sorry it
happened that way.  I read the things I wanted to read, and I got
more out of them than I ever got out of the stuff they taught me at
school.

The old penny dreadfuls were already going out when I was a kid,
and I can barely remember them, but there was a regular line of
boys' weeklies, some of which still exist.  The Buffalo Bill
stories have gone out, I think, and Nat Gould probably isn't read
any longer, but Nick Carter and Sexton Blake seem to be still the
same as ever.  The Gem and the Magnet, if I'm remembering rightly,
started about 1905.  The B.O.P. was still rather pi in those days,
but Chums, which I think must have started about 1903, was
splendid.  Then there was an encyclopedia--I don't remember its
exact name--which was issued in penny numbers.  It never seemed
quite worth buying, but a boy at school used to give away back
numbers sometimes.  If I now know the length of the Mississippi or
the difference between an octopus and a cuttle-fish or the exact
composition of bell-metal, that's where I learned it from.

Joe never read.  He was one of those boys who can go through years
of schooling and at the end of it are unable to read ten lines
consecutively.  The sight of print made him feel sick.  I've seen
him pick up one of my numbers of Chums, read a paragraph or two and
then turn away with just the same movement of disgust as a horse
when it smells stale hay.  He tried to kick me out of reading, but
Mother and Father, who had decided that I was 'the clever one',
backed me up.  They were rather proud that I showed a taste for
'book-learning', as they called it.  But it was typical of both of
them that they were vaguely upset by my reading things like Chums
and the Union Jack, thought that I ought to read something
'improving' but didn't know enough about books to be sure which
books were 'improving'.  Finally Mother got hold of a second-hand
copy of Foxe's Book of Martyrs, which I didn't read, though the
illustrations weren't half bad.

All through the winter of 1905 I spent a penny on Chums every week.
I was following up their serial story, 'Donovan the Dauntless'.
Donovan the Dauntless was an explorer who was employed by an
American millionaire to fetch incredible things from various
corners of the earth.  Sometimes it was diamonds the size of golf
balls from the craters of volcanoes in Africa, sometimes it was
petrified mammoths' tusks from the frozen forests of Siberia,
sometimes it was buried Inca treasures from the lost cities of
Peru.  Donovan went on a new journey every week, and he always made
good.  My favourite place for reading was the loft behind the yard.
Except when Father was getting out fresh sacks of grain it was the
quietest place in the house.  There were huge piles of sacks to lie
on, and a sort of plastery smell mixed up with the smell of
sainfoin, and bunches of cobwebs in all the corners, and just over
the place where I used to lie there was a hole in the ceiling and a
lath sticking out of the plaster.  I can feel the feeling of it
now.  A winter day, just warm enough to lie still.  I'm lying on my
belly with Chums open in front of me.  A mouse runs up the side of
a sack like a clockwork toy, then suddenly stops dead and watches
me with his little eyes like tiny jet beads.  I'm twelve years old,
but I'm Donovan the Dauntless.  Two thousand miles up the Amazon
I've just pitched my tent, and the roots of the mysterious orchid
that blooms once in a hundred years are safe in the tin box under
my camp bed.  In the forests all round Hopi-Hopi Indians, who paint
their teeth scarlet and skin white men alive, are beating their
war-drums.  I'm watching the mouse and the mouse is watching me,
and I can smell the dust and sainfoin and the cool plastery smell,
and I'm up the Amazon, and it's bliss, pure bliss.



7


That's all, really.

I've tried to tell you something about the world before the war,
the world I got a sniff of when I saw King Zog's name on the
poster, and the chances are that I've told you nothing.  Either you
remember before the war and don't need to be told about it, or you
don't remember, and it's no use telling you.  So far I've only
spoken about the things that happened to me before I was sixteen.
Up to that time things had gone pretty well with the family.  It
was a bit before my sixteenth birthday that I began to get glimpses
of what people call 'real life', meaning unpleasantness.

About three days after I'd seen the big carp at Binfield House,
Father came in to tea looking very worried and even more grey and
mealy than usual.  He ate his way solemnly through his tea and
didn't talk much.  In those days he had a rather preoccupied way of
eating, and his moustache used to work up and down with a sidelong
movement, because he hadn't many back teeth left.  I was just
getting up from table when he called me back.

'Wait a minute, George, my boy.  I got suthing to say to you.  Sit
down jest a minute.  Mother, you heard what I got to say last
night.'

Mother, behind the huge brown teapot, folded her hands in her lap
and looked solemn.  Father went on, speaking very seriously but
rather spoiling the effect by trying to deal with a crumb that
lodged somewhere in what was left of his back teeth:

'George, my boy, I got suthing to say to you.  I been thinking it
over, and it's about time you left school.  'Fraid you'll have to
get to work now and start earning a bit to bring home to your
mother.  I wrote to Mr Wicksey last night and told him as I should
have to take you away.'

Of course this was quite according to precedent--his writing to Mr
Wicksey before telling me, I mean.  Parents in those days, as a
matter of course, always arranged everything over their children's
heads.

Father went on to make some rather mumbling and worried explanations.
He'd 'had bad times lately', things had 'been a bit difficult',
and the upshot was that Joe and I would have to start earning
our living.  At that time I didn't either know or greatly
care whether the business was really in a bad way or not.  I hadn't
even enough commercial instinct to see the reason why things were
'difficult'.  The fact was that Father had been hit by competition.
Sarazins', the big retail seedsmen who had branches all over the
home counties, had stuck a tentacle into Lower Binfield.  Six
months earlier they'd taken the lease of a shop in the market-place
and dolled it up until what with bright green paint, gilt
lettering, gardening tools painted red and green, and huge
advertisements for sweet peas, it hit you in the eye at a hundred
yards' distance.  Sarazins', besides selling flower seeds,
described themselves as 'universal poultry and livestock
providers', and apart from wheat and oats and so forth they went in
for patent poultry mixtures, bird-seed done up in fancy packets,
dog-biscuits of all shapes and colours, medicines, embrocations,
and conditioning powders, and branched off into such things as rat-
traps, dog-chains, incubators, sanitary eggs, bird-nesting, bulbs,
weed-killer, insecticide, and even, in some branches, into what
they called a 'livestock department', meaning rabbits and day-old
chicks.  Father, with his dusty old shop and his refusal to stock
new lines, couldn't compete with that kind of thing and didn't want
to.  The tradesmen with their van-horses, and such of the farmers
as dealt with the retail seedsmen, fought shy of Sarazins', but
in six months they'd gathered in the petty gentry of the
neighbourhood, who in those days had carriages or dogcarts and
therefore horses.  This meant a big loss of trade for Father and
the other corn merchant, Winkle.  I didn't grasp any of this at the
time.  I had a boy's attitude towards it all.  I'd never taken any
interest in the business.  I'd never or hardly ever served in the
shop, and when, as occasionally happened, Father wanted me to run
an errand or give a hand with something, such as hoisting sacks of
grain up to the loft or down again, I'd always dodged it whenever
possible.  Boys in our class aren't such complete babies as public
schoolboys, they know that work is work and sixpence is sixpence,
but it seems natural for a boy to regard his father's business as a
bore.  Up till that time fishing-rods, bicycles, fizzy lemonade,
and so forth had seemed to me a good deal more real than anything
that happened in the grown-up world.

Father had already spoken to old Grimmett, the grocer, who wanted a
smart lad and was willing to take me into the shop immediately.
Meanwhile Father was going to get rid of the errand boy, and Joe
was to come home and help with the shop till he got a regular job.
Joe had left school some time back and had been more or less
loafing ever since.  Father had sometimes talked of 'getting him
into' the accounts department at the brewery, and earlier had even
had thoughts of making him into an auctioneer.  Both were
completely hopeless because Joe, at seventeen, wrote a hand like a
ploughboy and couldn't repeat the multiplication table.  At present
he was supposed to be 'learning the trade' at a big bicycle shop on
the outskirts of Walton.  Tinkering with bicycles suited Joe, who,
like most half-wits, had a slight mechanical turn, but he was quite
incapable of working steadily and spent all his time loafing about
in greasy overalls, smoking Woodbines, getting into fights,
drinking (he's started that already), getting 'talked of' with one
girl after another, and sticking Father for money.  Father was
worried, puzzled, and vaguely resentful.  I can see him yet, with
the meal on his bald head, and the bit of grey hair over his ears,
and his spectacles and his grey moustache.  He couldn't understand
what was happening to him.  For years his profits had gone up,
slowly and steadily, ten pounds this year, twenty pounds that year,
and now suddenly they'd gone down with a bump.  He couldn't
understand it.  He'd inherited the business from his father, he'd
done an honest trade, worked hard, sold sound goods, swindled
nobody--and his profits were going down.  He said a number of
times, between sucking at his teeth to get the crumb out, that
times were very bad, trade seemed very slack, he couldn't think
what had come over people, it wasn't as if the horses didn't have
to eat.  Perhaps it was these here motors, he decided finally.
'Nasty smelly things!' Mother put in.  She was a little worried,
and knew that she ought to be more so.  Once or twice while Father
was talking there was a far-away look in her eyes and I could see
her lips moving.  She was trying to decide whether it should be a
round of beef and carrots tomorrow or another leg of mutton.
Except when there was something in her own line that needed
foresight, such as buying linen or saucepans, she wasn't really
capable of thinking beyond tomorrow's meals.  The shop was giving
trouble and Father was worried--that was about as far as she saw
into it.  None of us had any grasp of what was happening.  Father
had had a bad year and lost money, but was he really frightened by
the future?  I don't think so.  This was 1909, remember.  He didn't
know what was happening to him, he wasn't capable of foreseeing
that these Sarazin people would systematically under-sell him, ruin
him, and eat him up.  How could he?  Things hadn't happened like
that when he was a young man.  All he knew was that times were bad,
trade was very 'slack', very 'slow' (he kept repeating these
phrases), but probably things would 'look up presently'.

It would be nice if I could tell you that I was a great help to my
father in his time of trouble, suddenly proved myself a man, and
developed qualities which no one had suspected in me--and so on and
so forth, like the stuff you used to read in the uplift novels of
thirty years ago.  Or alternatively I'd like to be able to record
that I bitterly resented having to leave school, my eager young
mind, yearning for knowledge and refinement, recoiled from the
soulless mechanical job into which they were thrusting me--and so
on and so forth, like the stuff you read in the uplift novels
today.  Both would be complete bunkum.  The truth is that I was
pleased and excited at the idea of going to work, especially when I
grasped that Old Grimmett was going to pay me real wages, twelve
shillings a week, of which I could keep four for myself.  The big
carp at Binfield House, which had filled my mind for three days
past, faded right out of it.  I'd no objection to leaving school a
few terms early.  It generally happened the same way with boys at
our school.  A boy was always 'going to' go to Reading University,
or study to be an engineer, or 'go into business' in London, or run
away to sea--and then suddenly, at two days' notice, he'd disappear
from school, and a fortnight later you'd meet him on a bicycle,
delivering vegetables.  Within five minutes of Father telling me
that I should have to leave school I was wondering about the new
suit I should wear to go to work in.  I instantly started demanding
a 'grown-up suit', with a kind of coat that was fashionable at that
time, a 'cutaway', I think it was called.  Of course both Mother
and Father were scandalized and said they'd 'never heard of such a
thing'.  For some reason that I've never fully fathomed, parents in
those days always tried to prevent their children wearing grown-up
clothes as long as possible.  In every family there was a stand-up
fight before a boy had his first tall collars or a girl put her
hair up.

So the conversation veered away from Father's business troubles and
degenerated into a long, nagging kind of argument, with Father
gradually getting angry and repeating over and over--dropping an
aitch now and again, as he was apt to do when he got angry--'Well,
you can't 'ave it.  Make up your mind to that--you can't 'ave it.'
So I didn't have my 'cutaway', but went to work for the first time
in a ready-made black suit and a broad collar in which I looked an
overgrown lout.  Any distress I felt over the whole business really
arose from that.  Joe was even more selfish about it.  He was
furious at having to leave the bicycle shop, and for the short time
that he remained at home he merely loafed about, made a nuisance of
himself and was no help to Father whatever.

I worked in old Grimmett's shop for nearly six years.  Grimmett was
a fine, upstanding, white-whiskered old chap, like a rather stouter
version of Uncle Ezekiel, and like Uncle Ezekiel a good Liberal.
But he was less of a firebrand and more respected in the town.
He'd trimmed his sails during the Boer War, he was a bitter enemy
of trade unions and once sacked an assistant for possessing a
photograph of Keir Hardie, and he was 'chapel'--in fact he was a
big noise, literally, in the Baptist Chapel, known locally as the
Tin Tab--whereas my family were 'church' and Uncle Ezekiel was an
infidel at that.  Old Grimmett was a town councillor and an
official at the local Liberal Party.  With his white whiskers, his
canting talk about liberty of conscience and the Grand Old Man, his
thumping bank balance, and the extempore prayers you could
sometimes hear him letting loose when you passed the Tin Tab, he
was a little like a legendary Nonconformist grocer in the story--
you've heard it, I expect:

'James!'

'Yessir?'

'Have you sanded the sugar?'

'Yessir!'

'Have you watered the treacle?'

'Yessir!'

'Then come up to prayers.'

God knows how often I heard that story whispered in the shop.  We
did actually start the day with a prayer before we put up the
shutters.  Not that old Grimmett sanded the sugar.  He knew that
that doesn't pay.  But he was a sharp man in business, he did all
the high-class grocery trade of Lower Binfield and the country
round, and he had three assistants in the shop besides the errand
boy, the van-man, and his own daughter (he was a widower) who acted
as cashier.  I was the errand boy for my first six months.  Then
one of the assistants left to 'set up' in Reading and I moved into
the shop and wore my first white apron.  I learned to tie a parcel,
pack a bag of currants, grind coffee, work the bacon-slicer, carve
ham, put an edge on a knife, sweep the floor, dust eggs without
breaking them, pass off an inferior article as a good one, clean a
window, judge a pound of cheese by eye, open a packing-case, whack
a slab of butter into shape, and--what was a good deal the hardest--
remember where the stock was kept.  I haven't such detailed
memories of grocering as I have of fishing, but I remember a good
deal.  To this day I know the trick of snapping a bit of string in
my fingers.  If you put me in front of a bacon-slicer I could work
it better than I can a typewriter.  I could spin you some pretty
fair technicalities about grades of China tea and what margarine is
made of and the average weight of eggs and the price of paper bags
per thousand.

Well, for more than five years that was me--an alert young chap
with a round, pink, snubby kind of face and butter-coloured hair
(no longer cut short but carefully greased and slicked back in what
people used to call a 'smarm'), hustling about behind the counter
in a white apron with a pencil behind my ear, tying up bags of
coffee like lightning and jockeying the customer along with 'Yes,
ma'am!  Certainly, ma'am!  AND the next order, ma'am!' in a voice
with just a trace of a Cockney accent.  Old Grimmett worked us
pretty hard, it was an eleven-hour day except on Thursdays and
Sundays, and Christmas week was a nightmare.  Yet it's a good time
to look back on.  Don't think that I had no ambitions.  I knew I
wasn't going to remain a grocer's assistant for ever, I was merely
'learning the trade'.  Some time, somehow or other, there'd be
enough money for me to 'set up' on my own.  That was how people
felt in those days.  This was before the war, remember, and before
the slumps and before the dole.  The world was big enough for
everyone.  Anyone could 'set up in trade', there was always room
for another shop.  And time was slipping on.  1909, 1910, 1911.
King Edward died and the papers came out with a black border round
the edge.  Two cinemas opened in Walton.  The cars got commoner on
the roads and cross-country motor-buses began to run.  An
aeroplane--a flimsy, rickety-looking thing with a chap sitting in
the middle on a kind of chair--flew over Lower Binfield and the
whole town rushed out of their houses to yell at it.  People began
to say rather vaguely that this here German Emperor was getting too
big for his boots and 'it' (meaning war with Germany) was 'coming
some time'.  My wages went gradually up, until finally, just before
the war, they were twenty-eight shillings a week.  I paid Mother
ten shillings a week for my board, and later, when times got worse,
fifteen shillings, and even that left me feeling richer than I've
felt since.  I grew another inch, my moustache began to sprout, I
wore button boots and collars three inches high.  In church on
Sundays, in my natty dark grey suit, with my bowler hat and black
dogskin gloves on the pew beside me, I looked the perfect gent, so
that Mother could hardly contain her pride in me.  In between work
and 'walking out' on Thursdays, and thinking about clothes and
girls, I had fits of ambition and saw myself developing into a Big
Business Man like Lever or William Whiteley.  Between sixteen and
eighteen I made serious efforts to 'improve my mind' and train
myself for a business career.  I cured myself of dropping aitches
and got rid of most of my Cockney accent.  (In the Thames Valley
the country accents were going out.  Except for the farm lads,
nearly everyone who was born later than 1890 talked Cockney.)  I
did a correspondence course with Littleburns' Commercial Academy,
learnt bookkeeping and business English, read solemnly through a
book of frightful blah called The Art of Salesmanship, and improved
my arithmetic and even my handwriting.  When I was as old as
seventeen I've sat up late at night with my tongue hanging out of
my mouth, practising copperplate by the little oil-lamp on the
bedroom table.  At times I read enormously, generally crime and
adventure stories, and sometimes paper-covered books which were
furtively passed round by the chaps at the shop and described as
'hot'.  (They were translations of Maupassant and Paul de Kock.)
But when I was eighteen I suddenly turned highbrow, got a ticket
for the County Library, and began to stodge through books by Marie
Corelli and Hall Caine and Anthony Hope.  It was at about that time
that I joined the Lower Binfield Reading Circle, which was run by
the vicar and met one evening a week all through the winter for
what was called 'literary discussion'.  Under pressure from the
vicar I read bits of Sesame and Lilies and even had a go at
Browning.

And time was slipping away.  1910, 1911, 1912.  And Father's
business was going down--not slumping suddenly into the gutter, but
it was going down.  Neither Father nor Mother was ever quite the
same after Joe ran away from home.  This happened not long after I
went to work at Grimmett's.

Joe, at eighteen, had grown into an ugly ruffian.  He was a hefty
chap, much bigger than the rest of the family, with tremendous
shoulders, a big head, and a sulky, lowering kind of face on which
he already had a respectable moustache.  When he wasn't in the tap-
room of the George he was loafing in the shop doorway, with his
hands dug deep into his pockets, scowling at the people who passed,
except when they happened to be girls, as though he'd like to knock
them down.  If anyone came into the shop he'd move aside just
enough to let them pass, and, without taking his hands out of his
pockets, yell over his shoulders 'Da-ad!  Shop!'  This was as near
as he ever got to helping.  Father and Mother said despairingly
that they 'didn't know what to do with him', and he was costing the
devil of a lot with his drinking and endless smoking.  Late one
night he walked out of the house and was never heard of again.
He'd prised open the till and taken all the money that was in it,
luckily not much, about eight pounds.  That was enough to get him a
steerage passage to America.  He'd always wanted to go to America,
and I think he probably did so, though we never knew for certain.
It made a bit of a scandal in the town.  The official theory was
that Joe had bolted because he'd put a girl in the family way.
There was a girl named Sally Chivers who lived in the same street
as the Simmonses and was going to have a baby, and Joe had
certainly been with her, but so had about a dozen others, and
nobody knew whose baby it was.  Mother and Father accepted the baby
theory and even, in private, used it to excuse their 'poor boy' for
stealing the eight pounds and running away.  They weren't capable
of grasping that Joe had cleared out because he couldn't stand a
decent respectable life in a little country town and wanted a life
of loafing, fights, and women.  We never heard of him again.
Perhaps he went utterly to the bad, perhaps he was killed in the
war, perhaps he merely didn't bother to write.  Luckily the baby
was born dead, so there were no complications.  As for the fact
that Joe had stolen the eight pounds, Mother and Father managed to
keep it a secret till they died.  In their eyes it was a much worse
disgrace than Sally Chivers's baby.

The trouble over Joe aged Father a great deal.  To lose Joe was
merely to cut a loss, but it hurt him and made him ashamed.  From
that time forward his moustache was much greyer and he seemed to
have grown a lot smaller.  Perhaps my memory of him as a little
grey man, with a round, lined, anxious face and dusty spectacles,
really dates from that time.  By slow degrees he was getting more
and more involved in money worries and less and less interested in
other things.  He talked less about politics and the Sunday papers,
and more about the badness of trade.  Mother seemed to have shrunk
a little, too.  In my childhood I'd known her as something vast and
overflowing, with her yellow hair and her beaming face and her
enormous bosom, a sort of great opulent creature like the figure-
head of a battleship.  Now she'd got smaller and more anxious and
older than her years.  She was less lordly in the kitchen, went in
more for neck of mutton, worried over the price of coal, and began
to use margarine, a thing which in the old days she'd never have
allowed into the house.  After Joe had gone Father had to hire an
errand boy again, but from then on he employed very young boys whom
he only kept for a year or two and who couldn't lift heavy weights.
I sometimes lent him a hand when I was at home.  I was too selfish
to do it regularly.  I can still see him working his way slowly
across the yard, bent double and almost hidden under an enormous
sack, like a snail under its shell.  The huge, monstrous sack,
weighing a hundred and fifty pounds, I suppose, pressing his neck
and shoulders almost to the ground, and the anxious, spectacled
face looking up from underneath it.  In 1911 he ruptured himself
and had to spend weeks in hospital and hire a temporary manager
for the shop, which ate another hole in his capital.  A small
shopkeeper going down the hill is a dreadful thing to watch, but it
isn't sudden and obvious like the fate of a working man who gets
the sack and promptly finds himself on the dole.  It's just a
gradual chipping away of trade, with little ups and downs, a few
shillings to the bad here, a few sixpences to the good there.
Somebody who's dealt with you for years suddenly deserts and goes
to Sarazins'.  Somebody else buys a dozen hens and gives you a
weekly order for corn.  You can still keep going.  You're still
'your own master', always a little more worried and a little
shabbier, with your capital shrinking all the time.  You can go on
like that for years, for a lifetime if you're lucky.  Uncle Ezekiel
died in 1911, leaving 120 pounds which must have made a lot of
difference to Father.  It wasn't till 1913 that he had to mortgage
his life-insurance policy.  That I didn't hear about at the time,
or I'd have understood what it meant.  As it was I don't think I
ever got further than realizing that Father 'wasn't doing well',
trade was 'slack', there'd be a bit longer to wait before I had the
money to 'set up'.  Like Father himself, I looked on the shop as
something permanent, and I was a bit inclined to be angry with him
for not managing things better.  I wasn't capable of seeing, and
neither was he nor anyone else, that he was being slowly ruined,
that his business would never pick up again and if he lived to be
seventy he'd certainly end in the workhouse.  Many a time I've
passed Sarazins' shop in the market-place and merely thought how
much I preferred their slick window-front to Father's dusty old
shop, with the 'S. Bowling' which you could hardly read, the
chipped white lettering, and the faded packets of bird-seed.  It
didn't occur to me that Sarazins' were tapeworms who were eating
him alive.  Sometimes I used to repeat to him some of the stuff
I'd been reading in my correspondence-course textbooks, about
salesmanship and modern methods.  He never paid much attention.
He'd inherited an old-established business, he'd always worked
hard, done a fair trade, and supplied sound goods, and things would
look up presently.  It's a fact that very few shopkeepers in those
days actually ended in the workhouse.  With any luck you died with
a few pounds still your own.  It was a race between death and
bankruptcy, and, thank God, death got Father first, and Mother too.

1911, 1912, 1913.  I tell you it was a good time to be alive.  It
was late in 1912, through the vicar's Reading Circle, that I first
met Elsie Waters.  Till then, although, like all the rest of the
boys in the town, I'd gone out looking for girls and occasionally
managed to connect up with this girl or that and 'walk out' a few
Sunday afternoons, I'd never really had a girl of my own.  It's a
queer business, that chasing of girls when you're about sixteen.
At some recognized part of the town the boys stroll up and down in
pairs, watching the girls, and the girls stroll up and down in
pairs, pretending not to notice the boys, and presently some kind
of contact is established and instead of twos they're trailing
along in fours, all four utterly speechless.  The chief feature of
those walks--and it was worse the second time, when you went out
with the girl alone--was the ghastly failure to make any kind of
conversation.  But Elsie Waters seemed different.  The truth was
that I was growing up.

I don't want to tell the story of myself and Elsie Waters, even if
there was any story to tell.  It's merely that she's part of the
picture, part of 'before the war'.  Before the war it was always
summer--a delusion, as I've remarked before, but that's how I
remember it.  the white dusty road stretching out between the
chestnut trees, the smell of night-stocks, the green pools under
the willows, the splash of Burford Weir--that's what I see when I
shut my eyes and think of 'before the war', and towards the end
Elsie Waters is part of it.

I don't know whether Elsie would be considered pretty now.  She was
then.  She was tall for a girl, about as tall as I am, with pale
gold, heavy kind of hair which she wore somehow plaited and coiled
round her head, and a delicate, curiously gentle face.  She was one
of those girls that always look their best in black, especially the
very plain black dresses they made them wear in the drapery--she
worked at Lilywhite's, the drapers, though she came originally from
London.  I suppose she would have been two years older than I was.

I'm grateful to Elsie, because she was the first person who taught
me to care about a woman.  I don't mean women in general, I mean an
individual woman.  I'd met her at the Reading Circle and hardly
noticed her, and then one day I went into Lilywhite's during
working hours, a thing I wouldn't normally have been able to do,
but as it happened we'd run out of butter muslin and old Grimmett
sent me to buy some.  You know the atmosphere of a draper's shop.
It's something peculiarly feminine.  There's a hushed feeling, a
subdued light, a cool smell of cloth, and a faint whirring from the
wooden balls of change rolling to and fro.  Elsie was leaning
against the counter, cutting off a length of cloth with the big
scissors.  There was something about her black dress and the curve
of her breast against the counter--I can't describe it, something
curiously soft, curiously feminine.  As soon as you saw her you
knew that you could take her in your arms and do what you wanted
with her.  She was really deeply feminine, very gentle, very
submissive, the kind that would always do what a man told her,
though she wasn't either small or weak.  She wasn't even stupid,
only rather silent and, at times, dreadfully refined.  But in those
days I was rather refined myself.

We were living together for about a year.  Of course in a town like
Lower Binfield you could only live together in a figurative sense.
Officially we were 'walking out', which was a recognized custom and
not quite the same as being engaged.  There was a road that
branched off from the road to Upper Binfield and ran along under
the edge of the hills.  There was a long stretch of it, nearly a
mile, that was quite straight and fringed with enormous horse-
chestnut trees, and on the grass at the side there was a footpath
under the boughs that was known as Lovers' Lane.  We used to go
there on the May evenings, when the chestnuts were in blossom.
Then the short nights came on, and it was light for hours after
we'd left the shop.  You know the feeling of a June evening.  The
kind of blue twilight that goes on and on, and the air brushing
against your face like silk.  Sometimes on Sunday afternoons we
went over Chamford Hill and down to the water-meadows along the
Thames.  1913!  My God!  1913!  The stillness, the green water, the
rushing of the weir!  It'll never come again.  I don't mean that
1913 will never come again.  I mean the feeling inside you, the
feeling of not being in a hurry and not being frightened, the
feeling you've either had and don't need to be told about, or
haven't had and won't ever have the chance to learn.

It wasn't till late summer that we began what's called living
together.  I'd been too shy and clumsy to begin, and too ignorant
to realize that there'd been others before me.  One Sunday
afternoon we went into the beech woods round Upper Binfield.  Up
there you could always be alone.  I wanted her very badly, and I
knew quite well that she was only waiting for me to begin.
Something, I don't know what, put it into my head to go into the
grounds of Binfield House.  Old Hodges, who was past seventy and
getting very crusty, was capable of turning us out, but he'd
probably be asleep on a Sunday afternoon.  We slipped through a gap
in the fence and down the footpath between the beeches to the big
pool.  It was four years or more since I'd been that way.  Nothing
had changed.  Still the utter solitude, the hidden feeling with the
great trees all round you, the old boat-house rotting among the
bulrushes.  We lay down in the little grass hollow beside the wild
peppermint, and we were as much alone as if we'd been in Central
Africa.  I'd kissed her God knows how many times, and then I'd got
up and was wandering about again.  I wanted her very badly, and
wanted to take the plunge, only I was half-frightened.  And
curiously enough there was another thought in my mind at the same
time.  It suddenly struck me that for years I'd meant to come back
here and had never come.  Now I was so near, it seemed a pity not
to go down to the other pool and have a look at the big carp.  I
felt I'd kick myself afterwards if I missed the chance, in fact I
couldn't think why I hadn't been back before.  The carp were stored
away in my mind, nobody knew about them except me, I was going to
catch them some time.  Practically they were MY carp.  I actually
started wandering along the bank in that direction, and then when
I'd gone about ten yards I turned back.  It meant crashing your way
through a kind of jungle of brambles and rotten brushwood, and I
was dressed up in my Sunday best.  Dark-grey suit, bowler hat,
button boots, and a collar that almost cut my ears off.  That was
how people dressed for Sunday afternoon walks in those days.  And I
wanted Elsie very badly.  I went back and stood over her for a
moment.  She was lying on the grass with her arm over her face, and
she didn't stir when she heard me come.  In her black dress she
looked--I don't know how, kind of soft, kind of yielding, as though
her body was a kind of malleable stuff that you could do what you
liked with.  She was mine and I could have her, this minute if I
wanted to.  Suddenly I stopped being frightened, I chucked my hat
on to the grass (it bounced, I remember), knelt down, and took hold
of her.  I can smell the wild peppermint yet.  It was my first
time, but it wasn't hers, and we didn't make such a mess of it as
you might expect.  So that was that.  The big carp faded out of my
mind again, and in fact for years afterwards I hardly thought about
them.

1913.  1914.  The spring of 1914.  First the blackthorn, then the
hawthorn, then the chestnuts in blossom.  Sunday afternoons along
the towpath, and the wind rippling the beds of rushes so that they
swayed all together in great thick masses and looked somehow like a
woman's hair.  The endless June evenings, the path under the
chestnut trees, an owl hooting somewhere and Elsie's body against
me.  It was a hot July that year.  How we sweated in the shop, and
how the cheese and the ground coffee smelt!  And then the cool of
the evening outside, the smell of night-stocks and pipe-tobacco in
the lane behind the allotments, the soft dust underfoot, and the
nightjars hawking after the cockchafers.

Christ!  What's the use of saying that one oughtn't to be sentimental
about 'before the war'?  I AM sentimental about it.  So are you if
you remember it.  It's quite true that if you look back on any
special period of time you tend to remember the pleasant bits.
That's true even of the war.  But it's also true that people then
had something that we haven't got now.

What?  It was simply that they didn't think of the future as
something to be terrified of.  It isn't that life was softer then
than now.  Actually it was harsher.  People on the whole worked
harder, lived less comfortably, and died more painfully.  The farm
hands worked frightful hours for fourteen shillings a week and
ended up as worn-out cripples with a five-shilling old-age pension
and an occasional half-crown from the parish.  And what was called
'respectable' poverty was even worse.  When little Watson, a small
draper at the other end of the High Street, 'failed' after years of
struggling, his personal assets were L2 9s. 6d., and he died almost
immediately of what was called 'gastric trouble', but the doctor
let it out that it was starvation.  Yet he'd clung to his frock
coat to the last.  Old Crimp, the watchmaker's assistant, a skilled
workman who'd been at the job, man and boy, for fifty years, got
cataract and had to go into the workhouse.  His grandchildren were
howling in the street when they took him away.  His wife went out
charing, and by desperate efforts managed to send him a shilling a
week for pocket-money.  You saw ghastly things happening sometimes.
Small businesses sliding down the hill, solid tradesmen turning
gradually into broken-down bankrupts, people dying by inches of
cancer and liver disease, drunken husbands signing the pledge every
Monday and breaking it every Saturday, girls ruined for life by an
illegitimate baby.  The houses had no bathrooms, you broke the ice
in your basin on winter mornings, the back streets stank like the
devil in hot weather, and the churchyard was bang in the middle of
the town, so that you never went a day without remembering how
you'd got to end.  And yet what was it that people had in those
days?  A feeling of security, even when they weren't secure.  More
exactly, it was a feeling of continuity.  All of them knew they'd
got to die, and I suppose a few of them knew they were going to go
bankrupt, but what they didn't know was that the order of things
could change.  Whatever might happen to themselves, things would go
on as they'd known them.  I don't believe it made very much
difference that what's called religious belief was still prevalent
in those days.  It's true that nearly everyone went to church, at
any rate in the country--Elsie and I still went to church as a
matter of course, even when we were living in what the vicar would
have called sin--and if you asked people whether they believed in a
life after death they generally answered that they did.  But I've
never met anyone who gave me the impression of really believing in
a future life.  I think that, at most, people believe in that kind
of thing in the same way as kids believe in Father Christmas.  But
it's precisely in a settled period, a period when civilization
seems to stand on its four legs like an elephant, that such things
as a future life don't matter.  It's easy enough to die if the
things you care about are going to survive.  You've had your life,
you're getting tired, it's time to go underground--that's how
people used to see it.  Individually they were finished, but their
way of life would continue.  Their good and evil would remain good
and evil.  They didn't feel the ground they stood on shifting under
their feet.

Father was failing, and he didn't know it.  It was merely that
times were very bad, trade seemed to dwindle and dwindle, his bills
were harder and harder to meet.  Thank God, he never even knew that
he was ruined, never actually went bankrupt, because he died very
suddenly (it was influenza that turned into pneumonia) at the
beginning of 1915.  To the end he believed that with thrift, hard
work, and fair dealing a man can't go wrong.  There must have been
plenty of small shopkeepers who carried that belief not merely on
to bankrupt deathbeds but even into the workhouse.  Even Lovegrove
the saddler, with cars and motor-vans staring him in the face,
didn't realize that he was as out of date as the rhinoceros.  And
Mother too--Mother never lived to know that the life she'd been
brought up to, the life of a decent God-fearing shopkeeper's
daughter and a decent God-fearing shopkeeper's wife in the reign
of good Queen Vic, was finished for ever.  Times were difficult
and trade was bad, Father was worried and this and that was
'aggravating', but you carried on much the same as usual.  The old
English order of life couldn't change.  For ever and ever decent
God-fearing women would cook Yorkshire pudding and apple dumplings
on enormous coal ranges, wear woollen underclothes and sleep on
feathers, make plum jam in July and pickles in October, and read
Hilda's Home Companion in the afternoons, with the flies buzzing
round, in a sort of cosy little underworld of stewed tea, bad legs,
and happy endings.  I don't say that either Father or Mother was
quite the same to the end.  They were a bit shaken, and sometimes a
little dispirited.  But at least they never lived to know that
everything they'd believed in was just so much junk.  They lived at
the end of an epoch, when everything was dissolving into a sort of
ghastly flux, and they didn't know it.  They thought it was
eternity.  You couldn't blame them.  That was what it felt like.

Then came the end of July, and even Lower Binfield grasped that
things were happening.  For days there was tremendous vague
excitement and endless leading articles in the papers, which Father
actually brought in from the shop to read aloud to Mother.  And
then suddenly the posters everywhere:


GERMAN ULTIMATUM.  FRANCE MOBILIZING


For several days (four days, wasn't it?  I forget the exact dates)
there was a strange stifled feeling, a kind of waiting hush, like
the moment before a thunderstorm breaks, as though the whole of
England was silent and listening.  It was very hot, I remember.  In
the shop it was as though we couldn't work, though already everyone
in the neighbourhood who had five bob to spare was rushing in to
buy quantities of tinned stuff and flour and oatmeal.  It was as if
we were too feverish to work, we only sweated and waited.  In the
evenings people went down to the railway station and fought like
devils over the evening papers which arrived on the London train.
And then one afternoon a boy came rushing down the High Street with
an armful of papers, and people were coming into their doorways to
shout across the street.  Everyone was shouting 'We've come in!
We've come in!'  The boy grabbed a poster from his bundle and stuck
it on the shop-front opposite:


ENGLAND DECLARES WAR ON GERMANY


We rushed out on to the pavement, all three assistants, and
cheered.  Everybody was cheering.  Yes, cheering.  But old
Grimmett, though he'd already done pretty well out of the war-
scare, still held on to a little of his Liberal principles, 'didn't
hold' with the war, and said it would be a bad business.

Two months later I was in the Army.  Seven months later I was in
France.



8


I wasn't wounded till late in 1916.

We'd just come out of the trenches and were marching over a bit of
road a mile or so back which was supposed to be safe, but which the
Germans must have got the range of some time earlier.  Suddenly
they started putting a few shells over--it was heavy H.E. stuff,
and they were only firing about one a minute.  There was the usual
zwee-e-e-e! and then BOOM! in a field somewhere over to the right.
I think it was the third shell that got me.  I knew as soon as I
heard it coming that it had my name written on it.  They say you
always know.  It didn't say what an ordinary shell says.  It said
'I'm after you, you b--, YOU, you b--, YOU!'--all this in the space
of about three seconds.  And the last you was the explosion.

I felt as if an enormous hand made of air were sweeping me along.
And presently I came down with a sort of burst, shattered feeling
among a lot of old tin cans, splinters of wood, rusty barbed wire,
turds, empty cartridge cases, and other muck in the ditch at the
side of the road.  When they'd hauled me out and cleaned some of
the dirt off me they found that I wasn't very badly hurt.  It was
only a lot of small shell-splinters that had lodged in one side of
my bottom and down the backs of my legs.  But luckily I'd broken a
rib in falling, which made it just bad enough to get me back to
England.  I spent that winter in a hospital camp on the downs near
Eastbourne.

Do you remember those war-time hospital camps?  The long rows of
wooden huts like chicken-houses stuck right on top of those beastly
icy downs--the 'south coast', people used to call it, which made me
wonder what the north coast could be like--where the wind seems to
blow at you from all directions at once.  And the droves of blokes
in their pale-blue flannel suits and red ties, wandering up and
down looking for a place out of the wind and never finding one.
Sometimes the kids from the slap-up boys' schools in Eastbourne
used to be led round in crocodiles to hand out fags and peppermint
creams to the 'wounded Tommies', as they called us.  A pink-faced
kid of about eight would walk up to a knot of wounded men sitting
on the grass, split open a packet of Woodbines and solemnly hand
one fag to each man, just like feeding the monkeys at the zoo.
Anyone who was strong enough used to wander for miles over the
downs in hopes of meeting girls.  There were never enough girls to
go round.  In the valley below the camp there was a bit of a
spinney, and long before dusk you'd see a couple glued against
every tree, and sometimes, if it happened to be a thick tree, one
on each side of it.  My chief memory of that time is sitting
against a gorse-bush in the freezing wind, with my fingers so cold
I couldn't bend them and the taste of a peppermint cream in my
mouth.  That's a typical soldier's memory.  But I was getting away
from a Tommy's life, all the same.  The C.O. had sent my name in
for a commission a little before I was wounded.  By this time they
were desperate for officers and anyone who wasn't actually
illiterate could have a commission if he wanted one.  I went
straight from the hospital to an officers' training camp near
Colchester.

It's very strange, the things the war did to people.  It was less
than three years since I'd been a spry young shop-assistant,
bending over the counter in my white apron with 'Yes, madam!
Certainly, madam!  AND the next order, madam?' with a grocer's life
ahead of me and about as much notion of becoming an Army officer as
of getting a knighthood.  And here I was already, swaggering about
in a gorblimey hat and a yellow collar and more or less keeping my
end up among a crowd of other temporary gents and some who weren't
even temporary.  And--this is really the point--not feeling it in
any way strange.  Nothing seemed strange in those days.

It was like an enormous machine that had got hold of you.  You'd no
sense of acting of your own free will, and at the same time no
notion of trying to resist.  If people didn't have some such
feeling as that, no war could last three months.  The armies would
just pack up and go home.  Why had I joined the Army?  Or the
million other idiots who joined up before conscription came in?
Partly for a lark and partly because of England my England and
Britons never never and all that stuff.  But how long did that
last?  Most of the chaps I knew had forgotten all about it long
before they got as far as France.  The men in the trenches weren't
patriotic, didn't hate the Kaiser, didn't care a damn about gallant
little Belgium and the Germans raping nuns on tables (it was always
'on tables', as though that made it worse) in the streets of
Brussels.  On the other hand it didn't occur to them to try and
escape.  The machine had got hold of you and it could do what it
liked with you.  It lifted you up and dumped you down among places
and things you'd never dreamed of, and if it had dumped you down on
the surface of the moon it wouldn't have seemed particularly
strange.  The day I joined the Army the old life was finished.  It
was as though it didn't concern me any longer.  I wonder if you'd
believe that from that day forward I only once went back to Lower
Binfield, and that was to Mother's funeral?  It sounds incredible
now, but it seemed natural enough at the time.  Partly, I admit, it
was on account of Elsie, whom, of course, I'd stopped writing to
after two or three months.  No doubt she'd picked up with someone
else, but I didn't want to meet her.  Otherwise, perhaps, when I
got a bit of leave I'd have gone down and seen Mother, who'd had
fits when I joined the Army but would have been proud of a son in
uniform.

Father died in 1915.  I was in France at the time.  I don't
exaggerate when I say that Father's death hurts me more now than
it did then.  At the time it was just a bit of bad news which I
accepted almost without interest, in the sort of empty-headed
apathetic way in which one accepted everything in the trenches.
I remember crawling into the doorway of the dugout to get enough
light to read the letter, and I remember Mother's tear-stains on
the letter, and the aching feeling in my knees and the smell of
mud.  Father's life-insurance policy had been mortgaged for most of
its value, but there was a little money in the bank and Sarazins'
were going to buy up the stock and even pay some tiny amount for
the good-will.  Anyway, Mother had a bit over two hundred pounds,
besides the furniture.  She went for the time being to lodge with
her cousin, the wife of a small-holder who was doing pretty well
out of the war, near Doxley, a few miles the other side of Walton.
It was only 'for the time being'.  There was a temporary feeling
about everything.  In the old days, which as a matter of fact were
barely a year old, the whole thing would have been an appalling
disaster.  With Father dead, the shop sold and Mother with two
hundred pounds in the world, you'd have seen stretching out in
front of you a kind of fifteen-act tragedy, the last act being a
pauper's funeral.  But now the war and the feeling of not being
one's own master overshadowed everything.  People hardly thought in
terms of things like bankruptcy and the workhouse any longer.  This
was the case even with Mother, who, God knows, had only very dim
notions about the war.  Besides, she was already dying, though
neither of us knew it.

She came across to see me in the hospital at Eastbourne.  It was
over two years since I'd seen her, and her appearance gave me a bit
of a shock.  She seemed to have faded and somehow to have shrunken.
Partly it was because by this time I was grown-up, I'd travelled,
and everything looked smaller to me, but there was no question that
she'd got thinner, and also yellower.  She talked in the old
rambling way about Aunt Martha (that was the cousin she was staying
with), and the changes in Lower Binfield since the war, and all the
boys who'd 'gone' (meaning joined the Army), and her indigestion
which was 'aggravating', and poor Father's tombstone and what a
lovely corpse he made.  It was the old talk, the talk I'd listened
to for years, and yet somehow it was like a ghost talking.  It
didn't concern me any longer.  I'd known her as a great splendid
protecting kind of creature, a bit like a ship's figure-head and a
bit like a broody hen, and after all she was only a little old
woman in a black dress.  Everything was changing and fading.  That
was the last time I saw her alive.  I got the wire saying she was
seriously ill when I was at the training school at Colchester, and
put in for a week's urgent leave immediately.  But it was too late.
She was dead by the time I got to Doxley.  What she and everyone
else had imagined to be indigestion was some kind of internal
growth, and a sudden chill on the stomach put the final touch.
The doctor tried to cheer me up by telling me that the growth was
'benevolent', which struck me as a queer thing to call it, seeing
that it had killed her.

Well, we buried her next to Father, and that was my last glimpse of
Lower Binfield.  It had changed a lot, even in three years.  Some
of the shops were shut, some had different names over them.  Nearly
all the men I'd known as boys were gone, and some of them were
dead.  Sid Lovegrove was dead, killed on the Somme.  Ginger Watson,
the farm lad who'd belonged to the Black Hand years ago, the one
who used to catch rabbits alive, was dead in Egypt.  One of the
chaps who'd worked with me at Grimmett's had lost both legs.  Old
Lovegrove had shut up his shop and was living in a cottage near
Walton on a tiny annuity.  Old Grimmett, on the other hand, was
doing well out of the war and had turned patriotic and was a member
of the local board which tried conscientious objectors.  The thing
which more than anything else gave the town an empty, forlorn kind
of look was that there were practically no horses left.  Every
horse worth taking had been commandeered long ago.  The station fly
still existed, but the brute that pulled it wouldn't have been able
to stand up if it hadn't been for the shafts.  For the hour or so
that I was there before the funeral I wandered round the town,
saying how d'you do to people and showing off my uniform.  Luckily
I didn't run into Elsie.  I saw all the changes, and yet it was as
though I didn't see them.  My mind was on other things, chiefly the
pleasure of being seen in my second-loot's uniform, with my black
armlet (a thing which looks rather smart on khaki) and my new
whipcord breeches.  I distinctly remember that I was still thinking
about those whipcord breeches when we stood at the graveside.  And
then they chucked some earth on to the coffin and I suddenly
realized what it means for your mother to be lying with seven feet
of earth on top of her, and something kind of twitched behind my
eyes and nose, but even then the whipcord breeches weren't
altogether out of my mind.

Don't think I didn't feel for Mother's death.  I did.  I wasn't in
the trenches any longer, I could feel sorry for a death.  But the
thing I didn't care a damn about, didn't even grasp to be
happening, was the passing-away of the old life I'd known.  After
the funeral, Aunt Martha, who was rather proud of having a 'real
officer' for a nephew and would have made a splash of the funeral
if I'd let her, went back to Doxley on the bus and I took the fly
down to the station, to get the train to London and then to
Colchester.  We drove past the shop.  No one had taken it since
Father died.  It was shut up and the window-pane was black with
dust, and they'd burned the 'S. Bowling' off the signboard with a
plumber's blowflame.  Well, there was the house where I'd been a
child and a boy and a young man, where I'd crawled about the
kitchen floor and smelt the sainfoin and read 'Donovan the
Dauntless', where I'd done my homework for the Grammar School,
mixed bread paste, mended bicycle punctures, and tried on my first
high collar.  It had been as permanent to me as the Pyramids, and
now it would be just an accident if I ever set foot in it again.
Father, Mother, Joe, the errand boys, old Nailer the terrier, Spot,
the one that came after Nailer, Jackie the bullfinch, the cats, the
mice in the loft--all gone, nothing left but dust.  And I didn't
care a damn.  I was sorry Mother was dead, I was even sorry Father
was dead, but all the time my mind was on other things.  I was a
bit proud of being seen riding in a cab, a thing I hadn't yet got
used to, and I was thinking of the sit of my new whipcord breeches,
and my nice smooth officer's putties, so different from the gritty
stuff the Tommies had to wear, and of the other chaps at Colchester
and the sixty quid Mother had left and the beanos we'd have with
it.  Also I was thanking God that I hadn't happened to run into
Elsie.

The war did extraordinary things to people.  And what was more
extraordinary than the way it killed people was the way it
sometimes didn't kill them.  It was like a great flood rushing you
along to death, and suddenly it would shoot you up some backwater
where you'd find yourself doing incredible and pointless things and
drawing extra pay for them.  There were labour battalions making
roads across the desert that didn't lead anywhere, there were chaps
marooned on oceanic islands to look out for German cruisers which
had been sunk years earlier, there were Ministries of this and that
with armies of clerks and typists which went on existing years
after their function had ended, by a kind of inertia.  People were
shoved into meaningless jobs and then forgotten by the authorities
for years on end.  This was what happened to myself, or very likely
I wouldn't be here.  The whole sequence of events is rather
interesting.

A little while after I was gazetted there was a call for officers
of the A.S.C.  As soon as the O.C. of the training camp heard that
I knew something about the grocery trade (I didn't let on that I'd
actually been behind the counter) he told me to send my name in.
That went through all right, and I was just about to leave for
another training-school for A.S.C. officers somewhere in the
Midlands when there was a demand for a young officer, with
knowledge of the grocery trade, to act as some kind of secretary to
Sir Joseph Cheam, who was a big noise in the A.S.C.  God knows why
they picked me out, but at any rate they did so.  I've since
thought that they probably mixed my name up with somebody else's.
Three days later I was saluting in Sir Joseph's office.  He was a
lean, upright, rather handsome old boy with grizzled hair and a
grave-looking nose which immediately impressed me.  He looked the
perfect professional soldier, the K.C.M.G., D.S.O. with bar type,
and might have been twin brother to the chap in the De Reszke
advert, though in private life he was chairman of one of the big
chain groceries and famous all over the world for something called
the Cheam Wage-Cut System.  He stopped writing as I came in and
looked me over.

'You a gentleman?'

'No, sir.'

'Good.  Then perhaps we'll get some work done.'

In about three minutes he'd wormed out of me that I had no
secretarial experience, didn't know shorthand, couldn't use a
typewriter, and had worked in a grocery at twenty-eight shillings a
week.  However, he said that I'd do, there were too many gentlemen
in this damned Army and he'd been looking for somebody who could
count beyond ten.  I liked him and looked forward to working for
him, but just at this moment the mysterious powers that seemed to
be running the war drove us apart again.  Something called the West
Coast Defence Force was being formed, or rather was being talked
about, and there was some vague idea of establishing dumps of
rations and other stores at various points along the coast.  Sir
Joseph was supposed to be responsible for the dumps in the south-
west corner of England.  The day after I joined his office he sent
me down to check over the stores at a place called Twelve Mile
Dump, on the North Cornish Coast.  Or rather my job was to find out
whether any stores existed.  Nobody seemed certain about this.  I'd
just got there and discovered that the stores consisted of eleven
tins of bully beef when a wire arrived from the War Office telling
me to take charge of the stores at Twelve Mile Dump and remain
there till further notice.  I wired back 'No stores at Twelve Mile
Dump.'  Too late.  Next day came the official letter informing me
that I was O.C. Twelve Mile Dump.  And that's really the end of the
story.  I remained O.C. Twelve Mile Dump for the rest of the war.

God knows what it was all about.  It's no use asking me what the
West Coast Defence Force was or what it was supposed to do.  Even
at that time nobody pretended to know.  In any case it didn't
exist.  It was just a scheme that had floated through somebody's
mind--following on some vague rumour of a German invasion via
Ireland, I suppose--and the food dumps which were supposed to exist
all along the coast were also imaginary.  The whole thing had
existed for about three days, like a sort of bubble, and then had
been forgotten, and I'd been forgotten with it.  My eleven tins of
bully beef had been left behind by some officers who had been there
earlier on some other mysterious mission.  They'd also left behind
a very deaf old man called Private Lidgebird.  What Lidgebird was
supposed to be doing there I never discovered.  I wonder whether
you'll believe that I remained guarding those eleven tins of bully
beef from half-way through 1917 to the beginning of 1919?  Probably
you won't, but it's the truth.  And at the time even that didn't
seem particularly strange.  By 1918 one had simply got out of the
habit of expecting things to happen in a reasonable manner.

Once a month they sent me an enormous official form calling upon me
to state the number and condition of pick-axes, entrenching tools,
coils of barbed wire, blankets, waterproof groundsheets, first-aid
outfits, sheets of corrugated iron, and tins of plum and apple jam
under my care.  I just entered 'nil' against everything and sent
the form back.  Nothing ever happened.  Up in London someone was
quietly filing the forms, and sending out more forms, and filing
those, and so on.  It was the way things were happening.  The
mysterious higher-ups who were running the war had forgotten my
existence.  I didn't jog their memory.  I was up a backwater that
didn't lead anywhere, and after two years in France I wasn't so
burning with patriotism that I wanted to get out of it.

It was a lonely part of the coast where you never saw a soul except
a few yokels who'd barely heard there was a war on.  A quarter of a
mile away, down a little hill, the sea boomed and surged over
enormous flats of sand.  Nine months of the year it rained, and the
other three a raging wind blew off the Atlantic.  There was nothing
there except Private Lidgebird, myself, two Army huts--one of them
a decentish two-roomed hut which I inhabited--and the eleven tins
of bully beef.  Lidgebird was a surly old devil and I could never
get much out of him except the fact that he'd been a market
gardener before he joined the Army.  It was interesting to see how
rapidly he was reverting to type.  Even before I got to Twelve Mile
Dump he'd dug a patch round one of the huts and started planting
spuds, in the autumn he dug another patch till he'd got about half
an acre under cultivation, at the beginning of 1918 he started
keeping hens which had got to quite a number by the end of the
summer, and towards the end of the year he suddenly produced a pig
from God knows where.  I don't think it crossed his mind to wonder
what the devil we were doing there, or what the West Coast Defence
Force was and whether it actually existed.  It wouldn't surprise me
to hear that he's there still, raising pigs and potatoes on the
spot where Twelve Mile Dump used to be.  I hope he is.  Good luck
to him.

Meanwhile I was doing something I'd never before had the chance to
do as a full-time job--reading.

The officers who'd been there before had left a few books behind,
mostly sevenpenny editions and nearly all of them the kind of tripe
that people were reading in those days.  Ian Hay and Sapper and the
Craig Kennedy stories and so forth.  But at some time or other
somebody had been there who knew what books are worth reading and
what are not.  I myself, at the time, didn't know anything of the
kind.  The only books I'd ever voluntarily read were detective
stories and once in a way a smutty sex book.  God knows I don't set
up to be a highbrow even now, but if you'd asked me THEN for the
name of a 'good' book I'd have answered The Woman Thou Gavest Me,
or (in memory of the vicar) Sesame and Lilies.  In any case a
'good' book was a book one didn't have any intention of reading.
But there I was, in a job where there was less than nothing to do,
with the sea booming on the beach and the rain streaming down the
window-panes--and a whole row of books staring me in the face on
the temporary shelf someone had rigged up against the wall of the
hut.  Naturally I started to read them from end to end, with, at
the beginning, about as much attempt to discriminate as a pig
working its way through a pail of garbage.

But in among them there were three or four books that were
different from the others.  No, you've got it wrong!  Don't run
away with the idea that I suddenly discovered Marcel Proust or
Henry James or somebody.  I wouldn't have read them even if I had.
These books I'm speaking of weren't in the least highbrow.  But now
and again it so happens that you strike a book which is exactly at
the mental level you've reached at the moment, so much so that it
seems to have been written especially for you.  One of them was
H. G. Wells's The History of Mr Polly, in a cheap shilling edition
which was falling to pieces.  I wonder if you can imagine the
effect it had upon me, to be brought up as I'd been brought up, the
son of a shopkeeper in a country town, and then to come across a
book like that?  Another was Compton Mackenzie's Sinister Street.
It had been the scandal of the season a few years back, and I'd
even heard vague rumours of it in Lower Binfield.  Another was
Conrad's Victory, parts of which bored me.  But books like that
started you thinking.  And there was a back number of some magazine
with a blue cover which had a short story of D. H. Lawrence's in
it.  I don't remember the name of it.  It was a story about a
German conscript who shoves his sergeant-major over the edge of a
fortification and then does a bunk and gets caught in his girl's
bedroom.  It puzzled me a lot.  I couldn't make out what it was all
about, and yet it left me with a vague feeling that I'd like to
read some others like it.

Well, for several months I had an appetite for books that was
almost like physical thirst.  It was the first real go-in at
reading that I'd had since my Dick Donovan days.  At the beginning
I had no idea how to set about getting hold of books.  I thought
the only way was to buy them.  That's interesting, I think.  It
shows you the difference upbringing makes.  I suppose the children
of the middle classes, the 500 pounds a year middle classes, know
all about Mudie's and the Times Book Club when they're in their
cradles.  A bit later I learned of the existence of lending
libraries and took out a subscription at Mudie's and another at a
library in Bristol.  And what I read during the next year or so!
Wells, Conrad, Kipling, Galsworthy, Barry Pain, W. W. Jacobs, Pett
Ridge, Oliver Onions, Compton Mackenzie, H. Seton Merriman, Maurice
Baring, Stephen McKenna, May Sinclair, Arnold Bennett, Anthony
Hope, Elinor Glyn, O. Henry, Stephen Leacock, and even Silas
Hocking and Jean Stratton Porter.  How many of the names in that
list are known to you, I wonder?  Half the books that people took
seriously in those days are forgotten now.  But at the beginning I
swallowed them all down like a whale that's got in among a shoal of
shrimps.  I just revelled in them.  After a bit, of course, I grew
more highbrow and began to distinguish between tripe and not-tripe.
I got hold of Lawrence's Sons and Lovers and sort of half-enjoyed
it, and I got a lot of kick out of Oscar Wilde's Dorian Gray and
Stevenson's New Arabian Nights.  Wells was the author who made the
biggest impression on me.  I read George Moore's Esther Waters and
liked it, and I tried several of Hardy's novels and always got
stuck about half-way through.  I even had a go at Ibsen, who left
me with a vague impression that in Norway it's always raining.

It was queer, really.  Even at the time it struck me as queer.  I
was a second-loot with hardly any Cockney accent left, I could
already distinguish between Arnold Bennett and Elinor Glyn, and yet
it was only four years since I'd been slicing cheese behind the
counter in my white apron and looking forward to the days when I'd
be a master-grocer.  If I tot up the account, I suppose I must
admit that the war did me good as well as harm.  At any rate that
year of reading novels was the only real education, in the sense of
book-learning, that I've ever had.  It did certain things to my
mind.  It gave me an attitude, a kind of questioning attitude,
which I probably wouldn't have had if I'd gone through life in a
normal sensible way.  But--I wonder if you can understand this--the
thing that really changed me, really made an impression on me,
wasn't so much the books I read as the rotten meaninglessness of
the life I was leading.

It really was unspeakably meaningless, that time in 1918.  Here I
was, sitting beside the stove in an Army hut, reading novels, and a
few hundred miles away in France the guns were roaring and droves
of wretched children, wetting their bags with fright, were being
driven into the machine-gun barrage like you'd shoot small coke
into a furnace.  I was one of the lucky ones.  The higher-ups had
taken their eye off me, and here I was in a snug little bolt-hole,
drawing pay for a job that didn't exist.  At times I got into a
panic and made sure they'd remember about me and dig me out, but it
never happened.  The official forms, on gritty grey paper, came in
once a month, and I filled them up and sent them back, and more
forms came in, and I filled them up and sent them back, and so it
went on.  The whole thing had about as much sense in it as a
lunatic's dream.  The effect of all this, plus the books I was
reading, was to leave me with a feeling of disbelief in everything.

I wasn't the only one.  The war was full of loose ends and
forgotten corners.  By this time literally millions of people were
stuck up backwaters of one kind and another.  Whole armies were
rotting away on fronts that people had forgotten the names of.
There were huge Ministries with hordes of clerks and typists all
drawing two pounds a week and upwards for piling up mounds of
paper.  Moreover they knew perfectly well that all they were doing
was to pile up mounds of paper.  Nobody believed the atrocity
stories and the gallant little Belgium stuff any longer.  The
soldiers thought the Germans were good fellows and hated the French
like poison.  Every junior officer looked on the General Staff as
mental defectives.  A sort of wave of disbelief was moving across
England, and it even got as far as Twelve Mile Dump.  It would be
an exaggeration to say that the war turned people into highbrows,
but it did turn them into nihilists for the time being.  People who
in a normal way would have gone through life with about as much
tendency to think for themselves as a suet pudding were turned into
Bolshies just by the war.  What should I be now if it hadn't been
for the war?  I don't know, but something different from what I am.
If the war didn't happen to kill you it was bound to start you
thinking.  After that unspeakable idiotic mess you couldn't go on
regarding society as something eternal and unquestionable, like a
pyramid.  You knew it was just a balls-up.



9


The war had jerked me out of the old life I'd known, but in the
queer period that came afterwards I forgot it almost completely.

I know that in a sense one never forgets anything.  You remember
that piece of orange-peel you saw in the gutter thirteen years ago,
and that coloured poster of Torquay that you once got a glimpse of
in a railway waiting-room.  But I'm speaking of a different kind of
memory.  In a sense I remembered the old life in Lower Binfield.
I remembered my fishing-rod and the smell of sainfoin and Mother
behind the brown teapot and Jackie the bullfinch and the horse-
trough in the market-place.  But none of it was alive in my mind
any longer.  It was something far away, something that I'd finished
with.  It would never have occurred to me that some day I might
want to go back to it.

It was a queer time, those years just after the war, almost queerer
than the war itself, though people don't remember it so vividly.
In a rather different form the sense of disbelieving in everything
was stronger than ever.  Millions of men had suddenly been kicked
out of the Army to find that the country they'd fought for didn't
want them, and Lloyd George and his pals were giving the works to
any illusions that still existed.  Bands of ex-service men marched
up and down rattling collection boxes, masked women were singing in
the streets, and chaps in officers' tunics were grinding barrel-
organs.  Everybody in England seemed to be scrambling for jobs,
myself included.  But I came off luckier than most.  I got a small
wound-gratuity, and what with that and the bit of money I'd put
aside during the last year of war (not having had much opportunity
to spend it), I came out of the Army with no less than three
hundred and fifty quid.  It's rather interesting, I think, to
notice my reaction.  Here I was, with quite enough money to do the
thing I'd been brought up to do and the thing I'd dreamed of for
years--that is, start a shop.  I had plenty of capital.  If you
bide your time and keep your eyes open you can run across quite
nice little businesses for three hundred and fifty quid.  And yet,
if you'll believe me, the idea never occurred to me.  I not only
didn't make any move towards starting a shop, but it wasn't till
years later, about 1925 in fact, that it even crossed my mind that
I might have done so.  The fact was that I'd passed right out of
the shopkeeping orbit.  That was what the Army did to you.  It
turned you into an imitation gentleman and gave you a fixed idea
that there'd always be a bit of money coming from somewhere.  If
you'd suggested to me then, in 1919, that I ought to start a shop--
a tobacco and sweet shop, say, or a general store in some god-
forsaken village--I'd just have laughed.  I'd worn pips on my
shoulder, and my social standards had risen.  At the same time I
didn't share the delusion, which was pretty common among ex-
officers, that I could spend the rest of my life drinking pink gin.
I knew I'd got to have a job.  And the job, of course, would be 'in
business'--just what kind of job I didn't know, but something high-
up and important, something with a car and a telephone and if
possible a secretary with a permanent wave.  During the last year
or so of war a lot of us had had visions like that.  The chap who'd
been a shop walker saw himself as a travelling salesman, and the
chap who'd been a travelling salesman saw himself as a managing
director.  It was the effect of Army life, the effect of wearing
pips and having a cheque-book and calling the evening meal dinner.
All the while there'd been an idea floating round--and this applied
to the men in the ranks as well as the officers--that when we came
out of the Army there'd be jobs waiting for us that would bring in
at least as much as our Army pay.  Of course, if ideas like that
didn't circulate, no war would ever be fought.

Well, I didn't get that job.  It seemed that nobody was anxious to
pay me 2,000 pounds a year for sitting among streamlined office
furniture and dictating letters to a platinum blonde.  I was
discovering what three-quarters of the blokes who'd been officers
were discovering--that from a financial point of view we'd been
better off in the Army than we were ever likely to be again.  We'd
suddenly changed from gentlemen holding His Majesty's commission
into miserable out-of-works whom nobody wanted.  My ideas soon sank
from two thousand a year to three or four pounds a week.  But even
jobs of the three or four pounds a week kind didn't seem to exist.
Every mortal job was filled already, either by men who'd been a few
years too old to fight, or by boys who'd been a few months too
young.  The poor bastards who'd happened to be born between 1890
and 1900 were left out in the cold.  And still it never occurred to
me to go back to the grocering business.  Probably I could have got
a job as a grocer's assistant; old Grimmett, if he was still alive
and in business (I wasn't in touch with Lower Binfield and didn't
know), would have given me good refs.  But I'd passed into a
different orbit.  Even if my social ideas hadn't risen, I could
hardly have imagined, after what I'd seen and learned, going back
to the old safe existence behind the counter.  I wanted to be
travelling about and pulling down the big dough.  Chiefly I wanted
to be a travelling salesman, which I knew would suit me.

But there were no jobs for travelling salesmen--that's to say, jobs
with a salary attached.  What there were, however, were on-
commission jobs.  That racket was just beginning on a big, scale.
It's a beautifully simple method of increasing your sales and
advertising your stuff without taking any risks, and it always
flourishes when times are bad.  They keep you on a string by
hinting that perhaps there'll be a salaried job going in three
months' time, and when you get fed up there's always some other
poor devil ready to take over.  Naturally it wasn't long before I
had an on-commission job, in fact I had quite a number in rapid
succession.  Thank God, I never came down to peddling vacuum-
cleaners, or dictionaries.  But I travelled in cutlery, in soap-
powder, in a line of patent corkscrews, tin-openers, and similar
gadgets, and finally in a line of office accessories--paper-clips,
carbon paper, typewriter ribbons, and so forth.  I didn't do so
badly either.  I'm the type that CAN sell things on commission.
I've got the temperament and I've got the manner.  But I never came
anywhere near making a decent living.  You can't, in jobs like
that--and, of course, you aren't meant to.

I had about a year of it altogether.  It was a queer time.  The
cross-country journeys, the godless places you fetched up in,
suburbs of Midland towns that you'd never hear of in a hundred
normal lifetimes.  The ghastly bed-and-breakfast houses where the
sheets always smell faintly of slops and the fried egg at breakfast
has a yolk paler than a lemon.  And the other poor devils of
salesmen that you're always meeting, middle-aged fathers of
families in moth-eaten overcoats and bowler hats, who honestly
believe that sooner or later trade will turn the corner and they'll
jack their earnings up to five quid a week.  And the traipsing from
shop to shop, and the arguments with shopkeepers who don't want to
listen, and the standing back and making yourself small when a
customer comes in.  Don't think that it worried me particularly.
To some chaps that kind of life is torture.  There are chaps who
can't even walk into a shop and open their bag of samples without
screwing themselves up as though they were going over the top.  But
I'm not like that.  I'm tough, I can talk people into buying things
they don't want, and even if they slam the door in my face it
doesn't bother me.  Selling things on commission is actually what I
like doing, provided I can see my way to making a bit of dough out
of it.  I don't know whether I learned much in that year, but I
unlearned a good deal.  It knocked the Army nonsense out of me, and
it drove into the back of my head the notions that I'd picked up
during the idle year when I was reading novels.  I don't think I
read a single book, barring detective stories, all the time I was
on the road.  I wasn't a highbrow any longer.  I was down among the
realities of modern life.  And what are the realities of modern
life?  Well, the chief one is an everlasting, frantic struggle to
sell things.  With most people it takes the form of selling
themselves--that's to say, getting a job and keeping it.  I suppose
there hasn't been a single month since the war, in any trade you
care to name, in which there weren't more men than jobs.  It's
brought a peculiar, ghastly feeling into life.  It's like on a
sinking ship when there are nineteen survivors and fourteen
lifebelts.  But is there anything particularly modern in that, you
say?  Has it anything to do with the war?  Well, it feels as if it
had.  That feeling that you've got to be everlastingly fighting and
hustling, that you'll never get anything unless you grab it from
somebody else, that there's always somebody after your job, the
next month or the month after they'll be reducing staff and it's
you that'll get the bird--THAT, I swear, didn't exist in the old
life before the war.

But meanwhile I wasn't badly off.  I was earning a bit and I'd
still got plenty of money in the bank, nearly two hundred quid, and
I wasn't frightened for the future.  I knew that sooner or later
I'd get a regular job.  And sure enough, after about a year, by a
stroke of luck it happened.  I say by a stroke of luck, but the
fact is that I was bound to fall on my feet.  I'm not the type that
starves.  I'm about as likely to end up in the workhouse as to end
up in the House of Lords.  I'm the middling type, the type that
gravitates by a kind of natural law towards the five-pound-a-week
level.  So long as there are any jobs at all I'll back myself to
get one.

It happened when I was peddling paper-clips and typewriter ribbons.
I'd just dodged into a huge block of offices in Fleet Street, a
building which canvassers weren't allowed into, as a matter of
fact, but I'd managed to give the lift attendant the impression
that my bag of samples was merely an attache case.  I was walking
along one of the corridors looking for the offices of a small
toothpaste firm that I'd been recommended to try, when I saw that
some very big bug was coming down the corridor in the other
direction.  I knew immediately that it was a big bug.  You know how
it is with these big business men, they seem to take up more room
and walk more loudly than any ordinary person, and they give off a
kind of wave of money that you can feel fifty yards away.  When he
got nearly up to me I saw that it was Sir Joseph Cheam.  He was in
civvies, of course, but I had no difficulty in recognizing him.  I
suppose he'd been there for some business conference or other.  A
couple of clerks, or secretaries, or something, were following
after him, not actually holding up his train, because he wasn't
wearing one, but you somehow felt that that was what they were
doing.  Of course I dodged aside instantly.  But curiously enough
he recognized me, though he hadn't seen me for years.  To my
surprise he stopped and spoke to me.

'Hullo, you!  I've seen you somewhere before.  What's your name?
It's on the tip of my tongue.'

'Bowling, sir.  Used to be in the A.S.C.'

'Of course.  The boy that said he wasn't a gentleman.  What are you
doing here?'

I might have told him I was selling typewriter ribbons, and there
perhaps the whole thing would have ended.  But I had one of those
sudden inspirations that you get occasionally--a feeling that I
might make something out of this if I handled it properly.  I said
instead:

'Well, sir, as a matter of fact I'm looking for a job.'

'A job, eh?  Hm.  Not so easy, nowadays.'

He looked me up and down for a second.  The two train-bearers had
kind of wafted themselves a little distance away.  I saw his rather
good-looking old face, with the heavy grey eyebrows and the
intelligent nose, looking me over and realized that he'd decided to
help me.  It's queer, the power of these rich men.  He'd been
marching past me in his power and glory, with his underlings after
him, and then on some whim or other he'd turned aside like an
emperor suddenly chucking a coin to a beggar.

'So you want a job?  What can you do?'

Again the inspiration.  No use, with a bloke like this, cracking up
your own merits.  Stick to the truth.  I said:  'Nothing, sir.  But
I want a job as a travelling salesman.'

'Salesman?  Hm.  Not sure that I've got anything for you at
present.  Let's see.'

He pursed his lips up.  For a moment, half a minute perhaps, he
was thinking quite deeply.  It was curious.  Even at the time I
realized that it was curious.  This important old bloke, who was
probably worth at least half a million, was actually taking thought
on my behalf.  I'd deflected him from his path and wasted at least
three minutes of his time, all because of a chance remark I'd
happened to make years earlier.  I'd stuck in his memory and
therefore he was willing to take the tiny bit of trouble that was
needed to find me a job.  I dare say the same day he gave twenty
clerks the sack.  Finally he said:

'How'd you like to go into an insurance firm?  Always fairly safe,
you know.  People have got to have insurance, same as they've got
to eat.'

Of course I jumped at the idea of going into an insurance firm.
Sir Joseph was 'interested' in the Flying Salamander.  God knows
how many companies he was 'interested' in.  One of the underlings
wafted himself forward with a scribbling-pad, and there and then,
with the gold stylo out of his waistcoat pocket, Sir Joseph
scribbled me a note to some higher-up in the Flying Salamander.
Then I thanked him, and he marched on, and I sneaked off in the
other direction, and we never saw one another again.

Well, I got the job, and, as I said earlier, the job got me.  I've
been with the Flying Salamander close on eighteen years.  I started
off in the office, but now I'm what's known as an Inspector,
or, when there's reason to sound particularly impressive, a
Representative.  A couple of days a week I'm working in the
district office, and the rest of the time I'm travelling around,
interviewing clients whose names have been sent in by the local
agents, making assessments of shops and other property, and now and
again snapping up a few orders on my own account.  I earn round
about seven quid a week.  And properly speaking that's the end of
my story.

When I look back I realize that my active life, if I ever had one,
ended when I was sixteen.  Everything that really matters to me had
happened before that date.  But in a manner of speaking things were
still happening--the war, for instance--up to the time when I got
the job with the Flying Salamander.  After that--well, they say
that happy people have no histories, and neither do the blokes who
work in insurance offices.  From that day forward there was nothing
in my life that you could properly describe as an event, except
that about two and a half years later, at the beginning of '23, I
got married.



10


I was living in a boarding-house in Ealing.  The years were rolling
on, or crawling on.  Lower Binfield had passed almost out of my
memory.  I was the usual young city worker who scoots for the 8.15
and intrigues for the other fellow's job.  I was fairly well
thought of in the firm and pretty satisfied with life.  The post-
war success dope had caught me, more or less.  You remember the
line of talk.  Pep, punch, grit, sand.  Get on or get out.  There's
plenty of room at the top.  You can't keep a good man down.  And
the ads in the magazines about the chap that the boss clapped on
the shoulder, and the keen-jawed executive who's pulling down the
big dough and attributes his success to so and so's correspondence
course.  It's funny how we all swallowed it, even blokes like me to
whom it hadn't the smallest application.  Because I'm neither a go-
getter nor a down-and-out, and I'm by nature incapable of being
either.  But it was the spirit of the time.  Get on!  Make good!
If you see a man down, jump on his guts before he gets up again.
Of course this was in the early twenties, when some of the effects
of the war had worn off and the slump hadn't yet arrived to knock
the stuffing out of us.

I had an 'A' subscription at Boots and went to half-crown dances
and belonged to a local tennis club.  You know those tennis clubs
in the genteel suburbs--little wooden pavilions and high wire-
netting enclosures where young chaps in rather badly cut white
flannels prance up and down, shouting 'Fifteen forty!' and 'Vantage
all!' in voices which are a tolerable imitation of the Upper Crust.
I'd learned to play tennis, didn't dance too badly, and got on well
with the girls.  At nearly thirty I wasn't a bad-looking chap, with
my red face and butter-coloured hair, and in those days it was
still a point in your favour to have fought in the war.  I never,
then or at any other time, succeeded in looking like a gentleman,
but on the other hand you probably wouldn't have taken me for the
son of a small shopkeeper in a country town.  I could keep my end
up in the rather mixed society of a place like Ealing, where the
office-employee class overlaps with the middling-professional
class.  It was at the tennis club that I first met Hilda.

At that time Hilda was twenty-four.  She was a small, slim, rather
timid girl, with dark hair, beautiful movements, and--because of
having very large eyes--a distinct resemblance to a hare.  She was
one of those people who never say much, but remain on the edge of
any conversation that's going on, and give the impression that
they're listening.  If she said anything at all, it was usually
'Oh, yes, I think so too', agreeing with whoever had spoken last.
At tennis she hopped about very gracefully, and didn't play badly,
but somehow had a helpless, childish air.  Her surname was Vincent.

If you're married, there'll have been times when you've said to
yourself 'Why the hell did I do it?' and God knows I've said it
often enough about Hilda.  And once again, looking at it across
fifteen years, why DID I marry Hilda?

Partly, of course, because she was young and in a way very pretty.
Beyond that I can only say that because she came of totally
different origins from myself it was very difficult for me to get
any grasp of what she was really like.  I had to marry her first
and find out about her afterwards, whereas if I'd married say,
Elsie Waters, I'd have known what I was marrying.  Hilda belonged
to a class I only knew by hearsay, the poverty-stricken officer
class.  For generations past her family had been soldiers, sailors,
clergymen, Anglo-Indian officials, and that kind of thing.  They'd
never had any money, but on the other hand none of them had ever
done anything that I should recognize as work.  Say what you will,
there's a kind of snob-appeal in that, if you belong as I do to the
God-fearing shopkeeper class, the low church, and high-tea class.
It wouldn't make any impression on me now, but it did then.  Don't
mistake what I'm saying.  I don't mean that I married Hilda BECAUSE
she belonged to the class I'd once served across the counter, with
some notion of jockeying myself up in the social scale.  It was
merely that I couldn't understand her and therefore was capable of
being goofy about her.  And one thing I certainly didn't grasp was
that the girls in these penniless middle-class families will marry
anything in trousers, just to get away from home.

It wasn't long before Hilda took me home to see her family.  I
hadn't known till then that there was a considerable Anglo-Indian
colony in Ealing.  Talk about discovering a new world!  It was
quite a revelation to me.

Do you know these Anglo-Indian families?  It's almost impossible,
when you get inside these people's houses, to remember that out in
the street it's England and the twentieth century.  As soon as you
set foot inside the front door you're in India in the eighties.
You know the kind of atmosphere.  The carved teak furniture, the
brass trays, the dusty tiger-skulls on the wall, the Trichinopoly
cigars, the red-hot pickles, the yellow photographs of chaps in
sun-helmets, the Hindustani words that you're expected to know the
meaning of, the everlasting anecdotes about tiger-shoots and what
Smith said to Jones in Poona in '87.  It's a sort of little world
of their own that they've created, like a kind of cyst.  To me, of
course, it was all quite new and in some ways rather interesting.
Old Vincent, Hilda's father, had been not only in India but also in
some even more outlandish place, Borneo or Sarawak, I forget which.
He was the usual type, completely bald, almost invisible behind his
moustache, and full of stories about cobras and cummerbunds and
what the district collector said in '93.  Hilda's mother was so
colourless that she was just like one of the faded photos on the
wall.  There was also a son, Harold, who had some official job in
Ceylon and was home on leave at the time when I first met Hilda.
They had a little dark house in one of those buried back-streets
that exist in Ealing.  It smelt perpetually of Trichinopoly cigars
and it was so full of spears, blow-pipes, brass ornaments, and the
heads of wild animals that you could hardly move about in it.

Old Vincent had retired in 1910, and since then he and his wife had
shown about as much activity, mental or physical, as a couple of
shellfish.  But at the time I was vaguely impressed by a family
which had had majors, colonels, and once even an admiral in it.
My attitude towards the Vincents, and theirs towards me, is an
interesting illustration of what fools people can be when they get
outside their own line.  Put me among business people--whether
they're company directors or commercial travellers--and I'm a
fairly good judge of character.  But I had no experience whatever
of the officer-rentier-clergyman class, and I was inclined to kow-
tow to these decayed throw-outs.  I looked on them as my social and
intellectual superiors, while they on the other hand mistook me for
a rising young businessman who before long would be pulling down
the big dough.  To people of that kind, 'business', whether it's
marine insurance or selling peanuts, is just a dark mystery.  All
they know is that it's something rather vulgar out of which you can
make money.  Old Vincent used to talk impressively about my being
'in business'--once, I remember, he had a slip of the tongue and
said 'in trade'--and obviously didn't grasp the difference between
being in business as an employee and being there on your own
account.  He had some vague notion that as I was 'in' the Flying
Salamander I should sooner or later rise to the top of it, by a
process of promotion.  I think it's possible that he also had
pictures of himself touching me for fivers at some future date.
Harold certainly had.  I could see it in his eye.  In fact, even
with my income being what it is, I'd probably be lending money to
Harold at this moment if he were alive.  Luckily he died a few
years after we were married, of enteric or something, and both the
old Vincents are dead too.

Well, Hilda and I were married, and right from the start it was a
flop.  Why did you marry her? you say.  But why did you marry
yours?  These things happen to us.  I wonder whether you'll believe
that during the first two or three years I had serious thoughts of
killing Hilda.  Of course in practice one never does these things,
they're only a kind of fantasy that one enjoys thinking about.
Besides, chaps who murder their wives always get copped.  However
cleverly you've faked the alibi, they know perfectly well that it's
you who did it, and they'll pin it on to you somehow.  When a
woman's bumped off, her husband is always the first suspect--which
gives you a little side-glimpse of what people really think about
marriage.

One gets used to everything in time.  After a year or two I stopped
wanting to kill her and started wondering about her.  Just
wondering.  For hours, sometimes, on Sunday afternoons or in the
evening when I've come home from work, I've lain on my bed with all
my clothes on except my shoes, wondering about women.  Why they're
like that, how they get like that, whether they're doing it on
purpose.  It seems to be a most frightful thing, the suddenness
with which some women go to pieces after they're married.  It's as
if they were strung up to do just that one thing, and the instant
they've done it they wither off like a flower that's set its seed.
What really gets me down is the dreary attitude towards life that
it implies.  If marriage was just an open swindle--if the woman
trapped you into it and then turned round and said, 'Now, you
bastard, I've caught you and you're going to work for me while I
have a good time!'--I wouldn't mind so much.  But not a bit of it.
They don't want to have a good time, they merely want to slump into
middle age as quickly as possible.  After the frightful battle of
getting her man to the altar, the woman kind of relaxes, and all
her youth, looks, energy, and joy of life just vanish overnight.
It was like that with Hilda.  Here was this pretty, delicate girl,
who'd seemed to me--and in fact when I first knew her she WAS--a
finer type of animal than myself, and within only about three years
she'd settled down into a depressed, lifeless, middle-aged frump.
I'm not denying that I was part of the reason.  But whoever she'd
married it would have been much the same.

What Hilda lacks--I discovered this about a week after we were
married--is any kind of joy in life, any kind of interest in things
for their own sake.  The idea of doing things because you enjoy
them is something she can hardly understand.  It was through Hilda
that I first got a notion of what these decayed middle-class
families are really like.  The essential fact about them is that
all their vitality has been drained away by lack of money.  In
families like that, which live on tiny pensions and annuities--
that's to say on incomes which never get bigger and generally get
smaller--there's more sense of poverty, more crust-wiping, and
looking twice at sixpence, than you'd find in any farm-labourer's
family, let alone a family like mine.  Hilda's often told me that
almost the first thing she can remember is a ghastly feeling that
there was never enough money for anything.  Of course, in that kind
of family, the lack of money is always at its worst when the kids
are at the school-age.  Consequently they grow up, especially the
girls, with a fixed idea not only that one always IS hard-up but
that it's one's duty to be miserable about it.

At the beginning we lived in a poky little maisonette and had a job
to get by on my wages.  Later, when I was transferred to the West
Bletchley branch, things were better, but Hilda's attitude didn't
change.  Always that ghastly glooming about money!  The milk bill!
The coal bill!  The rent!  The school fees!  We've lived all our
life together to the tune of 'Next week we'll be in the workhouse.'
It's not that Hilda's mean, in the ordinary sense of the word, and
still less that she's selfish.  Even when there happens to be a bit
of spare cash knocking about I can hardly persuade her to buy
herself any decent clothes.  But she's got this feeling that you
OUGHT to be perpetually working yourself up into a stew about lack
of money.  Just working up an atmosphere of misery from a sense of
duty.  I'm not like that.  I've got more the prole's attitude
towards money.  Life's here to be lived, and if we're going to be
in the soup next week--well, next week is a long way off.  What
really shocks her is the fact that I refuse to worry.  She's always
going for me about it.  'But, George!  You don't seem to REALIZE!
We've simply got no money at all!  It's very SERIOUS!'  She loves
getting into a panic because something or other is 'serious'.  And
of late she's got that trick, when she's glooming about something,
of kind of hunching her shoulders and folding her arms across her
breast.  If you made a list of Hilda's remarks throughout the day,
you'd find three bracketed together at the top--'We can't afford
it', 'It's a great saving', and 'I don't know where the money's to
come from'.  She does everything for negative reasons.  When she
makes a cake she's not thinking about the cake, only about how to
save butter and eggs.  When I'm in bed with her all she thinks
about is how not to have a baby.  If she goes to the pictures she's
all the time writhing with indignation about the price of the
seats.  Her methods of housekeeping, with all the emphasis on
'using things up' and 'making things do', would have given Mother
convulsions.  On the other hand, Hilda isn't in the least a snob.
She's never looked down on me because I'm not a gentleman.  On the
contrary, from her point of view I'm much too lordly in my habits.
We never have a meal in a tea-shop without a frightful row in
whispers because I'm tipping the waitress too much.  And it's a
curious thing that in the last few years she's become much more
definitely lower-middle-class, in outlook and even in appearance,
than I am.  Of course all this 'saving' business has never led to
anything.  It never does.  We live just about as well or as badly
as the other people in Ellesmere Road.  But the everlasting stew
about the gas bill and the milk bill and the awful price of butter
and the kids' boots and school-fees goes on and on.  It's a kind of
game with Hilda.

We moved to West Bletchley in '29 and started buying the house in
Ellesmere Road the next year, a little before Billy was born.
After I was made an Inspector I was more away from home and had
more opportunities with other women.  Of course I was unfaithful--
I won't say all the time, but as often as I got the chance.
Curiously enough, Hilda was jealous.  In a way, considering how
little that kind of thing means to her, I wouldn't have expected
her to mind.  And like all jealous women she'll sometimes show a
cunning you wouldn't think her capable of.  Sometimes the way she's
caught me out would have made me believe in telepathy, if it wasn't
that she's often been equally suspicious when I didn't happen to be
guilty.  I'm more or less permanently under suspicion, though, God
knows, in the last few years--the last five years, anyway--I've
been innocent enough.  You have to be, when you're as fat as I am.

Taking it by and large, I suppose Hilda and I don't get on worse
than about half the couples in Ellesmere Road.  There've been times
when I've thought of separation or divorce, but in our walk of life
you don't do those things.  You can't afford to.  And then time
goes on, and you kind of give up struggling.  When you've lived
with a woman for fifteen years, it's difficult to imagine life
without her.  She's part of the order of things.  I dare say you
might find things to object to in the sun and the moon, but do you
really want to change them?  Besides, there were the kids.  Kids
are a 'link', as they say.  Or a 'tie'.  Not to say a ball and
fetter.

Of late years Hilda has made two great friends called Mrs Wheeler
and Miss Minns.  Mrs Wheeler is a widow, and I gather she's got
very bitter ideas about the male sex.  I can feel her kind of
quivering with disapproval if I so much as come into the room.
She's a faded little woman and gives you a curious impression that
she's the same colour all over, a kind of greyish dust-colour, but
she's full of energy.  She's a bad influence on Hilda, because
she's got the same passion for 'saving' and 'making things do',
though in a slightly different form.  With her it takes the form
of thinking that you can have a good time without paying for it.
She's for ever nosing out bargains and amusements that don't cost
money.  With people like that it doesn't matter a damn whether they
want a thing or not, it's merely a question of whether they can get
it on the cheap.  When the big shops have their remnant sales Mrs
Wheeler's always at the head of the queue, and it's her greatest
pride, after a day's hard fighting round the counter, to come out
without having bought anything.  Miss Minns is quite a different
sort.  She's really a sad case, poor Miss Minns.  She's a tall thin
woman of about thirty-eight, with black patent-leather hair and a
very GOOD, trusting kind of face.  She lives on some kind of tiny
fixed income, an annuity or something, and I fancy she's a left-
over from the old society of West Bletchley, when it was a little
country town, before the suburb grew up.  It's written all over her
that her father was a clergyman and sat on her pretty heavily while
he lived.  They're a special by-product of the middle classes,
these women who turn into withered bags before they even manage to
escape from home.  Poor old Miss Minns, for all her wrinkles, still
looks exactly like a child.  It's still a tremendous adventure to
her not to go to church.  She's always burbling about 'modern
progress' and 'the woman's movement', and she's got a vague
yearning to do something she calls 'developing her mind', only she
doesn't quite know how to start.  I think in the beginning she
cottoned on to Hilda and Mrs Wheeler out of pure loneliness, but
now they take her with them wherever they go.

And the times they've had together, those three!  Sometimes I've
almost envied them.  Mrs Wheeler is the leading spirit.  You
couldn't name a kind of idiocy that she hasn't dragged them into at
one time or another.  Anything from theosophy to cat's-cradle,
provided you can do it on the cheap.  For months they went in for
the food-crank business.  Mrs Wheeler had picked up a second-hand
copy of some book called Radiant Energy which proved that you
should live on lettuces and other things that don't cost money.
Of course this appealed to Hilda, who immediately began starving
herself.  She'd have tried it on me and the kids as well, only I
put my foot down.  Then they had a go at faith-healing.  Then they
thought of tackling Pelmanism, but after a lot of correspondence
they found that they couldn't get the booklets free, which had been
Mrs Wheeler's idea.  Then it was hay-box cookery.  Then it was some
filthy stuff called bee wine, which was supposed to cost nothing at
all because you made it out of water.  They dropped that after
they'd read an article in the paper saying that bee wine gives you
cancer.  Then they nearly joined one of those women's clubs which
go for conducted tours round factories, but after a lot of
arithmetic Mrs Wheeler decided that the free teas the factories
gave you didn't quite equal the subscription.  Then Mrs Wheeler
scraped acquaintance with somebody who gave away free tickets for
plays produced by some stage society or other.  I've known the
three of them sit for hours listening to some highbrow play of
which they didn't even pretend to understand a word--couldn't even
tell you the name of the play afterwards--but they felt that they
were getting something for nothing.  Once they even took up
spiritualism.  Mrs Wheeler had run across some down-and-out medium
who was so desperate that he'd give seances for eighteenpence, so
that the three of them could have a glimpse beyond the veil for a
tanner a time.  I saw him once when he came to give a seance at our
house.  He was a seedy-looking old devil and obviously in mortal
terror of D.T.s.  He was so shaky that when he was taking his
overcoat off in the hall he had a sort of spasm and a hank of
butter-muslin dropped out of his trouser-leg.  I managed to shove
it back to him before the women saw.  Butter-muslin is what they
make the ectoplasm with, so I'm told.  I suppose he was going on to
another seance afterwards.  You don't get manifestations for
eighteen pence.  Mrs Wheeler's biggest find of the last few years
is the Left Book Club.  I think it was in '36 that the news of the
Left Book Club got to West Bletchley.  I joined it soon afterwards,
and it's almost the only time I can remember spending money without
Hilda protesting.  She can see some sense in buying a book when
you're getting it for a third of its proper price.  These women's
attitude is curious, really.  Miss Minns certainly had a try at
reading one or two of the books, but this wouldn't even have
occurred to the other two.  They've never had any direct connexion
with the Left Book Club or any notion what it's all about--in fact
I believe at the beginning Mrs Wheeler thought it had something to
do with books which had been left in railway carriages and were
being sold off cheap.  But they do know that it means seven and
sixpenny books for half a crown, and so they're always saying that
it's 'such a good idea'.  Now and again the local Left Book Club
branch holds meetings and gets people down to speak, and Mrs
Wheeler always takes the others along.  She's a great one for
public meetings of any kind, always provided that it's indoors and
admission free.  The three of them sit there like lumps of pudding.
They don't know what the meeting's about and they don't care, but
they've got a vague feeling, especially Miss Minns, that they're
improving their minds, and it isn't costing them anything.

Well, that's Hilda.  You see what she's like.  Take it by and
large, I suppose she's no worse than I am.  Sometimes when we were
first married I felt I'd like to strangle her, but later I got so
that I didn't care.  And then I got fat and settled down.  It must
have been in 1930 that I got fat.  It happened so suddenly that it
was as if a cannon ball had hit me and got stuck inside.  You know
how it is.  One night you go to bed, still feeling more or less
young, with an eye for the girls and so forth, and next morning you
wake up in the full consciousness that you're just a poor old fatty
with nothing ahead of you this side the grave except sweating your
guts out to buy boots for the kids.

And now it's '38, and in every shipyard in the world they're
riveting up the battleships for another war, and a name I chanced
to see on a poster had stirred up in me a whole lot of stuff which
ought to have been buried God knows how many years ago.




PART III



1


When I came home that evening I was still in doubt as to what I'd
spend my seventeen quid on.

Hilda said she was going to the Left Book Club meeting.  It seemed
that there was a chap coming down from London to lecture, though
needless to say Hilda didn't know what the lecture was going to be
about.  I told her I'd go with her.  In a general way I'm not much
of a one for lectures, but the visions of war I'd had that morning,
starting with the bomber flying over the train, had put me into a
kind of thoughtful mood.  After the usual argument we got the kids
to bed early and cleared off in time for the lecture, which was
billed for eight o'clock.

It was a misty kind of evening, and the hall was cold and not too
well lighted.  It's a little wooden hall with a tin roof, the
property of some Nonconformist sect or other, and you can hire it
for ten bob.  The usual crowd of fifteen or sixteen people had
rolled up.  On the front of the platform there was a yellow placard
announcing that the lecture was on 'The Menace of Fascism'.  This
didn't altogether surprise me.  Mr Witchett, who acts as chairman
of these meetings and who in private life is something in an
architect's office, was taking the lecturer round, introducing him
to everyone as Mr So-and-so (I forget his name) 'the well-known
anti-Fascist', very much as you might call somebody 'the well-known
pianist'.  The lecturer was a little chap of about forty, in a dark
suit, with a bald head which he'd tried rather unsuccessfully to
cover up with wisps of hair.

Meetings of this kind never start on time.  There's always a period
of hanging about on the pretence that perhaps a few more people are
going to turn up.  It was about twenty-five past eight when
Witchett tapped on the table and did his stuff.  Witchett's a mild-
looking chap, with a pink, baby's bottom kind of face that's always
covered in smiles.  I believe he's secretary of the local Liberal
Party, and he's also on the Parish Council and acts as M.C. at the
magic lantern lectures for the Mothers' Union.  He's what you might
call a born chairman.  When he tells you how delighted we all are
to have Mr So-and-so on the platform tonight, you can see that he
believes it.  I never look at him without thinking that he's
probably a virgin.  The little lecturer took out a wad of notes,
chiefly newspaper cuttings, and pinned them down with his glass of
water.  Then he gave a quick lick at his lips and began to shoot.

Do you ever go to lectures, public meetings, and what-not?

When I go to one myself, there's always a moment during the evening
when I find myself thinking the same thought:  Why the hell are we
doing this?  Why is it that people will turn out on a winter night
for this kind of thing?  I looked round the hall.  I was sitting in
the back row.  I don't ever remember going to any kind of public
meeting when I didn't sit in the back row if I could manage it.
Hilda and the others had planked themselves in front, as usual.
It was rather a gloomy little hall.  You know the kind of place.
Pitch-pine walls, corrugated iron roof, and enough draughts to make
you want to keep your overcoat on.  The little knot of us were
sitting in the light round the platform, with about thirty rows of
empty chairs behind us.  And the seats of all the chairs were
dusty.  On the platform behind the lecturer there was a huge square
thing draped in dust-cloths which might have been an enormous
coffin under a pall.  Actually it was a piano.

At the beginning I wasn't exactly listening.  The lecturer was
rather a mean-looking little chap, but a good speaker.  White face,
very mobile mouth, and the rather grating voice that they get from
constant speaking.  Of course he was pitching into Hitler and the
Nazis.  I wasn't particularly keen to hear what he was saying--get
the same stuff in the News Chronicle every morning--but his voice
came across to me as a kind of burr-burr-burr, with now and again a
phrase that struck out and caught my attention.

'Bestial atrocities. . . .  Hideous outbursts of sadism. . . .
Rubber truncheons. . . .  Concentration camps. . . .  Iniquitous
persecution of the Jews. . . .  Back to the Dark Ages. . . .
European civilization. . . .  Act before it is too late. . . .
Indignation of all decent peoples. . . .  Alliance of the
democratic nations. . . .  Firm stand. . . .  Defence of
democracy. . . .  Democracy. . . .  Fascism. . . .  Democracy. . . .
Fascism. . . .  Democracy. . . .'

You know the line of talk.  These chaps can churn it out by the
hour.  Just like a gramophone.  Turn the handle, press the button,
and it starts.  Democracy, Fascism, Democracy.  But somehow it
interested me to watch him.  A rather mean little man, with a white
face and a bald head, standing on a platform, shooting out slogans.
What's he doing?  Quite deliberately, and quite openly, he's
stirring up hatred.  Doing his damnedest to make you hate certain
foreigners called Fascists.  It's a queer thing, I thought, to be
known as 'Mr So-and-so, the well-known anti-Fascist'.  A queer
trade, anti-Fascism.  This fellow, I suppose, makes his living by
writing books against Hitler.  But what did he do before Hitler
came along?  And what'll he do if Hitler ever disappears?  Same
question applies to doctors, detectives, rat-catchers, and so
forth, of course.  But the grating voice went on and on, and
another thought struck me.  He MEANS it.  Not faking at all--feels
every word he's saying.  He's trying to work up hatred in the
audience, but that's nothing to the hatred he feels himself.  Every
slogan's gospel truth to him.  If you cut him open all you'd find
inside would be Democracy-Fascism-Democracy.  Interesting to know a
chap like that in private life.  But does he have a private life?
Or does he only go round from platform to platform, working up
hatred?  Perhaps even his dreams are slogans.

As well as I could from the back row I had a look at the audience.
I suppose, if you come to think of it, we people who'll turn out on
winter nights to sit in draughty halls listening to Left Book Club
lectures (and I consider that I'm entitled to the 'we', seeing that
I'd done it myself on this occasion) have a certain significance.
We're the West Bletchley revolutionaries.  Doesn't look hopeful at
first sight.  It struck me as I looked round the audience that only
about half a dozen of them had really grasped what the lecturer was
talking about, though by this time he'd been pitching into Hitler
and the Nazis for over half an hour.  It's always like that with
meetings of this kind.  Invariably half the people come away
without a notion of what it's all about.  In his chair beside the
table Witchett was watching the lecturer with a delighted smile,
and his face looked a little like a pink geranium.  You could hear
in advance the speech he'd make as soon as the lecturer sat down--
same speech as he makes at the end of the magic lantern lecture in
aid of trousers for the Melanesians:  'Express our thanks--voicing
the opinion of all of us--most interesting--give us all a lot to
think about--most stimulating evening!'  In the front row Miss
Minns was sitting very upright, with her head cocked a little on
one side, like a bird.  The lecturer had taken a sheet of paper
from under the tumbler and was reading out statistics about the
German suicide-rate.  You could see by the look of Miss Minns's
long thin neck that she wasn't feeling happy.  Was this improving
her mind, or wasn't it?  If only she could make out what it was all
about!  The other two were sitting there like lumps of pudding.
Next to them a little woman with red hair was knitting a jumper.
One plain, two purl, drop one, and knit two together.  The lecturer
was describing how the Nazis chop people's heads off for treason
and sometimes the executioner makes a bosh shot.  There was one
other woman in the audience, a girl with dark hair, one of the
teachers at the Council School.  Unlike the other she was really
listening, sitting forward with her big round eyes fixed on the
lecturer and her mouth a little bit open, drinking it all in.

Just behind her two old blokes from the local Labour Party were
sitting.  One had grey hair cropped very short, the other had a
bald head and a droopy moustache.  Both wearing their overcoats.
You know the type.  Been in the Labour Party since the year dot.
Lives given up to the movement.  Twenty years of being blacklisted
by employers, and another ten of badgering the Council to do
something about the slums.  Suddenly everything's changed, the old
Labour Party stuff doesn't matter any longer.  Find themselves
pitchforked into foreign politics--Hitler, Stalin, bombs, machine-
guns, rubber truncheons, Rome-Berlin axis, Popular Front, anti-
Comintern pact.  Can't make head or tail of it.  Immediately in
front of me the local Communist Party branch were sitting.  All
three of them very young.  One of them's got money and is something
in the Hesperides Estate Company, in fact I believe he's old Crum's
nephew.  Another's a clerk at one of the banks.  He cashes cheques
for me occasionally.  A nice boy, with a round, very young, eager
face, blue eyes like a baby, and hair so fair that you'd think he
peroxided it.  He only looks about seventeen, though I suppose he's
twenty.  He was wearing a cheap blue suit and a bright blue tie
that went with his hair.  Next to these three another Communist was
sitting.  But this one, it seems, is a different kind of Communist
and not-quite, because he's what they call a Trotskyist.  The
others have got a down on him.  He's even younger, a very thin,
very dark, nervous-looking boy.  Clever face.  Jew, of course.
These four were taking the lecture quite differently from the
others.  You knew they'd be on their feet the moment question-time
started.  You could see them kind of twitching already.  And the
little Trotskyist working himself from side to side on his bum in
his anxiety to get in ahead of the others.

I'd stopped listening to the actual words of the lecture.  But
there are more ways than one of listening.  I shut my eyes for a
moment.  The effect of that was curious.  I seemed to see the
fellow much better when I could only hear his voice.

It was a voice that sounded as if it could go on for a fortnight
without stopping.  It's a ghastly thing, really, to have a sort of
human barrel-organ shooting propaganda at you by the hour.  The
same thing over and over again.  Hate, hate, hate.  Let's all get
together and have a good hate.  Over and over.  It gives you the
feeling that something has got inside your skull and is hammering
down on your brain.  But for a moment, with my eyes shut, I managed
to turn the tables on him.  I got inside HIS skull.  It was a
peculiar sensation.  For about a second I was inside him, you might
almost say I WAS him.  At any rate, I felt what he was feeling.

I saw the vision that he was seeing.  And it wasn't at all the kind
of vision that can be talked about.  What he's SAYING is merely
that Hitler's after us and we must all get together and have a good
hate.  Doesn't go into details.  Leaves it all respectable.  But
what he's SEEING is something quite different.  It's a picture of
himself smashing people's faces in with a spanner.  Fascist faces,
of course.  I KNOW that's what he was seeing.  It was what I saw
myself for the second or two that I was inside him.  Smash!  Right
in the middle!  The bones cave in like an eggshell and what was a
face a minute ago is just a great big blob of strawberry jam.
Smash!  There goes another!  That's what's in his mind, waking and
sleeping, and the more he thinks of it the more he likes it.  And
it's all O.K. because the smashed faces belong to Fascists.  You
could hear all that in the tone of his voice.

But why?  Likeliest explanation, because he's scared.  Every
thinking person nowadays is stiff with fright.  This is merely a
chap who's got sufficient foresight to be a little more frightened
than the others.  Hitler's after us!  Quick!  Let's all grab a
spanner and get together, and perhaps if we smash in enough faces
they won't smash ours.  Gang up, choose your Leader.  Hitler's
black and Stalin's white.  But it might just as well be the other
way about, because in the little chap's mind both Hitler and Stalin
are the same.  Both mean spanners and smashed faces.

War!  I started thinking about it again.  It's coming soon, that's
certain.  But who's afraid of war?  That's to say, who's afraid of
the bombs and the machine-guns?  'You are', you say.  Yes, I am,
and so's anybody who's ever seen them.  But it isn't the war that
matters, it's the after-war.  The world we're going down into, the
kind of hate-world, slogan-world.  The coloured shirts, the barbed
wire, the rubber truncheons.  The secret cells where the electric
light burns night and day, and the detectives watching you while
you sleep.  And the processions and the posters with enormous
faces, and the crowds of a million people all cheering for the
Leader till they deafen themselves into thinking that they really
worship him, and all the time, underneath, they hate him so that
they want to puke.  It's all going to happen.  Or isn't it?  Some
days I know it's impossible, other days I know it's inevitable.
That night, at any rate, I knew it was going to happen.  It was all
in the sound of the little lecturer's voice.

So perhaps after all there IS a significance in this mingy little
crowd that'll turn out on a winter night to listen to a lecture of
this kind.  Or at any rate in the five or six who can grasp what
it's all about.  They're simply the outposts of an enormous army.
They're the long-sighted ones, the first rats to spot that the ship
is sinking.  Quick, quick!  The Fascists are coming!  Spanners
ready, boys!  Smash others or they'll smash you.  So terrified of
the future that we're jumping straight into it like a rabbit diving
down a boa-constrictor's throat.

And what'll happen to chaps like me when we get Fascism in England?
The truth is it probably won't make the slightest difference.  As
for the lecturer and those four Communists in the audience, yes,
it'll make plenty of difference to them.  They'll be smashing
faces, or having their own smashed, according to who's winning.
But the ordinary middling chaps like me will be carrying on just as
usual.  And yet it frightens me--I tell you it frightens me.  I'd
just started to wonder why when the lecturer stopped and sat down.

There was the usual hollow little sound of clapping that you get
when there are only about fifteen people in the audience, and then
old Witchett said his piece, and before you could say Jack Robinson
the four Communists were on their feet together.  They had a good
dog-fight that went on for about ten minutes, full of a lot of
stuff that nobody else understood, such as dialectical materialism
and the destiny of the proletariat and what Lenin said in 1918.
Then the lecturer, who'd had a drink of water, stood up and gave a
summing-up that made the Trotskyist wriggle about on his chair but
pleased the other three, and the dog-fight went on unofficially for
a bit longer.  Nobody else did any talking.  Hilda and the others
had cleared off the moment the lecture ended.  Probably they were
afraid there was going to be a collection to pay for the hire of
the hall.  The little woman with red hair was staying to finish her
row.  You could hear her counting her stitches in a whisper while
the others argued.  And Witchett sat and beamed at whoever happened
to be speaking, and you could see him thinking how interesting it
all was and making mental notes, and the girl with black hair
looked from one to the other with her mouth a little open, and the
old Labour man, looking rather like a seal with his droopy
moustache and his overcoat up to his ears, sat looking up at them,
wondering what the hell it was all about.  And finally I got up and
began to put on my overcoat.

The dog-fight had turned into a private row between the little
Trotskyist and the boy with fair hair.  They were arguing about
whether you ought to join the Army if war broke out.  As I edged
my way along the row of chairs to get out, the fair-haired one
appealed to me.

'Mr Bowling!  Look here.  If war broke out and we had the chance to
smash Fascism once and for all, wouldn't you fight?  If you were
young, I mean.'

I suppose he thinks I'm about sixty.

'You bet I wouldn't,' I said.  'I had enough to go on with last
time.'

'But to smash Fascism!'

'Oh, b-- Fascism!  There's been enough smashing done already, if
you ask me.'

The little Trotskyist chips in with social-patriotism and betrayal
of the workers, but the others cut him short:

'But you're thinking of 1914.  That was just an ordinary imperialist
war.  This time it's different.  Look here.  When you hear about
what's going on in Germany, and the concentration camps and the
Nazis beating people up with rubber truncheons and making the Jews
spit in each other's faces--doesn't it make your blood boil?'

They're always going on about your blood boiling.  Just the same
phrase during the war, I remember.

'I went off the boil in 1916,' I told him.  'And so'll you when you
know what a trench smells like.'

And then all of a sudden I seemed to see him.  It was as if I
hadn't properly seen him till that moment.

A very young eager face, might have belonged to a good-looking
schoolboy, with blue eyes and tow-coloured hair, gazing into mine,
and for a moment actually he'd got tears in his eyes!  Felt as
strongly as all that about the German Jews!  But as a matter of
fact I knew just what he felt.  He's a hefty lad, probably plays
rugger for the bank.  Got brains, too.  And here he is, a bank
clerk in a godless suburb, sitting behind the frosted window,
entering figures in a ledger, counting piles of notes, bumsucking
to the manager.  Feels his life rotting away.  And all the while,
over in Europe, the big stuff's happening.  Shells bursting over
the trenches and waves of infantry charging through the drifts of
smoke.  Probably some of his pals are fighting in Spain.  Of course
he's spoiling for a war.  How can you blame him?  For a moment I
had a peculiar feeling that he was my son, which in point of years
he might have been.  And I thought of that sweltering hot day in
August when the newsboy stuck up the poster ENGLAND DECLARES WAR ON
GERMANY, and we all rushed out on to the pavement in our white
aprons and cheered.

'Listen son,' I said, 'you've got it all wrong.  In 1914 WE thought
it was going to be a glorious business.  Well, it wasn't.  It was
just a bloody mess.  If it comes again, you keep out of it.  Why
should you get your body plugged full of lead?  Keep it for some
girl.  You think war's all heroism and V.C. charges, but I tell you
it isn't like that.  You don't have bayonet-charges nowadays, and
when you do it isn't like you imagine.  You don't feel like a hero.
All you know is that you've had no sleep for three days, and stink
like a polecat, you're pissing your bags with fright, and your
hands are so cold you can't hold your rifle.  But that doesn't
matter a damn, either.  It's the things that happen afterwards.'

Makes no impression of course.  They just think you're out of date.
Might as well stand at the door of a knocking-shop handing out
tracts.

The people were beginning to clear off.  Witchett was taking the
lecturer home.  The three Communists and the little Jew went up the
road together, and they were going at it again with proletarian
solidarity and dialectic of the dialectic and what Trotsky said in
1917.  They're all the same, really.  It was a damp, still, very
black night.  The lamps seemed to hang in the darkness like stars
and didn't light the road.  In the distance you could hear the
trains booming along the High Street.  I wanted a drink, but it was
nearly ten and the nearest pub was half a mile away.  Besides, I
wanted somebody to talk to, the way you can't talk in a pub.  It
was funny how my brain had been on the go all day.  Partly the
result of not working, of course, and partly of the new false
teeth, which had kind of freshened me up.  All day I'd been
brooding on the future and the past.  I wanted to talk about the
bad time that's either coming or isn't coming, the slogans and the
coloured shirts and the streamlined men from eastern Europe who are
going to knock old England cock-eyed.  Hopeless trying to talk to
Hilda.  Suddenly it occurred to me to go and look up old Porteous,
who's a pal of mine and keeps late hours.

Porteous is a retired public-school master.  He lives in rooms,
which luckily are in the lower half of the house, in the old part
of the town, near the church.  He's a bachelor, of course.  You
can't imagine that kind married.  Lives all alone with his books
and his pipe and has a woman in to do for him.  He's a learned kind
of chap, with his Greek and Latin and poetry and all that.  I
suppose that if the local Left Book Club branch represents
Progress, old Porteous stands for Culture.  Neither of them cuts
much ice in West Bletchley.

The light was burning in the little room where old Porteous sits
reading till all hours of the night.  As I tapped on the front door
he came strolling out as usual, with his pipe between his teeth and
his fingers in a book to keep the place.  He's rather a striking
looking chap, very tall, with curly grey hair and a thin, dreamy
kind of face that's a bit discoloured but might almost belong to a
boy, though he must be nearly sixty.  It's funny how some of these
public-school and university chaps manage to look like boys till
their dying day.  It's something in their movements.  Old Porteous
has got a way of strolling up and down, with that handsome head of
his, with the grey curls, held a little back that makes you feel
that all the while he's dreaming about some poem or other and isn't
conscious of what's going on round him.  You can't look at him
without seeing the way he's lived written all over him.  Public
School, Oxford, and then back to his old school as a master.  Whole
life lived in an atmosphere of Latin, Greek, and cricket.  He's got
all the mannerisms.  Always wears an old Harris tweed jacket and
old grey flannel bags which he likes you to call 'disgraceful',
smokes a pipe and looks down on cigarettes, and though he sits up
half the night I bet he has a cold bath every morning.  I suppose
from his point of view I'm a bit of a bounder.  I haven't been to a
public school, I don't know any Latin and don't even want to.  He
tells me sometimes that it's a pity I'm 'insensible to beauty',
which I suppose is a polite way of saying that I've got no
education.  All the same I like him.  He's very hospitable in the
right kind of way, always ready to have you in and talk at all
hours, and always got drinks handy.  When you live in a house like
ours, more or less infested by women and kids, it does you good to
get out of it sometimes into a bachelor atmosphere, a kind of book-
pipe-fire atmosphere.  And the classy Oxford feeling of nothing
mattering except books and poetry and Greek statues, and nothing
worth mentioning having happened since the Goths sacked Rome--
sometimes that's a comfort too.

He shoved me into the old leather armchair by the fire and dished
out whisky and soda.  I've never seen his sitting-room when it
wasn't dim with pipe-smoke.  The ceiling is almost black.  It's a
smallish room and, except for the door and the window and the space
over the fireplace, the walls are covered with books from the floor
right up to the ceiling.  On the mantelpiece there are all the
things you'd expect.  A row of old briar pipes, all filthy, a few
Greek silver coins, a tobacco jar with the arms of old Porteous's
college on it, and a little earthenware lamp which he told me he
dug up on some mountain in Sicily.  Over the mantelpiece there are
photos of Greek statues.  There's a big one in the middle, of a
woman with wings and no head who looks as if she was stepping out
to catch a bus.  I remember how shocked old Porteous was when the
first time I saw it, not knowing any better, I asked him why they
didn't stick a head on it.

Porteous started refilling his pipe from the jar on the
mantelpiece.

'That intolerable woman upstairs has purchased a wireless set,' he
said.  'I had been hoping to live the rest of my life out of the
sound of those things.  I suppose there is nothing one can do?  Do
you happen to know the legal position?'

I told him there was nothing one could do.  I rather like the
Oxfordy way he says 'intolerable', and it tickles me, in 1938, to
find someone objecting to having a radio in the house.  Porteous
was strolling up and down in his usual dreamy way, with his hands
in his coat pockets and his pipe between his teeth, and almost
instantly he'd begun talking about some law against musical
instruments that was passed in Athens in the time of Pericles.
It's always that way with old Porteous.  All his talk is about
things that happened centuries ago.  Whatever you start off with it
always comes back to statues and poetry and the Greeks and Romans.
If you mention the Queen Mary he'd start telling you about
Phoenician triremes.  He never reads a modern book, refuses to know
their names, never looks at any newspaper except The Times, and
takes a pride in telling you that he's never been to the pictures.
Except for a few poets like Keats and Wordsworth he thinks the
modern world--and from his point of view the modern world is the
last two thousand years--just oughtn't to have happened.

I'm part of the modern world myself, but I like to hear him talk.
He'll stroll round the shelves and haul out first one book and then
another, and now and again he'll read you a piece between little
puffs of smoke, generally having to translate it from the Latin or
something as he goes.  It's all kind of peaceful, kind of mellow.
All a little like a school-master, and yet it soothes you, somehow.
While you listen you aren't in the same world as trains and gas
bills and insurance companies.  It's all temples and olive trees,
and peacocks and elephants, and chaps in the arena with their nets
and tridents, and winged lions and eunuchs and galleys and
catapults, and generals in brass armour galloping their horses over
the soldiers' shields.  It's funny that he ever cottoned on to a
chap like me.  But it's one of the advantages of being fat that you
can fit into almost any society.  Besides we meet on common ground
when it comes to dirty stories.  They're the one modern thing he
cares about, though, as he's always reminding me, they aren't
modern.  He's rather old-maidish about it, always tells a story in
a veiled kind of way.  Sometimes he'll pick out some Latin poet and
translate a smutty rhyme, leaving a lot to your imagination, or
he'll drop hints about the private lives of the Roman emperors and
the things that went on in the temples of Ashtaroth.  They seem to
have been a bad lot, those Greeks and Romans.  Old Porteous has got
photographs of wall-paintings somewhere in Italy that would make
your hair curl.

When I'm fed up with business and home life it's often done me a
lot of good to go and have a talk with Porteous.  But tonight it
didn't seem to.  My mind was still running on the same lines as it
had been all day.  Just as I'd done with the Left Book Club
lecturer, I didn't exactly listen to what Porreous was saying, only
to the sound of his voice.  But whereas the lecturer's voice had
got under my skin, old Porteous's didn't.  It was too peaceful, too
Oxfordy.  Finally, when he was in the middle of saying something, I
chipped in and said:

'Tell me, Porteous, what do you think of Hitler?'

Old Porteous was leaning in his lanky, graceful kind of way with
his elbows on the mantelpiece and a foot on the fender.  He was so
surprised that he almost took his pipe out of his mouth.

'Hitler?  This German person?  My dear fellow!  I DON'T think of
him.'

'But the trouble is he's going to bloody well make us think about
him before he's finished.'

Old Porteous shies a bit at the world 'bloody', which he doesn't
like, though of course it's part of his pose never to be shocked.
He begins walking up and down again, puffing out smoke.

'I see no reason for paying any attention to him.  A mere
adventurer.  These people come and go.  Ephemeral, purely
ephemeral.'

I'm not certain what the word 'ephemeral' means, but I stick to my
point:

'I think you've got it wrong.  Old Hitler's something different.
So's Joe Stalin.  They aren't like these chaps in the old days who
crucified people and chopped their heads off and so forth, just for
the fun of it.  They're after something quite new--something that's
never been heard of before.'

'My dear fellow!  There is nothing new under the sun.'

Of course that's a favourite saying of old Porteous's.  He won't
hear of the existence of anything new.  As soon as you tell him
about anything that's happening nowadays he says that exactly the
same thing happened in the reign of King So-and-so.  Even if you
bring up things like aeroplanes he tells you that they probably had
them in Crete, or Mycenae, or wherever it was.  I tried to explain
to him what I'd felt while the little bloke was lecturing and the
kind of vision I'd had of the bad time that's coming, but he
wouldn't listen.  Merely repeated that there's nothing new under
the sun.  Finally he hauls a book out of the shelves and reads me a
passage about some Greek tyrant back in the B.C.s who certainly
might have been Hitler's twin brother.

The argument went on for a bit.  All day I'd been wanting to talk
to somebody about this business.  It's funny.  I'm not a fool, but
I'm not a highbrow either, and God knows at normal times I don't
have many interests that you wouldn't expect a middle-aged seven-
pound-a-weeker with two kids to have.  And yet I've enough sense to
see that the old life we're used to is being sawn off at the roots.
I can feel it happening.  I can see the war that's coming and I can
see the after-war, the food-queues and the secret police and the
loudspeakers telling you what to think.  And I'm not even
exceptional in this.  There are millions of others like me.
Ordinary chaps that I meet everywhere, chaps I run across in pubs,
bus drivers, and travelling salesmen for hardware firms, have got a
feeling that the world's gone wrong.  They can feel things cracking
and collapsing under their feet.  And yet here's this learned chap,
who's lived all his life with books and soaked himself in history
till it's running out of his pores, and he can't even see that
things are changing.  Doesn't think Hitler matters.  Refuses to
believe there's another war coming.  In any case, as he didn't
fight in the last war, it doesn't enter much into his thoughts--he
thinks it was a poor show compared with the siege of Troy.  Doesn't
see why one should bother about the slogans and the loudspeakers
and the coloured shirts.  What intelligent person would pay any
attention to such things? he always says.  Hitler and Stalin will
pass away, but something which old Porteous calls 'the eternal
verities' won't pass away.  This, of course, is simply another way
of saying that things will always go on exactly as he's known them.
For ever and ever, cultivated Oxford blokes will stroll up and down
studies full of books, quoting Latin tags and smoking good tobacco
out of jars with coats of arms on them.  Really it was no use
talking to him.  I'd have got more change out of the lad with tow-
coloured hair.  By degrees the conversation twisted off, as it
always does, to things that happened B.C.  Then it worked round to
poetry.  Finally old Porteous drags another book out of the shelves
and begins reading Keat's 'Ode to a Nightingale' (or maybe it was a
skylark--I forget).

So far as I'm concerned a little poetry goes a long way.  But it's
a curious fact that I rather like hearing old Porteous reading it
aloud.  There's no question that he reads well.  He's got the
habit, of course--used to reading to classes of boys.  He'll lean
up against something in his lounging way, with his pipe between his
teeth and little jets of smoke coming out, and his voice goes kind
of solemn and rises and falls with the line.  You can see that it
moves him in some way.  I don't know what poetry is or what it's
supposed to do.  I imagine it has a kind of nervous effect on some
people like music has on others.  When he's reading I don't
actually listen, that's to say I don't take in the words, but
sometimes the sound of it brings a kind of peaceful feeling into my
mind.  On the whole I like it.  But somehow tonight it didn't work.
It was as if a cold draught had blown into the room.  I just felt
that this was all bunk.  Poetry!  What is it?  Just a voice, a bit
of an eddy in the air.  And Gosh! what use would that be against
machine-guns?

I watched him leaning up against the bookshelf.  Funny, these
public-school chaps.  Schoolboys all their days.  Whole life
revolving round the old school and their bits of Latin and Greek
and poetry.  And suddenly I remembered that almost the first time I
was here with Porteous he'd read me the very same poem.  Read it in
just the same way, and his voice quivered when he got to the same
bit--the bit about magic casements, or something.  And a curious
thought struck me.  HE'S DEAD.  He's a ghost.  All people like that
are dead.

It struck me that perhaps a lot of the people you see walking about
are dead.  We say that a man's dead when his heart stops and not
before.  It seems a bit arbitrary.  After all, parts of your body
don't stop working--hair goes on growing for years, for instance.
Perhaps a man really dies when his brain stops, when he loses the
power to take in a new idea.  Old Porteous is like that.
Wonderfully learned, wonderfully good taste--but he's not capable
of change.  Just says the same things and thinks the same thoughts
over and over again.  There are a lot of people like that.  Dead
minds, stopped inside.  Just keep moving backwards and forwards on
the same little track, getting fainter all the time, like ghosts.

Old Porteous's mind, I thought, probably stopped working at about
the time of the Russo-Japanese War.  And it's a ghastly thing that
nearly all the decent people, the people who DON'T want to go round
smashing faces in with spanners, are like that.  They're decent,
but their minds have stopped.  They can't defend themselves against
what's coming to them, because they can't see it, even when it's
under their noses.  They think that England will never change and
that England's the whole world.  Can't grasp that it's just a left-
over, a tiny corner that the bombs happen to have missed.  But what
about the new kind of men from eastern Europe, the streamlined men
who think in slogans and talk in bullets?  They're on our track.
Not long before they catch up with us.  No Marquess of Queensbury
rules for those boys.  And all the decent people are paralysed.
Dead men and live gorillas.  Doesn't seem to be anything between.

I cleared out about half an hour later, having completely failed to
convince old Porteous that Hitler matters.  I was still thinking
the same thoughts as I walked home through the shivery streets.
The trains had stopped running.  The house was all dark and Hilda
was asleep.  I dropped my false teeth into the glass of water in
the bathroom, got into my pyjamas, and prised Hilda over to the
other side of the bed.  She rolled over without waking, and the
kind of hump between her shoulders was towards me.  It's funny, the
tremendous gloom that sometimes gets hold of you late at night.  At
that moment the destiny of Europe seemed to me more important than
the rent and the kids' school-bills and the work I'd have to do
tomorrow.  For anyone who has to earn his living such thoughts are
just plain foolishness.  But they didn't move out of my mind.
Still the vision of the coloured shirts and the machine-guns
rattling.  The last thing I remember wondering before I fell asleep
was why the hell a chap like me should care.



2


The primroses had started.  I suppose it was some time in March.

I'd driven through Westerham and was making for Pudley.  I'd got to
do an assessment of an ironmonger's shop, and then, if I could get
hold of him, to interview a life-insurance case who was wavering in
the balance.  His name had been sent in by our local agent, but at
the last moment he'd taken fright and begun to doubt whether he
could afford it.  I'm pretty good at talking people round.  It's
being fat that does it.  It puts people in a cheery kind of mood,
makes 'em feel that signing a cheque is almost a pleasure.  Of
course there are different ways of tackling different people.  With
some it's better to lay all the stress on the bonuses, others you
can scare in a subtle way with hints about what'll happen to their
wives if they die uninsured.

The old car switchbacked up and down the curly little hills.  And
by God, what a day!  You know the kind of day that generally comes
some time in March when winter suddenly seems to give up fighting.
For days past we'd been having the kind of beastly weather that
people call 'bright' weather, when the sky's a cold hard blue and
the wind scrapes you like a blunt razor-blade.  Then suddenly the
wind had dropped and the sun got a chance.  You know the kind of
day.  Pale yellow sunshine, not a leaf stirring, a touch of mist in
the far distance where you could see the sheep scattered over the
hillsides like lumps of chalk.  And down in the valleys fires were
burning, and the smoke twisted slowly upwards and melted into the
mist.  I'd got the road to myself.  It was so warm you could almost
have taken your clothes off.

I got to a spot where the grass beside the road was smothered in
primroses.  A patch of clayey soil, perhaps.  Twenty yards farther
on I slowed down and stopped.  The weather was too good to miss.  I
felt I'd got to get out and have a smell at the spring air, and
perhaps even pick a few primroses if there was nobody coming.  I
even had some vague notion of picking a bunch of them to take home
to Hilda.

I switched the engine off and got out.  I never like leaving the
old car running in neutral, I'm always half afraid she'll shake her
mudguards off or something.  She's a 1927 model, and she's done a
biggish mileage.  When you lift the bonnet and look at the engine
it reminds you of the old Austrian Empire, all tied together with
bits of string but somehow keeps plugging along.  You wouldn't
believe any machine could vibrate in so many directions at once.
It's like the motion of the earth, which has twenty-two different
kinds of wobble, or so I remember reading.  If you look at her from
behind when she's running in neutral it's for all the world like
watching one of those Hawaiian girls dancing the hula-hula.

There was a five-barred gate beside the road.  I strolled over and
leaned across it.  Not a soul in sight.  I hitched my hat back a
bit to get the kind of balmy feeling of the air against my
forehead.  The grass under the hedge was full of primroses.  Just
inside the gate a tramp or somebody had left the remains of a fire.
A little pile of white embers and a wisp of smoke still oozing out
of them.  Farther along there was a little bit of a pool, covered
over with duck-weed.  The field was winter wheat.  It sloped up
sharply, and then there was a fall of chalk and a little beech
spinney.  A kind of mist of young leaves on the trees.  And utter
stillness everywhere.  Not even enough wind to stir the ashes of
the fire.  A lark singing somewhere, otherwise not a sound, not
even an aeroplane.

I stayed there for a bit, leaning over the gate.  I was alone,
quite alone.  I was looking at the field, and the field was looking
at me.  I felt--I wonder whether you'll understand.

What I felt was something that's so unusual nowadays that to say it
sounds like foolishness.  I felt HAPPY.  I felt that though I
shan't live for ever, I'd be quite ready to.  If you like you can
say that that was merely because it was the first day of spring.
Seasonal effect on the sex-glands, or something.  But there was
more to it than that.  Curiously enough, the thing that had
suddenly convinced me that life was worth living, more than the
primroses or the young buds on the hedge, was that bit of fire near
the gate.  You know the look of a wood fire on a still day.  The
sticks that have gone all to white ash and still keep the shape of
sticks, and under the ash the kind of vivid red that you can see
into.  It's curious that a red ember looks more alive, gives you
more of a feeling of life than any living thing.  There's something
about it, a kind of intensity, a vibration--I can't think of the
exact words.  But it lets you know that you're alive yourself.
It's the spot on the picture that makes you notice everything else.

I bent down to pick a primrose.  Couldn't reach it--too much belly.
I squatted down on my haunches and picked a little bunch of them.
Lucky there was no one to see me.  The leaves were kind of crinkly
and shaped like rabbits' ears.  I stood up and put my bunch of
primroses on the gatepost.  Then on an impulse I slid my false
teeth out of my mouth and had a look at them.

If I'd had a mirror I'd have looked at the whole of myself, though,
as a matter of fact, I knew what I looked like already.  A fat man
of forty-five, in a grey herring-bone suit a bit the worse for wear
and a bowler hat.  Wife, two kids, and a house in the suburbs
written all over me.  Red face and boiled blue eyes.  I know, you
don't have to tell me.  But the thing that struck me, as I gave my
dental plate the once-over before slipping it back into my mouth,
was that IT DOESN'T MATTER.  Even false teeth don't matter.  I'm
fat--yes.  I look like a bookie's unsuccessful brother--yes.  No
woman will ever go to bed with me again unless she's paid to.  I
know all that.  But I tell you I don't care.  I don't want the
women, I don't even want to be young again.  I only want to be
alive.  And I was alive that moment when I stood looking at the
primroses and the red embers under the hedge.  It's a feeling
inside you, a kind of peaceful feeling, and yet it's like a flame.

Farther down the hedge the pool was covered with duck-weed, so like
a carpet that if you didn't know what duck-weed was you might think
it was solid and step on it.  I wondered why it is that we're all
such bloody fools.  Why don't people, instead of the idiocies they
do spend their time on, just walk round LOOKING at things?  That
pool, for instance--all the stuff that's in it.  Newts, water-
snails, water-beetles, caddis-flies, leeches, and God knows how
many other things that you can only see with a microscope.  The
mystery of their lives, down there under water.  You could spend a
lifetime watching them, ten lifetimes, and still you wouldn't have
got to the end even of that one pool.  And all the while the sort
of feeling of wonder, the peculiar flame inside you.  It's the only
thing worth having, and we don't want it.

But I do want it.  At least I thought so at that moment.  And don't
mistake what I'm saying.  To begin with, unlike most Cockneys, I'm
not soppy about 'the country'.  I was brought up a damn sight too
near to it for that.  I don't want to stop people living in towns,
or in suburbs for that matter.  Let 'em live where they like.  And
I'm not suggesting that the whole of humanity could spend the whole
of their lives wandering round picking primroses and so forth.
I know perfectly well that we've got to work.  It's only because
chaps are coughing their lungs out in mines and girls are hammering
at typewriters that anyone ever has time to pick a flower.
Besides, if you hadn't a full belly and a warm house you wouldn't
want to pick flowers.  But that's not the point.  Here's this
feeling that I get inside me--not often, I admit, but now and
again.  I know it's a good feeling to have.  What's more, so does
everybody else, or nearly everybody.  It's just round the corner
all the time, and we all know it's there.  Stop firing that
machine-gun!  Stop chasing whatever you're chasing!  Calm down, get
your breath back, let a bit of peace seep into your bones.  No use.
We don't do it.  Just keep on with the same bloody fooleries.

And the next war coming over the horizon, 1941, they say.  Three
more circles of the sun, and then we whizz straight into it.  The
bombs diving down on you like black cigars, and the streamlined
bullets streaming from the Bren machine-guns.  Not that that
worries me particularly.  I'm too old to fight.  There'll be air-
raids, of course, but they won't hit everybody.  Besides, even if
that kind of danger exists, it doesn't really enter into one's
thoughts beforehand.  As I've said several times already, I'm not
frightened of the war, only the after-war.  And even that isn't
likely to affect me personally.  Because who'd bother about a chap
like me?  I'm too fat to be a political suspect.  No one would bump
me off or cosh me with a rubber truncheon.  I'm the ordinary
middling kind that moves on when the policeman tells him.  As for
Hilda and the kids, they'd probably never notice the difference.
And yet it frightens me.  The barbed wire!  The slogans!  The
enormous faces!  The cork-lined cellars where the executioner plugs
you from behind!  For that matter it frightens other chaps who are
intellectually a good deal dumber than I am.  But why!  Because it
means good-bye to this thing I've been telling you about, this
special feeling inside you.  Call it peace, if you like.  But when
I say peace I don't mean absence of war, I mean peace, a feeling in
your guts.  And it's gone for ever if the rubber truncheon boys get
hold of us.

I picked up my bunch of primroses and had a smell at them.  I was
thinking of Lower Binfield.  It was funny how for two months past
it had been in and out of my mind all the time, after twenty years
during which I'd practically forgotten it.  And just at this moment
there was the zoom of a car coming up the road.

It brought me up with a kind of jolt.  I suddenly realized what I
was doing--wandering round picking primroses when I ought to have
been going through the inventory at that ironmonger's shop in
Pudley.  What was more, it suddenly struck me what I'd look like if
those people in the car saw me.  A fat man in a bowler hat holding
a bunch of primroses!  It wouldn't look right at all.  Fat men
mustn't pick primroses, at any rate in public.  I just had time to
chuck them over the hedge before the car came in sight.  It was a
good job I'd done so.  The car was full of young fools of about
twenty.  How they'd have sniggered if they'd seen me!  They were
all looking at me--you know how people look at you when they're in
a car coming towards you--and the thought struck me that even now
they might somehow guess what I'd been doing.  Better let 'em think
it was something else.  Why should a chap get out of his car at the
side of a country road?  Obvious!  As the car went past I pretended
to be doing up a fly-button.

I cranked up the car (the self-starter doesn't work any longer) and
got in.  Curiously enough, in the very moment when I was doing up
the fly-button, when my mind was about three-quarters full of those
young fools in the other car, a wonderful idea had occurred to me.

I'd go back to Lower Binfield!

Why not? I thought as I jammed her into top gear.  Why shouldn't I?
What was to stop me?  And why the hell hadn't I thought of it
before?  A quiet holiday in Lower Binfield--just the thing I
wanted.

Don't imagine that I had any ideas of going back to LIVE in Lower
Binfield.  I wasn't planning to desert Hilda and the kids and start
life under a different name.  That kind of thing only happens in
books.  But what was to stop me slipping down to Lower Binfield and
having a week there all by myself, on the Q.T.?

I seemed to have it all planned out in my mind already.  It was all
right as far as the money went.  There was still twelve quid left
in that secret pile of mine, and you can have a very comfortable
week on twelve quid.  I get a fortnight's holiday a year, generally
in August or September.  But if I made up some suitable story--
relative dying of incurable disease, or something--I could probably
get the firm to give me my holiday in two separate halves.  Then I
could have a week all to myself before Hilda knew what was
happening.  A week in Lower Binfield, with no Hilda, no kids, no
Flying Salamander, no Ellesmere Road, no rumpus about the hire-
purchase payments, no noise of traffic driving you silly--just a
week of loafing round and listening to the quietness?

But why did I want to go back to Lower Binfield? you say.  Why
Lower Binfield in particular?  What did I mean to do when I got
there?

I didn't mean to do anything.  That was part of the point.  I
wanted peace and quiet.  Peace!  We had it once, in Lower Binfield.
I've told you something about our old life there, before the war.
I'm not pretending it was perfect.  I dare say it was a dull,
sluggish, vegetable kind of life.  You can say we were like
turnips, if you like.  But turnips don't live in terror of the
boss, they don't lie awake at night thinking about the next slump
and the next war.  We had peace inside us.  Of course I knew that
even in Lower Binfield life would have changed.  But the place
itself wouldn't have.  There'd still be the beech woods round
Binfield House, and the towpath down by Burford Weir, and the
horse-trough in the market-place.  I wanted to get back there, just
for a week, and let the feeling of it soak into me.  It was a bit
like one of these Eastern sages retiring into a desert.  And I
should think, the way things are going, there'll be a good many
people retiring into the desert during the next few years.  It'll
be like the time in ancient Rome that old Porteous was telling me
about, when there were so many hermits that there was a waiting
list for every cave.

But it wasn't that I wanted to watch my navel.  I only wanted to
get my nerve back before the bad times begin.  Because does anyone
who isn't dead from the neck up doubt that there's a bad time
coming?  We don't even know what it'll be, and yet we know it's
coming.  Perhaps a war, perhaps a slump--no knowing, except that
it'll be something bad.  Wherever we're going, we're going
downwards.  Into the grave, into the cesspool--no knowing.  And you
can't face that kind of thing unless you've got the right feeling
inside you.  There's something that's gone out of us in these
twenty years since the war.  It's a kind of vital juice that we've
squirted away until there's nothing left.  All this rushing to and
fro!  Everlasting scramble for a bit of cash.  Everlasting din of
buses, bombs, radios, telephone bells.  Nerves worn all to bits,
empty places in our bones where the marrow ought to be.

I shoved my foot down on the accelerator.  The very thought of
going back to Lower Binfield had done me good already.  You know
the feeling I had.  Coming up for air!  Like the big sea-turtles
when they come paddling up to the surface, stick their noses out
and fill their lungs with a great gulp before they sink down again
among the seaweed and the octopuses.  We're all stifling at the
bottom of a dustbin, but I'd found the way to the top.  Back to
Lower Binfield!  I kept my foot on the accelerator until the old
car worked up to her maximum speed of nearly forty miles an hour.
She was rattling like a tin tray full of crockery, and under cover
of the noise I nearly started singing.

Of course the fly in the milk-jug was Hilda.  That thought pulled
me up a bit.  I slowed down to about twenty to think it over.

There wasn't much doubt Hilda would find out sooner or later.  As
to getting only a week's holiday in August, I might be able to pass
that off all right.  I could tell her the firm were only giving me
a week this year.  Probably she wouldn't ask too many questions
about that, because she'd jump at the chance of cutting down the
holiday expenses.  The kids, in any case, always stay at the
seaside for a month.  Where the difficulty came in was finding an
alibi for that week in May.  I couldn't just clear off without
notice.  Best thing, I thought, would be to tell her a good while
ahead that I was being sent on some special job to Nottingham, or
Derby, or Bristol, or some other place a good long way away.  If
I told her about it two months ahead it would look as if I hadn't
anything to hide.

But of course she'd find out sooner or later.  Trust Hilda!  She'd
start off by pretending to believe it, and then, in that quiet,
obstinate way she has, she'd nose out the fact that I'd never been
to Nottingham or Derby or Bristol or wherever it might be.  It's
astonishing how she does it.  Such perseverance!  She lies low
till she's found out all the weak points in your alibi, and then
suddenly, when you've put your foot in it by some careless remark,
she starts on you.  Suddenly comes out with the whole dossier of
the case.  'Where did you spend Saturday night?  That's a lie!
You've been off with a woman.  Look at these hairs I found when
I was brushing your waistcoat.  Look at them!  Is my hair that
colour?'  And then the fun begins.  Lord knows how many times it's
happened.  Sometimes she's been right about the woman and sometimes
she's been wrong, but the after-effects are always the same.
Nagging for weeks on end!  Never a meal without a row--and the kids
can't make out what it's all about.  The one completely hopeless
thing would be to tell her just where I'd spent that week, and why.
If I explained till the Day of Judgment she'd never believe that.

But, hell!  I thought, why bother?  It was a long way off.  You
know how different these things seem before and after.  I shoved my
foot down on the accelerator again.  I'd had another idea, almost
bigger than the first.  I wouldn't go in May.  I'd go in the second
half of June, when the coarse-fishing season had started, and I'd
go fishing!

Why not, after all?  I wanted peace, and fishing is peace.  And
then the biggest idea of all came into my head and very nearly made
me swing the car off the road.

I'd go and catch those big carp in the pool at Binfield House!

And once again, why not?  Isn't it queer how we go through life,
always thinking that the things we want to do are the things that
can't be done?  Why shouldn't I catch those carp?  And yet, as soon
as the idea's mentioned, doesn't it sound to you like something
impossible, something that just couldn't happen?  It seemed so to
me, even at that moment.  It seemed to me a kind of dope-dream,
like the ones you have of sleeping with film stars or winning the
heavyweight championship.  And yet it wasn't in the least
impossible, it wasn't even improbable.  Fishing can be rented.
Whoever owned Binfield House now would probably let the pool if
they got enough for it.  And Gosh!  I'd be glad to pay five pounds
for a day's fishing in that pool.  For that matter it was quite
likely that the house was still empty and nobody even knew that the
pool existed.

I thought of it in the dark place among the trees, waiting for me
all those years.  And the huge black fish still gliding round it.
Jesus!  If they were that size thirty years ago, what would they be
like now?



3


It was June the seventeenth, Friday, the second day of the coarse-
fishing season.

I hadn't had any difficulty in fixing things with the firm.  As for
Hilda, I'd fitted her up with a story that was all shipshape and
watertight.  I'd fixed on Birmingham for my alibi, and at the last
moment I'd even told her the name of the hotel I was going to stay
at, Rowbottom's Family and Commercial.  I happened to know the
address because I'd stayed there some years earlier.  At the same
time I didn't want her writing to me at Birmingham, which she might
do if I was away as long as a week.  After thinking it over I took
young Saunders, who travels for Glisso Floor Polish, partly into my
confidence.  He'd happened to mention that he'd be passing through
Birmingham on the eighteenth of June, and I got him to promise that
he'd stop on his way and post a letter from me to Hilda, addressed
from Rowbottom's.  This was to tell her that I might be called away
and she'd better not write.  Saunders understood, or thought he
did.  He gave me a wink and said I was wonderful for my age.  So
that settled Hilda.  She hadn't asked any questions, and even if
she turned suspicious later, an alibi like that would take some
breaking.

I drove through Westerham.  It was a wonderful June morning.  A
faint breeze blowing, and the elm tops swaying in the sun, little
white clouds streaming across the sky like a flock of sheep, and
the shadows chasing each other across the fields.  Outside
Westerham a Walls' Ice Cream lad, with cheeks like apples, came
tearing towards me on his bike, whistling so that it went through
your head.  It suddenly reminded me of the time when I'd been an
errand boy myself (though in those days we didn't have free-wheel
bikes) and I very nearly stopped him and took one.  They'd cut the
hay in places, but they hadn't got it in yet.  It lay drying in
long shiny rows, and the smell of it drifted across the road and
got mixed up with the petrol.

I drove along at a gentle fifteen.  The morning had a kind of
peaceful, dreamy feeling.  The ducks floated about on the ponds as
if they felt too satisfied to eat.  In Nettlefield, the village
beyond Westerham, a little man in a white apron, with grey hair and
a huge grey moustache, darted across the green, planted himself in
the middle of the road and began doing physical jerks to attract my
attention.  My car's known all along this road, of course.  I
pulled up.  It's only Mr Weaver, who keeps the village general
shop.  No, he doesn't want to insure his life, nor his shop either.
He's merely run out of change and wants to know whether I've got a
quid's worth of 'large silver'.  They never have any change in
Nettlefield, not even at the pub.

I drove on.  The wheat would have been as tall as your waist.  It
went undulating up and down the hills like a great green carpet,
with the wind rippling it a little, kind of thick and silky-
looking.  It's like a woman, I thought.  It makes you want to lie
on it.  And a bit ahead of me I saw the sign-post where the road
forks right for Pudley and left for Oxford.

I was still on my usual beat, inside the boundary of my own
'district', as the firm calls it.  The natural thing, as I was
going westward, would have been to leave London along the Uxbridge
Road.  But by a kind of instinct I'd followed my usual route.  The
fact was I was feeling guilty about the whole business.  I wanted
to get well away before I headed for Oxfordshire.  And in spite of
the fact that I'd fixed things so neatly with Hilda and the firm,
in spite of the twelve quid in my pocket-book and the suitcase in
the back of the car, as I got nearer the crossroads I actually felt
a temptation--I knew I wasn't going to succumb to it, and yet it
was a temptation--to chuck the whole thing up.  I had a sort of
feeling that so long as I was driving along my normal beat I was
still inside the law.  It's not too late, I thought.  There's still
time to do the respectable thing.  I could run into Pudley, for
instance, see the manager of Barclay's Bank (he's our agent at
Pudley) and find out if any new business had come in.  For that
matter I could even turn round, go back to Hilda, and make a clean
breast of the plot.

I slowed down as I got to the corner.  Should I or shouldn't I?
For about a second I was really tempted.  But no!  I tooted the
klaxon and swung the car westward, on to the Oxford road.

Well, I'd done it.  I was on the forbidden ground.  It was true
that five miles farther on, if I wanted to, I could turn to the
left again and get back to Westerham.  But for the moment I was
headed westward.  Strictly speaking I was in flight.  And what was
curious, I was no sooner on the Oxford road than I felt perfectly
certain that THEY knew all about it.  When I say THEY I mean all
the people who wouldn't approve of a trip of this kind and who'd
have stopped me if they could--which, I suppose, would include
pretty well everybody.

What was more, I actually had a feeling that they were after me
already.  The whole lot of them!  All the people who couldn't
understand why a middle-aged man with false teeth should sneak away
for a quiet week in the place where he spent his boyhood.  And all
the mean-minded bastards who COULD understand only too well, and
who'd raise heaven and earth to prevent it.  They were all on my
track.  It was as if a huge army were streaming up the road behind
me.  I seemed to see them in my mind's eye.  Hilda was in front, of
course, with the kids tagging after her, and Mrs Wheeler driving
her forward with a grim, vindictive expression, and Miss Minns
rushing along in the rear, with her pince-nez slipping down and a
look of distress on her face, like the hen that gets left behind
when the others have got hold of the bacon rind.  And Sir Herbert
Crum and the higher-ups of the Flying Salamander in their Rolls-
Royces and Hispano-Suizas.  And all the chaps at the office, and
all the poor down-trodden pen-pushers from Ellesmere Road and from
all such other roads, some of them wheeling prams and mowing-
machines and concrete garden-rollers, some of them chugging along
in little Austin Sevens.  And all the soul-savers and Nosey
Parkers, the people whom you've never seen but who rule your
destiny all the same, the Home Secretary, Scotland Yard, the
Temperance League, the Bank of England, Lord Beaverbrook, Hitler
and Stalin on a tandem bicycle, the bench of Bishops, Mussolini,
the Pope--they were all of them after me.  I could almost hear them
shouting:

'There's a chap who thinks he's going to escape!  There's a chap
who says he won't be streamlined!  He's going back to Lower
Binfield!  After him!  Stop him!'

It's queer.  The impression was so strong that I actually took a
peep through the little window at the back of the car to make sure
I wasn't being followed.  Guilty conscience, I suppose.  But there
was nobody.  Only the dusty white road and the long line of the
elms dwindling out behind me.

I trod on the gas and the old car rattled into the thirties.  A few
minutes later I was past the Westerham turning.  So that was that.
I'd burnt my boats.  This was the idea which, in a dim sort of way,
had begun to form itself in my mind the day I got my new false
teeth.




PART IV



1


I came towards Lower Binfield over Chamford Hill.  There are four
roads into Lower Binfield, and it would have been more direct to go
through Walton.  But I'd wanted to come over Chamford Hill, the way
we used to go when we biked home from fishing in the Thames.  When
you get just past the crown of the hill the trees open out and you
can see Lower Binfield lying in the valley below you.

It's a queer experience to go over a bit of country you haven't
seen in twenty years.  You remember it in great detail, and you
remember it all wrong.  All the distances are different, and the
landmarks seem to have moved about.  You keep feeling, surely this
hill used to be a lot steeper--surely that turning was on the other
side of the road?  And on the other hand you'll have memories which
are perfectly accurate, but which only belong to one particular
occasion.  You'll remember, for instance, a corner of a field, on a
wet day in winter, with the grass so green that it's almost blue,
and a rotten gatepost covered with lichen and a cow standing in the
grass and looking at you.  And you'll go back after twenty years
and be surprised because the cow isn't standing in the same place
and looking at you with the same expression.

As I drove up Chamford Hill I realized that the picture I'd had of
it in my mind was almost entirely imaginary.  But it was a fact
that certain things had changed.  The road was tarmac, whereas in
the old days it used to be macadam (I remember the bumpy feeling of
it under the bike), and it seemed to have got a lot wider.  And
there were far less trees.  In the old days there used to be huge
beeches growing in the hedgerows, and in places their boughs met
across the road and made a kind of arch.  Now they were all gone.
I'd nearly got to the top of the hill when I came on something
which was certainly new.  To the right of the road there was a
whole lot of fake-picturesque houses, with overhanging eaves and
rose pergolas and what-not.  You know the kind of houses that are
just a little too high-class to stand in a row, and so they're
dotted about in a kind of colony, with private roads leading up to
them.  And at the entrance to one of the private roads there was a
huge white board which said:


THE KENNELS

PEDIGREE SEALYHAM PUPS

DOGS BOARDED


Surely THAT usen't to be there?

I thought for a moment.  Yes, I remembered!  Where those houses
stood there used to be a little oak plantation, and the trees grew
too close together, so that they were very tall and thin, and in
spring the ground underneath them used to be smothered in anemones.
Certainly there were never any houses as far out of the town as
this.

I got to the top of the hill.  Another minute and Lower Binfield
would be in sight.  Lower Binfield!  Why should I pretend I wasn't
excited?  At the very thought of seeing it again an extraordinary
feeling that started in my guts crept upwards and did something to
my heart.  Five seconds more and I'd be seeing it.  Yes, here we
are!  I declutched, trod on the foot-brake, and--Jesus!

Oh, yes, I know you knew what was coming.  But _I_ didn't.  You can
say I was a bloody fool not to expect it, and so I was.  But it
hadn't even occurred to me.

The first question was, where WAS Lower Binfield?

I don't mean that it had been demolished.  It had merely been
swallowed.  The thing I was looking down at was a good-sized
manufacturing town.  I remember--Gosh, how I remember! and in this
case I don't think my memory is far out--what Lower Binfield used
to look like from the top of Chamford Hill.  I suppose the High
Street was about a quarter of a mile long, and except for a few
outlying houses the town was roughly the shape of a cross.  The
chief landmarks were the church tower and the chimney of the
brewery.  At this moment I couldn't distinguish either of them.
All I could see was an enormous river of brand-new houses which
flowed along the valley in both directions and half-way up the
hills on either side.  Over to the right there were what looked
like several acres of bright red roofs all exactly alike.  A big
Council housing estate, by the look of it.

But where was Lower Binfield?  Where was the town I used to know?
It might have been anywhere.  All I knew was that it was buried
somewhere in the middle of that sea of bricks.  Of the five or six
factory chimneys that I could see, I couldn't even make a guess at
which belonged to the brewery.  Towards the eastern end of the town
there were two enormous factories of glass and concrete.  That
accounts for the growth of the town, I thought, as I began to take
it in.  It occurred to me that the population of this place (it
used to be about two thousand in the old days) must be a good
twenty-five thousand.  The only thing that hadn't changed,
seemingly, was Binfield House.  It wasn't much more than a dot at
that distance, but you could see it on the hillside opposite, with
the beech trees round it, and the town hadn't climbed that high.
As I looked a fleet of black bombing planes came over the hill and
zoomed across the town.

I shoved the clutch in and started slowly down the hill.  The
houses had climbed half-way up it.  You know those very cheap small
houses which run up a hillside in one continuous row, with the
roofs rising one above the other like a flight of steps, all
exactly the same.  But a little before I got to the houses I
stopped again.  On the left of the road there was something else
that was quite new.  The cemetery.  I stopped opposite the lych-
gate to have a look at it.

It was enormous, twenty acres, I should think.  There's always a
kind of jumped-up unhomelike look about a new cemetery, with its
raw gravel paths and its rough green sods, and the machine-made
marble angels that look like something off a wedding-cake.  But
what chiefly struck me at the moment was that in the old days this
place hadn't existed.  There was no separate cemetery then, only
the churchyard.  I could vaguely remember the farmer these fields
used to belong to--Blackett, his name was, and he was a dairy-
farmer.  And somehow the raw look of the place brought it home to
me how things have changed.  It wasn't only that the town had grown
so vast that they needed twenty acres to dump their corpses in.  It
was their putting the cemetery out here, on the edge of the town.
Have you noticed that they always do that nowadays?  Every new town
puts its cemetery on the outskirts.  Shove it away--keep it out of
sight!  Can't bear to be reminded of death.  Even the tombstones
tell you the same story.  They never say that the chap underneath
them 'died', it's always 'passed away' or 'fell asleep'.  It wasn't
so in the old days.  We had our churchyard plumb in the middle of
the town, you passed it every day, you saw the spot where your
grandfather was lying and where some day you were going to lie
yourself.  We didn't mind looking at the dead.  In hot weather, I
admit, we also had to smell them, because some of the family vaults
weren't too well sealed.

I let the car run down the hill slowly.  Queer!  You can't imagine
how queer!  All the way down the hill I was seeing ghosts, chiefly
the ghosts of hedges and trees and cows.  It was as if I was
looking at two worlds at once, a kind of thin bubble of the thing
that used to be, with the thing that actually existed shining
through it.  There's the field where the bull chased Ginger
Rodgers!  And there's the place where the horse-mushrooms used to
grow!  But there weren't any fields or any bulls or any mushrooms.
It was houses, houses everywhere, little raw red houses with their
grubby window-curtains and their scraps of back-garden that hadn't
anything in them except a patch of rank grass or a few larkspurs
struggling among the weeds.  And blokes walking up and down, and
women shaking out mats, and snotty-nosed kids playing along the
pavement.  All strangers!  They'd all come crowding in while my
back was turned.  And yet it was they who'd have looked on me as a
stranger, they didn't know anything about the old Lower Binfield,
they'd never heard of Shooter and Wetherall, or Mr Grimmett and
Uncle Ezekiel, and cared less, you bet.

It's funny how quickly one adjusts.  I suppose it was five minutes
since I'd halted at the top of the hill, actually a bit out of
breath at the thought of seeing Lower Binfield again.  And already
I'd got used to the idea that Lower Binfield had been swallowed up
and buried like the lost cities of Peru.  I braced up and faced it.
After all, what else do you expect?  Towns have got to grow, people
have got to live somewhere.  Besides, the old town hadn't been
annihilated.  Somewhere or other it still existed, though it had
houses round it instead of fields.  In a few minutes I'd be seeing
it again, the church and the brewery chimney and Father's shop-
window and the horse-trough in the market-place.  I got to the
bottom of the hill, and the road forked.  I took the left-hand
turning, and a minute later I was lost.

I could remember nothing.  I couldn't even remember whether it was
hereabouts that the town used to begin.  All I knew was that in the
old days this street hadn't existed.  For hundreds of yards I was
running along it--a rather mean, shabby kind of street, with the
houses giving straight on the pavement and here and there a corner
grocery or a dingy little pub--and wondering where the hell it led
to.  Finally I pulled up beside a woman in a dirty apron and no hat
who was walking down the pavement.  I stuck my head out of the
window.

'Beg pardon--can you tell me the way to the market-place?'

She 'couldn't tell'.  Answered in an accent you could cut with a
spade.  Lancashire.  There's lots of them in the south of England
now.  Overflow from the distressed areas.  Then I saw a bloke in
overalls with a bag of tools coming along and tried again.  This
time I got the answer in Cockney, but he had to think for a moment.

'Market-place?  Market-place?  Lessee, now.  Oh--you mean the OLE
Market?'

I supposed I did mean the Old Market.

'Oh, well--you take the right 'and turning--'

It was a long way.  Miles, it seemed to me, though really it wasn't
a mile.  Houses, shops, cinemas, chapels, football grounds--new,
all new.  Again I had that feeling of a kind of enemy invasion
having happened behind my back.  All these people flooding in from
Lancashire and the London suburbs, planting themselves down in this
beastly chaos, not even bothering to know the chief landmarks of
the town by name.  But I grasped presently why what we used to call
the market-place was now known as the Old Market.  There was a big
square, though you couldn't properly call it a square, because it
was no particular shape, in the middle of the new town, with
traffic-lights and a huge bronze statue of a lion worrying an
eagle--the war-memorial, I suppose.  And the newness of everything!
The raw, mean look!  Do you know the look of these new towns that
have suddenly swelled up like balloons in the last few years,
Hayes, Slough, Dagenham, and so forth?  The kind of chilliness, the
bright red brick everywhere, the temporary-looking shop-windows
full of cut-price chocolates and radio parts.  It was just like
that.  But suddenly I swung into a street with older houses.  Gosh!
The High Street!

After all my memory hadn't played tricks on me.  I knew every inch
of it now.  Another couple of hundred yards and I'd be in the
market-place.  The old shop was down the other end of the High
Street.  I'd go there after lunch--I was going to put up at the
George.  And every inch a memory!  I knew all the shops, though all
the names had changed, and the stuff they dealt in had mostly
changed as well.  There's Lovegrove's!  And there's Todd's!  And a
big dark shop with beams and dormer windows.  Used to be Lilywhite's
the draper's, where Elsie used to work.  And Grimmett's!  Still a
grocer's apparently.  Now for the horse-trough in the market-place.
There was another car ahead of me and I couldn't see.

It turned aside as we got into the market-place.  The horse-trough
was gone.

There was an A.A. man on traffic-duty where it used to stand.  He
gave a glance at the car, saw that it hadn't the A.A. sign, and
decided not to salute.

I turned the corner and ran down to the George.  The horse-trough
being gone had thrown me out to such an extent that I hadn't even
looked to see whether the brewery chimney was still standing.  The
George had altered too, all except the name.  The front had been
dolled up till it looked like one of those riverside hotels, and
the sign was different.  It was curious that although till that
moment I hadn't thought of it once in twenty years, I suddenly
found that I could remember every detail of the old sign, which had
swung there ever since I could remember.  It was a crude kind of
picture, with St George on a very thin horse trampling on a very
fat dragon, and in the corner, though it was cracked and faded,
you could read the little signature, 'Wm. Sandford, Painter &
Carpenter'.  The new sign was kind of artistic-looking.  You could
see it had been painted by a real artist.  St George looked a
regular pansy.  The cobbled yard, where the farmers' traps used to
stand and the drunks used to puke on Saturday nights, had been
enlarged to about three times its size and concreted over, with
garages all round it.  I backed the car into one of the garages and
got out.

One thing I've noticed about the human mind is that it goes in
jerks.  There's no emotion that stays by you for any length of
time.  During the last quarter of an hour I'd had what you could
fairly describe as a shock.  I'd felt it almost like a sock in the
guts when I stopped at the top of Chamford Hill and suddenly
realized that Lower Binfield had vanished, and there'd been another
little stab when I saw the horse-trough was gone.  I'd driven
through the streets with a gloomy, Ichabod kind of feeling.  But as
I stepped out of the car and hitched my trilby hat on to my head I
suddenly felt that it didn't matter a damn.  It was such a lovely
sunny day, and the hotel yard had a kind of summery look, with its
flowers in green tubs and what-not.  Besides, I was hungry and
looking forward to a spot of lunch.

I strolled into the hotel with a consequential kind of air, with
the boots, who'd already nipped out to meet me, following with the
suitcase.  I felt pretty prosperous, and probably I looked it.  A
solid business man, you'd have said, at any rate if you hadn't seen
the car.  I was glad I'd come in my new suit--blue flannel with a
thin white stripe, which suits my style.  It has what the tailor
calls a 'reducing effect'.  I believe that day I could have passed
for a stockbroker.  And say what you like it's a very pleasant
thing, on a June day when the sun's shining on the pink geraniums
in the window-boxes, to walk into a nice country hotel with roast
lamb and mint sauce ahead of you.  Not that it's any treat to me to
stay in hotels, Lord knows I see all too much of them--but ninety-
nine times out of a hundred it's those godless 'family and
commercial' hotels, like Rowbottom's, where I was supposed to be
staying at present, the kind of places where you pay five bob for
bed and breakfast, and the sheets are always damp and the bath taps
never work.  The George had got so smart I wouldn't have known it.
In the old days it had hardly been a hotel, only a pub, though it
had a room or two to let and used to do a farmers' lunch (roast
beef and Yorkshire, suet dumpling and Stilton cheese) on market
days.  It all seemed different except for the public bar, which I
got a glimpse of as I went past, and which looked the same as ever.
I went up a passage with a soft carpet, and hunting prints and
copper warming-pans and such-like junk hanging on the walls.  And
dimly I could remember the passage as it used to be, the hollowed-
out flags underfoot, and the smell of plaster mixed up with the
smell of beer.  A smart-looking young woman, with frizzed hair and
a black dress, who I suppose was the clerk or something, took my
name at the office.

'You wish for a room, sir?  Certainly, sir.  What name shall I put
down, sir?'

I paused.  After all, this was my big moment.  She'd be pretty sure
to know the name.  It isn't common, and there are a lot of us in
the churchyard.  We were one of the old Lower Binfield families,
the Bowlings of Lower Binfield.  And though in a way it's painful
to be recognized, I'd been rather looking forward to it.

'Bowling,' I said very distinctly.  'Mr George Bowling.'

'Bowling, sir.  B-O-A--oh!  B-O-W?  Yes, sir.  And you are coming
from London, sir?'

No response.  Nothing registered.  She'd never heard of me.  Never
heard of George Bowling, son of Samuel Bowling--Samuel Bowling who,
damn it! had had his half-pint in this same pub every Saturday for
over thirty years.



2


The dining-room had changed, too.

I could remember the old room, though I'd never had a meal there,
with its brown mantelpiece and its bronzy-yellow wallpaper--I never
knew whether it was meant to be that colour, or had just got like
that from age and smoke--and the oil-painting, also by Wm.
Sandford, Painter & Carpenter, of the battle of Tel-el-Kebir.
Now they'd got the place up in a kind of medieval style.  Brick
fireplace with inglenooks, a huge beam across the ceiling, oak
panelling on the walls, and every bit of it a fake that you could
have spotted fifty yards away.  The beam was genuine oak, came out
of some old sailing-ship, probably, but it didn't hold anything up,
and I had my suspicions of the panels as soon as I set eyes on
them.  As I sat down at my table, and the slick young waiter came
towards me fiddling with his napkin, I tapped the wall behind me.
Yes!  Thought so!  Not even wood.  They fake it up with some kind
of composition and then paint it over.

But the lunch wasn't bad.  I had my lamb and mint sauce, and I had
a bottle of some white wine or other with a French name which made
me belch a bit but made me feel happy.  There was one other person
lunching there, a woman of about thirty with fair hair, looked like
a widow.  I wondered whether she was staying at the George, and
made vague plans to get off with her.  It's funny how your feelings
get mixed up.  Half the time I was seeing ghosts.  The past was
sticking out into the present, Market day, and the great solid
farmers throwing their legs under the long table, with their
hobnails grating on the stone floor, and working their way through
a quantity of beef and dumpling you wouldn't believe the human
frame could hold.  And then the little tables with their shiny
white cloths and wine-glasses and folded napkins, and the faked-up
decorations and the general expensiveness would blot it out again.
And I'd think, 'I've got twelve quid and a new suit.  I'm little
Georgie Bowling, and who'd have believed I'd ever come back to
Lower Binfield in my own motorcar?'  And then the wine would send a
kind of warm feeling upwards from my stomach, and I'd run an eye
over the woman with fair hair and mentally take her clothes off.

It was the same in the afternoon as I lay about in the lounge--
fake-medieval again, but it had streamlined leather armchairs and
glass-topped tables--with some brandy and a cigar.  I was seeing
ghosts, but on the whole I was enjoying it.  As a matter of fact
I was a tiny bit boozed and hoping that the woman with fair hair
would come in so that I could scrape acquaintance.  She never
showed up, however.  It wasn't till nearly tea-time that I went
out.

I strolled up to the market-place and turned to the left.  The
shop!  It was funny.  Twenty-one years ago, the day of Mother's
funeral, I'd passed it in the station fly, and seen it all shut up
and dusty, with the sign burnt off with a plumber's blowflame, and
I hadn't cared a damn.  And now, when I was so much further away
from it, when there were actually details about the inside of the
house that I couldn't remember, the thought of seeing it again did
things to my heart and guts.  I passed the barber's shop.  Still a
barber's, though the name was different.  A warm, soapy, almondy
smell came out of the door.  Not quite so good as the old smell of
bay rum and latakia.  The shop--our shop--was twenty yards farther
down.  Ah!

An arty-looking sign--painted by the same chap as did the one at
the George, I shouldn't wonder--hanging out over the pavement:


WENDY'S TEASHOP

MORNING COFFEE

HOME-MADE CAKES


A tea-shop!

I suppose if it had been a butcher's or an ironmonger's, or
anything else except a seedsman's, it would have given me the same
kind of jolt.  It's absurd that because you happen to have been
born in a certain house you should feel that you've got rights over
it for the rest of your life, but so you do.  The place lived up to
its name, all right.  Blue curtains in the window, and a cake or
two standing about, the kind of cake that's covered with chocolate
and has just one walnut stuck somewhere on the top.  I went in.
I didn't really want any tea, but I had to see the inside.

They'd evidently turned both the shop and what used to be the
parlour into tea-rooms.  As for the yard at the back where the
dustbin used to stand and Father's little patch of weeds used to
grow, they'd paved it all over and dolled it up with rustic tables
and hydrangeas and things.  I went through into the parlour.  More
ghosts!  The piano and the texts on the wall, and the two lumpy old
red armchairs where Father and Mother used to sit on opposite sides
of the fireplace, reading the People and the News of the World on
Sunday afternoons!  They'd got the place up in an even more antique
style than the George, with gateleg tables and a hammered-iron
chandelier and pewter plates hanging on the wall and what-not.  Do
you notice how dark they always manage to make it in these arty
tea-rooms?  It's part of the antiqueness, I suppose.  And instead
of an ordinary waitress there was a young woman in a kind of print
wrapper who met me with a sour expression.  I asked her for tea,
and she was ten minutes getting it.  You know the kind of tea--
China tea, so weak that you could think it's water till you put the
milk in.  I was sitting almost exactly where Father's armchair used
to stand.  I could almost hear his voice, reading out a 'piece', as
he used to call it, from the People, about the new flying machines,
or the chap who was swallowed by a whale, or something.  It gave me
a most peculiar feeling that I was there on false pretences and
they could kick me out if they discovered who I was, and yet
simultaneously I had a kind of longing to tell somebody that I'd
been born here, that I belonged to this house, or rather (what I
really felt) that the house belonged to me.  There was nobody else
having tea.  The girl in the print wrapper was hanging about by the
window, and I could see that if I hadn't been there she'd have been
picking her teeth.  I bit into one of the slices of cake she'd
brought me.  Home-made cakes!  You bet they were.  Home-made with
margarine and egg-substitute.  But in the end I had to speak.
I said:

'Have you been in Lower Binfield long?'

She started, looked surprised, and didn't answer.  I tried again:

'I used to live in Lower Binfleld myself, a good while ago.'

Again no answer, or only something that I couldn't hear.  She gave
me a kind of frigid look and then gazed out of the window again.  I
saw how it was.  Too much of a lady to go in for back-chat with
customers.  Besides, she probably thought I was trying to get off
with her.  What was the good of telling her I'd been born in the
house?  Even if she believed it, it wouldn't interest her.  She'd
never heard of Samuel Bowling, Corn & Seed Merchant.  I paid the
bill and cleared out.

I wandered up to the church.  One thing that I'd been half afraid
of, and half looking forward to, was being recognized by people I
used to know.  But I needn't have worried, there wasn't a face I
knew anywhere in the streets.  It seemed as if the whole town had
got a new population.

When I got to the church I saw why they'd had to have a new
cemetery.  The churchyard was full to the brim, and half the graves
had names on them that I didn't know.  But the names I did know
were easy enough to find.  I wandered round among the graves.  The
sexton had just scythed the grass and there was a smell of summer
even there.  They were all alone, all the older folks I'd known.
Gravitt the butcher, and Winkle the other seedsman, and Trew, who
used to keep the George, and Mrs Wheeler from the sweet-shop--they
were all lying there.  Shooter and Wetherall were opposite one
another on either side of the path, just as if they were still
singing at each other across the aisle.  So Wetherall hadn't got
his hundred after all.  Born in '43 and 'departed his life' in
1928.  But he'd beaten Shooter, as usual.  Shooter died in '26.
What a time old Wetherall must have had those last two years when
there was nobody to sing against him!  And old Grimmett under a
huge marble thing shaped rather like a veal-and-ham pie, with an
iron railing round it, and in the corner a whole batch of Simmonses
under cheap little crosses.  All gone to dust.  Old Hodges with his
tobacco-coloured teeth, and Lovegrove with his big brown beard, and
Lady Rampling with the coachman and the tiger, and Harry Barnes's
aunt who had a glass eye, and Brewer of the Mill Farm with his
wicked old face like something carved out of a nut--nothing left of
any of them except a slab of stone and God knows what underneath.

I found Mother's grave, and Father's beside it.  Both of them in
pretty good repair.  The sexton had kept the grass clipped.  Uncle
Ezekiel's was a little way away.  They'd levelled a lot of the
older graves, and the old wooden head-pieces, the ones that used to
look like the end of a bedstead, had all been cleared away.  What
do you feel when you see your parents' graves after twenty years?
I don't know what you ought to feel, but I'll tell you what I did
feel, and that was nothing.  Father and Mother have never faded out
of my mind.  It's as if they existed somewhere or other in a kind
of eternity, Mother behind the brown teapot, Father with his bald
head a little mealy, and his spectacles and his grey moustache,
fixed for ever like people in a picture, and yet in some way alive.
Those boxes of bones lying in the ground there didn't seem to have
anything to do with them.  Merely, as I stood there, I began to
wonder what you feel like when you're underground, whether you care
much and how soon you cease to care, when suddenly a heavy shadow
swept across me and gave me a bit of a start.

I looked over my shoulder.  It was only a bombing plane which had
flown between me and the sun.  The place seemed to be creeping with
them.

I strolled into the church.  For almost the first time since I got
back to Lower Binfield I didn't have the ghostly feeling, or rather
I had it in a different form.  Because nothing had changed.
Nothing, except that all the people were gone.  Even the hassocks
looked the same.  The same dusty, sweetish corpse-smell.  And by
God! the same hole in the window, though, as it was evening and the
sun was round the other side, the spot of light wasn't creeping up
the aisle.  They'd still got pews--hadn't changed over to chairs.
There was our pew, and there was the one in front where Wetherall
used to bellow against Shooter.  Sihon king of the Amorites and Og
the king of Bashan!  And the worn stones in the aisle where you
could still half-read the epitaphs of the blokes who lay beneath
them.  I squatted down to have a look at the one opposite our pew.
I still knew the readable bits of it by heart.  Even the pattern
they made seemed to have stuck in my memory.  Lord knows how often
I'd read them during the sermon.


Here..................fon,   Gent.,
of this parif h..........his juft &
  upright..........................
..................................
To his........manifold private bene
volences he added a diligent.......
...................................
.......................beloved wife
Amelia, by..............iffue feven
daughters..........................


I remembered how the long S's used to puzzle me as a kid.  Used to
wonder whether in the old days they pronounced their S's as F's,
and if so, why.

There was a step behind me.  I looked up.  A chap in a cassock was
standing over me.  It was the vicar.

But I mean THE vicar!  It was old Betterton, who'd been vicar in
the old days--not, as a matter of fact, ever since I could
remember, but since 1904 or thereabouts.  I recognized him at once,
though his hair was quite white.

He didn't recognize me.  I was only a fat tripper in a blue suit
doing a bit of sightseeing.  He said good evening and promptly
started on the usual line of talk--was I interested in architecture,
remarkable old building this, foundations go back to Saxon times and
so on and so forth.  And soon he was doddering round, showing me the
sights, such as they were--Norman arch leading into the vestry,
brass effigy of Sir Roderick Bone who was killed at the Battle of
Newbury.  And I followed him with the kind of whipped-dog air that
middle-aged businessmen always have when they're being shown round a
church or a picture-gallery.  But did I tell him that I knew it all
already?  Did I tell him that I was Georgie Bowling, son of Samuel
Bowling--he'd have remembered my father even if he didn't remember
me--and that I'd not only listened to his sermons for ten years and
gone to his Confirmation classes, but even belonged to the Lower
Binfield Reading Circle and had a go at Sesame and Lilies just to
please him?  No, I didn't.  I merely followed him round, making the
kind of mumble that you make when somebody tells you that this or
that is five hundred years old and you can't think what the hell to
say except that it doesn't look it.  From the moment that I set eyes
on him I'd decided to let him think I was a stranger.  As soon as I
decently could I dropped sixpence in the Church Expenses box and
bunked.

But why?  Why not make contact, now that at last I'd found somebody
I knew?

Because the change in his appearance after twenty years had
actually frightened me.  I suppose you think I mean that he looked
older.  But he didn't!  He looked YOUNGER.  And it suddenly taught
me something about the passage of time.

I suppose old Betterton would be about sixty-five now, so that when
I last saw him he'd have been about forty-five--my own present age.
His hair was white now, and the day he buried Mother it was a kind
of streaky grey, like a shaving-brush.  And yet as soon as I saw
him the first thing that struck me was that he looked younger.  I'd
thought of him as an old, old man, and after all he wasn't so very
old.  As a boy, it occurred to me, all people over forty had seemed
to me just worn-out old wrecks, so old that there was hardly any
difference between them.  A man of forty-five had seemed to me
older than this old dodderer of sixty-five seemed now.  And Christ!
I was forty-five myself.  It frightened me.

So that's what I look like to chaps of twenty, I thought as I made
off between the graves.  Just a poor old hulk.  Finished.  It was
curious.  As a rule I don't care a damn about my age.  Why should
I?  I'm fat, but I'm strong and healthy.  I can do everything I
want to do.  A rose smells the same to me now as it did when I was
twenty.  Ah, but do I smell the same to the rose?  Like an answer a
girl, might have been eighteen, came up the churchyard lane.  She
had to pass within a yard or two of me.  I saw the look she gave
me, just a tiny momentary look.  No, not frightened, nor hostile.
Only kind of wild, remote, like a wild animal when you catch its
eye.  She'd been born and grown up in those twenty years while I
was away from Lower Binfield.  All my memories would have been
meaningless to her.  Living in a different world from me, like an
animal.

I went back to the George.  I wanted a drink, but the bar didn't
open for another half-hour.  I hung about for a bit, reading a
Sporting and Dramatic of the year before, and presently the fair-
haired dame, the one I thought might be a widow, came in.  I had a
sudden desperate yearning to get off with her.  Wanted to show
myself that there's life in the old dog yet, even if the old dog
does have to wear false teeth.  After all, I thought, if she's
thirty and I'm forty-five, that's fair enough.  I was standing in
front of the empty fireplace, making believe to warm my bum, the
way you do on a summer day.  In my blue suit I didn't look so bad.
A bit fat, no doubt, but distingue.  A man of the world.  I could
pass for a stockbroker.  I put on my toniest accent and said
casually:

'Wonderful June weather we're having.'

It was a pretty harmless remark, wasn't it?  Nor in the same class
as 'Haven't I met you somewhere before?'

But it wasn't a success.  She didn't answer, merely lowered for
about half a second the paper she was reading and gave me a look
that would have cracked a window.  It was awful.  She had one of
those blue eyes that go into you like a bullet.  In that split
second I saw how hopelessly I'd got her wrong.  She wasn't the kind
of widow with dyed hair who likes being taken out to dance-halls.
She was upper-middle-class, probably an admiral's daughter, and
been to one of those good schools where they play hockey.  And I'd
got myself wrong too.  New suit or no new suit, I COULDN'T pass for
a stockbroker.  Merely looked like a commercial traveller who'd
happened to get hold of a bit of dough.  I sneaked off to the
private bar to have a pint or two before dinner.

The beer wasn't the same.  I remember the old beer, the good Thames
Valley beer that used to have a bit of taste in it because it was
made out of chalky water.  I asked the barmaid:

'Have Bessemers' still got the brewery?'

'Bessemers?  Oo, NO, sir!  They've gorn.  Oo, years ago--long
before we come 'ere.'

She was a friendly sort, what I call the elder-sister type of
barmaid, thirty-fivish, with a mild kind of face and the fat arms
they develop from working the beer-handle.  She told me the name of
the combine that had taken over the brewery.  I could have guessed
it from the taste, as a matter of fact.  The different bars ran
round in a circle with compartments in between.  Across in the
public bar two chaps were playing a game of darts, and in the Jug
and Bottle there was a chap I couldn't see who occasionally put in
a remark in a sepulchral kind of voice.  The barmaid leaned her fat
elbows on the bar and had a talk with me.  I ran over the names of
the people I used to know, and there wasn't a single one of them
that she'd heard of.  She said she'd only been in Lower Binfield
five years.  She hadn't even heard of old Trew, who used to have
the George in the old days.

'I used to live in Lower Binfield myself,' I told her.  'A good
while back, it was, before the war.'

'Before the war?  Well, now!  You don't look that old.'

'See some changes, I dessay,' said the chap in the Jug and Bottle.

'The town's grown,' I said.  'It's the factories, I suppose.'

'Well, of course they mostly work at the factories.  There's the
gramophone works, and then there's Truefitt Stockings.  But of
course they're making bombs nowadays.'

I didn't altogether see why it was of course, but she began telling
me about a young fellow who worked at Truefitt's factory and
sometimes came to the George, and he'd told her that they were
making bombs as well as stockings, the two, for some reason I
didn't understand, being easy to combine.  And then she told me
about the big military aerodrome near Walton--that accounted for
the bombing planes I kept seeing--and the next moment we'd started
talking about the war, as usual.  Funny.  It was exactly to escape
the thought of war that I'd come here.  But how can you, anyway?
It's in the air you breathe.

I said it was coming in 1941.  The chap in the Jug and Bottle said
he reckoned it was a bad job.  The barmaid said it gave her the
creeps.  She said:

'It doesn't seem to do much good, does it, after all said and done?
And sometimes I lie awake at night and hear one of those great
things going overhead, and think to myself, "Well, now, suppose
that was to drop a bomb right down on top of me!"  And all this
A.R.P., and Miss Todgers, she's the Air Warden, telling you it'll
be all right if you keep your head and stuff the windows up with
newspaper, and they say they're going to dig a shelter under the
Town Hall.  But the way I look at it is, how could you put a gas-
mask on a baby?'

The chap in the Jug and Bottle said he'd read in the paper that you
ought to get into a hot bath till it was all over.  The chaps in
the public bar overheard this and there was a bit of a by-play on
the subject of how many people could get into the same bath, and
both of them asked the barmaid if they could share her bath with
her.  She told them not to get saucy, and then she went up the
other end of the bar and hauled them out a couple more pints of old
and mild.  I took a suck at my beer.  It was poor stuff.  Bitter,
they call it.  And it was bitter, right enough, too bitter, a kind
of sulphurous taste.  Chemicals.  They say no English hops ever go
into beer nowadays, they're all made into chemicals.  Chemicals, on
the other hand, are made into beer.  I found myself thinking about
Uncle Ezekiel, what he'd have said to beer like this, and what he'd
have said about A.R.P. and the buckets of sand you're supposed to
put the thermite bombs out with.  As the barmaid came back to my
side of the bar I said:

'By the way, who's got the Hall nowadays?'

We always used to call it the Hall, though its name was Binfield
House.  For a moment she didn't seem to understand.

'The Hall, sir?'

''E means Binfield 'Ouse,' said the chap in the Jug and Bottle.

'Oh, Binfield House!  Oo, I thought you meant the Memorial Hall.
It's Dr Merrall's got Binfield House now.'

'Dr Merrall?'

'Yes, sir.  He's got more than sixty patients up there, they say.'

'Patients?  Have they turned it into a hospital, or something?'

'Well--it's not what you'd call an ordinary hospital.  More of a
sanatorium.  It's mental patients, reely.  What they call a Mental
Home.'

A loony-bin!

But after all, what else could you expect?



3


I crawled out of bed with a bad taste in my mouth and my bones
creaking.

The fact was that, what with a bottle of wine at lunch and another
at dinner, and several pints in between, besides a brandy or two,
I'd had a bit too much to drink the day before.  For several
minutes I stood in the middle of the carpet, gazing at nothing in
particular and too done-in to make a move.  You know that god-awful
feeling you get sometimes in the early morning.  It's a feeling
chiefly in your legs, but it says to you clearer than any words
could do, 'Why the hell do you go on with it?  Chuck it up, old
chap!  Stick your head in the gas oven!'

Then I shoved my teeth in and went to the window.  A lovely June
day, again, and the sun was just beginning to slant over the roofs
and hit the house-fronts on the other side of the street.  The pink
geraniums in the window-boxes didn't look half bad.  Although it
was only about half past eight and this was only a side-street off
the market-place there was quite a crowd of people coming and
going.  A stream of clerkly-looking chaps in dark suits with
dispatch-cases were hurrying along, all in the same direction, just
as if this had been a London suburb and they were scooting for the
Tube, and the schoolkids were straggling up towards the market-
place in twos and threes.  I had the same feeling that I'd had the
day before when I saw the jungle of red houses that had swallowed
Chamford Hill.  Bloody interlopers!  Twenty thousand gate-crashers
who didn't even know my name.  And here was all this new life
swarming to and fro, and here was I, a poor old fatty with false
teeth, watching them from a window and mumbling stuff that nobody
wanted to listen to about things that happened thirty and forty
years ago.  Christ! I thought, I was wrong to think that I was
seeing ghosts.  I'm the ghost myself.  I'm dead and they're alive.

But after breakfast--haddock, grilled kidneys, toast and marmalade,
and a pot of coffee--I felt better.  The frozen dame wasn't
breakfasting in the dining-room, there was a nice summery feeling
in the air, and I couldn't get rid of the feeling that in that blue
flannel suit of mine I looked just a little bit distingue.  By God!
I thought, if I'm a ghost, I'll BE a ghost!  I'll walk.  I'll haunt
the old places.  And maybe I can work a bit of black magic on some
of these bastards who've stolen my home town from me.

I started out, but I'd got no farther than the market-place when I
was pulled up by something I hadn't expected to see.  A procession
of about fifty school-kids was marching down the street in column
of fours--quite military, they looked--with a grim-looking woman
marching alongside of them like a sergeant-major.  The leading four
were carrying a banner with a red, white, and blue border and
BRITONS PREPARE on it in huge letters.  The barber on the corner
had come out on to his doorstep to have a look at them.  I spoke to
him.  He was a chap with shiny black hair and a dull kind of face.

'What are those kids doing?'

'It's this here air-raid practice,' he said vaguely.  'This here
A.R.P.  Kind of practising, like.  That's Miss Todgers, that is.'

I might have guessed it was Miss Todgers.  You could see it in her
eye.  You know the kind of tough old devil with grey hair and a
kippered face that's always put in charge of Girl Guide
detachments, Y.W.C.A. hostels, and whatnot.  She had on a coat and
skirt that somehow looked like a uniform and gave you a strong
impression that she was wearing a Sam Browne belt, though actually
she wasn't.  I knew her type.  Been in the W.A.A.C.s in the war,
and never had a day's fun since.  This A.R.P. was jam to her.  As
the kids swung past I heard her letting out at them with the real
sergeant-major yell, 'Monica!  Lift your feet up!' and I saw that
the rear four had another banner with a red, white, and blue
border, and in the middle


WE ARE READY.  ARE YOU?


'What do they want to march them up and down for?' I said to the
barber.

'I dunno.  I s'pose it's kind of propaganda, like.'

I knew, of course.  Get the kids war-minded.  Give us all the
feeling that there's no way out of it, the bombers are coming as
sure as Christmas, so down to the cellar you go and don't argue.
Two of the great black planes from Walton were zooming over the
eastern end of the town.  Christ! I thought, when it starts it
won't surprise us any more than a shower of rain.  Already we're
listening for the first bomb.  The barber went on to tell me that
thanks to Miss Todgers's efforts the school-kids had been served
with their gas-masks already.

Well, I started to explore the town.  Two days I spent just
wandering round the old landmarks, such of them as I could
identify.  And all that time I never ran across a soul that knew
me.  I was a ghost, and if I wasn't actually invisible, I felt like
it.

It was queer, queerer than I can tell you.  Did you ever read a
story of H.G. Wells's about a chap who was in two places at once--
that's to say, he was really in his own home, but he had a kind of
hallucination that he was at the bottom of the sea?  He'd been
walking round his room, but instead of the tables and chairs he'd
see the wavy waterweed and the great crabs and cuttlefish reaching
out to get him.  Well, it was just like that.  For hours on end I'd
be walking through a world that wasn't there.  I'd count my paces
as I went down the pavement and think, 'Yes, here's where so-and-
so's field begins.  The hedge runs across the street and slap
through that house.  That petrol pump is really an elm tree.  And
here's the edge of the allotments.  And this street (it was a
dismal little row of semi-detached houses called Cumberledge Road,
I remember) is the lane where we used to go with Katie Simmons, and
the nut-bushes grew on both sides.'  No doubt I got the distances
wrong, but the general directions were right.  I don't believe
anyone who hadn't happened to be born here would have believed that
these streets were fields as little as twenty years ago.  It was as
though the countryside had been buried by a kind of volcanic
eruption from the outer suburbs.  Nearly the whole of what used to
be old Brewer's land had been swallowed up in the Council housing
estate.  The Mill Farm had vanished, the cow-pond where I caught my
first fish had been drained and filled up and built over, so that I
couldn't even say exactly where it used to stand.  It was all
houses, houses, little red cubes of houses all alike, with privet
hedges and asphalt paths leading up to the front door.  Beyond the
Council Estate the town thinned out a bit, but the jerry-builders
were doing their best.  And there were little knots of houses
dumped here and there, wherever anybody had been able to buy a plot
of land, and the makeshift roads leading up to the houses, and
empty lots with builders' boards, and bits of ruined fields covered
with thistles and tin cans.

In the centre of the old town, on the other hand, things hadn't
changed much, so far as buildings went.  A lot of the shops were
still doing the same line of trade, although the names were
different.  Lillywhite's was still a draper's, but it didn't look
too prosperous.  What used to be Gravitt's, the butcher's, was now
a shop that sold radio parts.  Mother Wheeler's little window had
been bricked over.  Grimmett's was still a grocer's, but it had
been taken over by the International.  It gives you an idea of the
power of these big combines that they could even swallow up a cute
old skinflint like Grimmett.  But from what I know of him--not to
mention that slap-up tombstone in the churchyard--I bet he got out
while the going was good and had ten to fifteen thousand quid to
take to heaven with him.  The only shop that was still in the same
hands was Sarazins', the people who'd ruined Father.  They'd
swollen to enormous dimensions, and they had another huge branch in
the new part of the town.  But they'd turned into a kind of general
store and sold furniture, drugs, hardware, and ironmongery as well
as the old garden stuff.

For the best part of two days I was wandering round, not actually
groaning and rattling a chain, but sometimes feeling that I'd like
to.  Also I was drinking more than was good for me.  Almost as soon
as I got to Lower Binfield I'd started on the booze, and after that
the pubs never seemed to open quite early enough.  My tongue was
always hanging out of my mouth for the last half-hour before
opening time.

Mind you, I wasn't in the same mood all the time.  Sometimes it
seemed to me that it didn't matter a damn if Lower Binfield had
been obliterated.  After all, what had I come here for, except to
get away from the family?  There was no reason why I shouldn't do
all the things I wanted to do, even go fishing if I felt like it.
On the Saturday afternoon I even went to the fishing-tackle shop in
the High Street and bought a split-cane rod (I'd always pined for a
split-cane rod as a boy--it's a little bit dearer than a green-
heart) and hooks and gut and so forth.  The atmosphere of the shop
cheered me up.  Whatever else changes, fishing-tackle doesn't--
because, of course, fish don't change either.  And the shopman
didn't see anything funny in a fat middle-aged man buying a
fishing-rod.  On the contrary, we had a little talk about the
fishing in the Thames and the big chub somebody had landed the year
before last on a paste made of brown bread, honey, and minced
boiled rabbit.  I even--though I didn't tell him what I wanted them
for, and hardly even admitted it to myself--bought the strongest
salmon trace he'd got, and some No. 5 roach-hooks, with an eye to
those big carp at Binfield House, in case they still existed.

Most of Sunday morning I was kind of debating it in my mind--should
I go fishing, or shouldn't I?  One moment I'd think, why the hell
not, and the next moment it would seem to me that it was just one
of those things that you dream about and don't ever do.  But in the
afternoon I got the car out and drove down to Burford Weir.  I
thought I'd just have a look at the river, and tomorrow, if the
weather was right, maybe I'd take my new fishing-rod and put on the
old coat and grey flannel bags I had in my suitcase, and have a
good day's fishing.  Three or four days, if I felt like it.

I drove over Chamford Hill.  Down at the bottom the road turns off
and runs parallel to the towpath.  I got out of the car and walked.
Ah!  A knot of little red and white bungalows had sprung up beside
the road.  Might have expected it, of course.  And there seemed to
be a lot of cars standing about.  As I got nearer the river I came
into the sound--yes, plonk-tiddle-tiddle-plonk!--yes, the sound of
gramphones.

I rounded the bend and came in sight of the towpath.  Christ!
Another jolt.  The place was black with people.  And where the
water-meadows used to be--tea-houses, penny-in-the-slot machines,
sweet kiosks, and chaps selling Walls' Ice-Cream.  Might as well
have been at Margate.  I remember the old towpath.  You could walk
along it for miles, and except for the chaps at the lock gates, and
now and again a bargeman mooching along behind his horse, you'd
meet never a soul.  When we went fishing we always had the place to
ourselves.  Often I've sat there a whole afternoon, and a heron
might be standing in the shallow water fifty yards up the bank, and
for three or four hours on end there wouldn't be anyone passing to
scare him away.  But where had I got the idea that grown-up men
don't go fishing?  Up and down the bank, as far as I could see in
both directions, there was a continuous chain of men fishing, one
every five yards.  I wondered how the hell they could all have got
there until it struck me that they must be some fishing-club or
other.  And the river was crammed with boats--rowing-boats, canoes,
punts, motor-launches, full of young fools with next to nothing on,
all of them screaming and shouting and most of them with a
gramphone aboard as well.  The floats of the poor devils who were
trying to fish rocked up and down on the wash of the motor-boats.

I walked a little way.  Dirty, choppy water, in spite of the fine
day.  Nobody was catching anything, not even minnows.  I wondered
whether they expected to.  A crowd like that would be enough to
scare every fish in creation.  But actually, as I watched the
floats rocking up and down among the ice-cream tubs and the paper
bags, I doubted whether there were any fish to catch.  Are there
still fish in the Thames?  I suppose there must be.  And yet I'll
swear the Thames water isn't the same as it used to be.  Its colour
is quite different.  Of course you think that's merely my
imagination, but I can tell you it isn't so.  I know the water has
changed.  I remember the Thames water as it used to be, a kind of
luminous green that you could see deep into, and the shoals of dace
cruising round the reeds.  You couldn't see three inches into the
water now.  It's all brown and dirty, with a film of oil in it from
the motor-boats, not to mention the fag-ends and the paper bags.

After a bit I turned back.  Couldn't stand the noise of the
gramophones any longer.  Of course it's Sunday, I thought.
Mightn't be so bad on a week-day.  But after all, I knew I'd never
come back.  God rot them, let 'em keep their bloody river.
Wherever I go fishing it won't be in the Thames.

The crowds swarmed past me.  Crowds of bloody aliens, and nearly
all of them young.  Boys and girls larking along in couples.  A
troop of girls came past, wearing bell-bottomed trousers and white
caps like the ones they wear in the American Navy, with slogans
printed on them.  One of them, seventeen she might have been, had
PLEASE KISS ME.  I wouldn't have minded.  On an impulse I suddenly
turned aside and weighed myself on one of the penny-in-the-slot
machines.  There was a clicking noise somewhere inside it--you know
those machines that tell your fortune as well as your weight--and a
typewritten card came sliding out.

'You are the possessor of exceptional gifts,' I read, 'but owing to
excessive modesty you have never received your reward.  Those about
you underrate your abilities.  You are too fond of standing aside
and allowing others to take the credit for what you have done
yourself .  You are sensitive, affectionate, and always loyal to
your friends.  You are deeply attractive to the opposite sex.  Your
worst fault is generosity.  Persevere, for you will rise high!

'Weight: 14 stone 11 pounds.'

I'd put on four pounds in the last three days, I noticed.  Must
have been the booze.



4


I drove back to the George, dumped the car in the garage, and had a
late cup of tea.  As it was Sunday the bar wouldn't open for
another hour or two.  In the cool of the evening I went out and
strolled up in the direction of the church.

I was just crossing the market-place when I noticed a woman walking
a little way ahead of me.  As soon as I set eyes on her I had a
most peculiar feeling that I'd seen her somewhere before.  You know
that feeling.  I couldn't see her face, of course, and so far as
her back view went there was nothing I could identify and yet I
could have sworn I knew her.

She went up the High Street and turned down one of the side-streets
to the right, the one where Uncle Ezekiel used to have his shop.  I
followed.  I don't quite know why--partly curiosity, perhaps, and
partly as a kind of precaution.  My first thought had been that
here at last was one of the people I'd known in the old days in
Lower Binfield, but almost at the same moment it struck me that it
was just as likely that she was someone from West Bletchley.  In
that case I'd have to watch my step, because if she found out I was
here she'd probably split to Hilda.  So I followed cautiously,
keeping at a safe distance and examining her back view as well as I
could.  There was nothing striking about it.  She was a tallish,
fattish woman, might have been forty or fifty, in a rather shabby
black dress.  She'd no hat on, as though she'd just slipped out of
her house for a moment, and the way she walked gave you the
impression that her shoes were down at heel.  All in all, she
looked a bit of a slut.  And yet there was nothing to identify,
only that vague something which I knew I'd seen before.  It was
something in her movements, perhaps.  Presently she got to a little
sweet and paper shop, the kind of little shop that always keeps
open on a Sunday.  The woman who kept it was standing in the
doorway, doing something to a stand of postcards.  My woman stopped
to pass the time of day.

I stopped too, as soon as I could find a shop window which I could
pretend to be looking into.  It was a plumber's and decorator's,
full of samples of wallpaper and bathroom fittings and things.  By
this time I wasn't fifteen yards away from the other two.  I could
hear their voices cooing away in one of those meaningless
conversations that women have when they're just passing the time of
day.  'Yes, that's jest about it.  That's jest where it is.  I said
to him myself, I said, "Well, what else do you expect?" I said.  It
don't seem right, do it?  But what's the use, you might as well
talk to a stone.  It's a shame!' and so on and so forth.  I was
getting warmer.  Obviously my woman was a small shopkeeper's wife,
like the other.  I was just wondering whether she mightn't be one
of the people I'd known in Lower Binfield after all, when she
turned almost towards me and I saw three-quarters of her face.
And Jesus Christ!  It was Elsie!

Yes, it was Elsie.  No chance of mistake.  Elsie!  That fat hag!

It gave me such a shock--not, mind you, seeing Elsie, but seeing
what she'd grown to be like--that for a moment things swam in front
of my eyes.  The brass taps and ballstops and porcelain sinks and
things seemed to fade away into the distance, so that I both saw
them and didn't see them.  Also for a moment I was in a deadly funk
that she might recognize me.  But she'd looked bang in my face and
hadn't made any sign.  A moment more, and she turned and went on.
Again I followed.  It was dangerous, she might spot I was following
her, and that might start her wondering who I was, but I just had
to have another look at her.  The fact was that she exercised a
kind of horrible fascination on me.  In a manner of speaking I'd
been watching her before, but I watched her with quite different
eyes now.

It was horrible, and yet I got a kind of scientific kick out of
studying her back view.  It's frightening, the things that twenty-
four years can do to a woman.  Only twenty-four years, and the girl
I'd known, with her milky-white skin and red mouth and kind of
dull-gold hair, had turned into this great round-shouldered hag,
shambling along on twisted heels.  It made me feel downright glad
I'm a man.  No man ever goes to pieces quite so completely as that.
I'm fat, I grant you.  I'm the wrong shape, if you like.  But at
least I'm A shape.  Elsie wasn't even particularly fat, she was
merely shapeless.  Ghastly things had happened to her hips.  As for
her waist, it had vanished.  She was just a kind of soft lumpy
cylinder, like a bag of meal.

I followed her a long way, out of the old town and through a lot of
mean little streets I didn't know.  Finally she turned in at the
doorway of another shop.  By the way she went in, it was obviously
her own.  I stopped for a moment outside the window.  'G. Cookson,
Confectioner and Tobacconist.'  So Elsie was Mrs Cookson.  It was
a mangy little shop, much like the other one where she'd stopped
before, but smaller and a lot more flyblown.  Didn't seem to sell
anything except tobacco and the cheapest kinds of sweets.  I
wondered what I could buy that would take a minute or two.  Then I
saw a rack of cheap pipes in the window, and I went in.  I had to
brace my nerve up a little before I did it, because there'd need to
be some hard lying if by any chance she recognized me.

She'd disappeared into the room behind the shop, but she came back
as I tapped on the counter.  So we were face to face.  Ah! no sign.
Didn't recognize me.  Just looked at me the way they do.  You know
the way small shopkeepers look at their customers--utter lack of
interest.

It was the first time I'd seen her full face, and though I half
expected what I saw, it gave me almost as big a shock as that first
moment when I'd recognized her.  I suppose when you look at the
face of someone young, even of a child, you ought to be able to
foresee what it'll look like when it's old.  It's all a question of
the shape of the bones.  But if it had ever occurred to me, when I
was twenty and she was twenty-two, to wonder what Elsie would look
like at forty-seven, it wouldn't have crossed my mind that she
could ever look like THAT.  The whole face had kind of sagged, as
if it had somehow been drawn downwards.  Do you know that type of
middle-aged woman that has a face just like a bulldog?  Great
underhung jaw, mouth turned down at the corners, eyes sunken, with
pouches underneath.  Exactly like a bulldog.  And yet it was the
same face, I'd have known it in a million.  Her hair wasn't
completely grey, it was a kind of dirty colour, and there was much
less of it than there used to be.  She didn't know me from Adam.
I was just a customer, a stranger, an uninteresting fat man.  It's
queer what an inch or two of fat can do.  I wondered whether I'd
changed even more than she had, or whether it was merely that she
wasn't expecting to see me, or whether--what was the likeliest of
all--she's simply forgotten my existence.

'Devening,' she said, in that listless way they have.

'I want a pipe,' I said flatly.  'A briar pipe.'

'A pipe.  Now jest lemme see.  I know we gossome pipes somewhere.
Now where did I--ah!  'Ere we are.'

She took a cardboard box full of pipes from somewhere under the
counter.  How bad her accent had got!  Or maybe I was just
imagining that, because my own standards had changed?  But no, she
used to be so 'superior', all the girls at Lilywhite's were so
'superior', and she'd been a member of the vicar's Reading Circle.
I swear she never used to drop her aitches.  It's queer how these
women go to pieces once they're married.  I fiddled among the pipes
for a moment and pretended to look them over.  Finally I said I'd
like one with an amber mouthpiece.

'Amber?  I don't know as we got any--' she turned towards the back
of the shop and called:  'Ge-orge!'

So the other bloke's name was George too.  A noise that sounded
something like 'Ur!' came from the back of the shop.

'Ge-orge!  Where ju put that other box of pipes?'

George came in.  He was a small stoutish chap, in shirtsleeves,
with a bald head and a big gingery-coloured soupstrainer moustache.
His jaw was working in a ruminative kind of way.  Obviously he'd
been interrupted in the middle of his tea.  The two of them started
poking round in search of the other box of pipes.  It was about
five minutes before they ran it to earth behind some bottles of
sweets.  It's wonderful, the amount of litter they manage to
accumulate in these frowsy little shops where the whole stock is
worth about fifty quid.

I watched old Elsie poking about among the litter and mumbling to
herself.  Do you know the kind of shuffling, round-shouldered
movements of an old woman who's lost something?  No use trying to
describe to you what I felt.  A kind of cold, deadly desolate
feeling.  You can't conceive it unless you've had it.  All I can
say is, if there was a girl you used to care about twenty-five
years ago, go and have a look at her now.  Then perhaps you'll know
what I felt.

But as a matter of fact, the thought that was chiefly in my mind
was how differently things turn out from what you expect.  The
times I'd had with Elsie!  The July nights under the chestnut
trees!  Wouldn't you think it would leave some kind of after-effect
behind?  Who'd have thought the time would ever come when there
would be just no feeling whatever between us?  Here was I and here
was she, our bodies might be a yard apart, and we were just as much
strangers as though we'd never met.  As for her, she didn't even
recognize me.  If I told her who I was, very likely she wouldn't
remember.  And if she did remember, what would she feel?  Just
nothing.  Probably wouldn't even be angry because I'd done the
dirty on her.  It was as if the whole thing had never happened.

And on the other hand, who'd ever have foreseen that Elsie would
end up like this?  She'd seemed the kind of girl who's bound to go
to the devil.  I know there'd been at least one other man before I
had met her, and it's safe to bet there were others between me and
the second George.  It wouldn't surprise me to learn that she'd had
a dozen altogether.  I treated her badly, there's no question about
that, and many a time it had given me a bad half-hour.  She'll end
up on the streets, I used to think, or stick her head in the gas
oven.  And sometimes I felt I'd been a bit of a bastard, but other
times I reflected (what was true enough) that if it hadn't been me
it would have been somebody else.  But you see the way things
happen, the kind of dull pointless way.  How many women really end
up on the streets?  A damn sight more end up at the mangle.  She
hadn't gone to the bad, or to the good either.  Just ended up like
everybody else, a fat old woman muddling about a frowsy little
shop, with a gingery-moustached George to call her own.  Probably
got a string of kids as well.  Mrs George Cookson.  Lived respected
and died lamented--and might die this side of the bankruptcy-court,
if she was lucky.

They'd found the box of pipes.  Of course there weren't any with
amber mouthpieces among them.

'I don't know as we got any amber ones just at present, sir.  Not
amber.  We gossome nice vulcanite ones.'

'I wanted an amber one,' I said.

'We gossome nice pipes 'ere.'  She held one out.  'That's a nice
pipe, now.  'Alf a crown, that one is.'

I took it.  Our fingers touched.  No kick, no reaction.  The body
doesn't remember.  And I suppose you think I bought the pipe, just
for old sake's sake, to put half a crown in Elsie's pocket.  But
not a bit of it.  I didn't want the thing.  I don't smoke a pipe.
I'd merely been making a pretext to come into the shop.  I turned
it over in my fingers and then put it down on the counter.

'Doesn't matter, I'll leave it,' I said.  'Give me a small
Players'.'

Had to buy something, after all that fuss.  George the second, or
maybe the third or fourth, routed out a packet of Players', still
munching away beneath his moustache.  I could see he was sulky
because I'd dragged him away from his tea for nothing.  But it
seemed too damn silly to waste half a crown.  I cleared out and
that was the last I ever saw of Elsie.

I went back to the George and had dinner.  Afterwards I went out
with some vague idea of going to the pictures, if they were open,
but instead I landed up in one of the big noisy pubs in the new
part of the town.  There I ran into a couple of chaps from
Staffordshire who were travelling in hardware, and we got talking
about the state of trade, and playing darts and drinking Guinness.
By closing time they were both so boozed that I had to take them
home in a taxi, and I was a bit under the weather myself, and the
next morning I woke up with a worse head than ever.



5


But I had to see the pool at Binfield House.

I felt really bad that morning.  The fact was that ever since I
struck Lower Binfield I'd been drinking almost continuously from
every opening time to every closing time.  The reason, though it
hadn't occurred to me till this minute, was that really there'd
been nothing else to do.  That was all my trip had amounted to so
far--three days on the booze.

The same as the other morning, I crawled over to the window and
watched the bowler hats and school caps hustling to and fro.  My
enemies, I thought.  The conquering army that's sacked the town and
covered the ruins with fag-ends and paper bags.  I wondered why I
cared.  You think, I dare say, that if it had given me a jolt to
find Lower Binfield swollen into a kind of Dagenham, it was merely
because I don't like to see the earth getting fuller and country
turning into town.  But it isn't that at all.  I don't mind towns
growing, so long as they do grow and don't merely spread like gravy
over a tablecloth.  I know that people have got to have somewhere
to live, and that if a factory isn't in one place it'll be in
another.  As for the picturesqueness, the sham countrified stuff,
the oak panels and pewter dishes and copper warming-pans and what-
not, it merely gives me the sick.  Whatever we were in the old
days, we weren't picturesque.  Mother would never have seen any
sense in the antiques that Wendy had filled our house with.  She
didn't like gateleg tables--she said they 'caught your legs'.  As
for pewter, she wouldn't have it in the house.  'Nasty greasy
stuff', she called it.  And yet, say what you like, there was
something that we had in those days and haven't got now, something
that you probably can't have in a streamlined milk-bar with the
radio playing.  I'd come back to look for it, and I hadn't found
it.  And yet somehow I half believe in it even now, when I hadn't
yet got my teeth in and my belly was crying out for an aspirin and
a cup of tea.

And that started me thinking again about the pool at Binfield
House.  After seeing what they'd done to the town, I'd had a
feeling you could only describe as fear about going to see whether
the pool still existed.  And yet it might, there was no knowing.
The town was smothered under red brick, our house was full of Wendy
and her junk, the Thames was poisoned with motor-oil and paper
bags.  But maybe the pool was still there, with the great black
fish still cruising round it.  Maybe, even, it was still hidden in
the woods and from that day to this no one had discovered it
existed.  It was quite possible.  It was a very thick bit of wood,
full of brambles and rotten brushwood (the beech trees gave way to
oaks round about there, which made the undergrowth thicker), the
kind of place most people don't care to penetrate.  Queerer things
have happened.

I didn't start out till late afternoon.  It must have been about
half past four when I took the car out and drove on to the Upper
Binfield road.  Half-way up the hill the houses thinned out and
stopped and the beech trees began.  The road forks about there and
I took the right-hand fork, meaning to make a detour round and come
back to Binfield House on the road.  But presently I stopped to
have a look at the copse I was driving through.  The beech trees
seemed just the same.  Lord, how they were the same!  I backed the
car on to a bit of grass beside the road, under a fall of chalk,
and got out and walked.  Just the same.  The same stillness, the
same great beds of rustling leaves that seem to go on from year to
year without rotting.  Not a creature stirring except the small
birds in the tree-tops which you couldn't see.  It wasn't easy to
believe that that great noisy mess of a town was barely three miles
away.  I began to make my way through the little copse, in the
direction of Binfield House.  I could vaguely remember how the
paths went.  And Lord!  Yes!  The same chalk hollow where the Black
Hand went and had catapult shots, and Sid Lovegrove told us how
babies were born, the day I caught my first fish, pretty near forty
years ago!

As the trees thinned out again you could see the other road and the
wall of Binfield House.  The old rotting wooden fence was gone, of
course, and they'd put up a high brick wall with spikes on top,
such as you'd expect to see round a loony-bin.  I'd puzzled for
some time about how to get into Binfield House until finally it had
struck me that I'd only to tell them my wife was mad and I was
looking for somewhere to put her.  After that they'd be quite ready
to show me round the grounds.  In my new suit I probably looked
prosperous enough to have a wife in a private asylum.  It wasn't
till I was actually at the gate that it occurred to me to wonder
whether the pool was still inside the grounds.

The old grounds of Binfield House had covered fifty acres, I
suppose, and the grounds of the loony-bin weren't likely to be more
than five or ten.  They wouldn't want a great pool of water for the
loonies to drown themselves in.  The lodge, where old Hodges used
to live, was the same as ever, but the yellow brick wall and the
huge iron gates were new.  From the glimpse I got through the gates
I wouldn't have known the place.  Gravel walks, flower-beds, lawns,
and a few aimless-looking types wandering about--loonies, I
suppose.  I strolled up the road to the right.  The pool--the big
pool, the one where I used to fish--was a couple of hundred yards
behind the house.  It might have been a hundred yards before I got
to the corner of the wall.  So the pool was outside the grounds.
The trees seemed to have got much thinner.  I could hear children's
voices.  And Gosh! there was the pool.

I stood for a moment, wondering what had happened to it.  Then I
saw what it was--all the trees were gone from round its edge.  It
looked all bare and different, in fact it looked extraordinarily
like the Round Pond in Kensington Gardens.  Kids were playing all
round the edge, sailing boats and paddling, and a few rather older
kids were rushing about in those little canoes which you work by
turning a handle.  Over to the left, where the old rotting boat-
house used to stand among the reeds, there was a sort of pavilion
and a sweet kiosk, and a huge white notice saying UPPER BINFIELD
MODEL YACHT CLUB.

I looked over to the right.  It was all houses, houses, houses.
One might as well have been in the outer suburbs.  All the woods
that used to grow beyond the pool, and grew so thick that they were
like a kind of tropical jungle, had been shaved flat.  Only a few
clumps of trees still standing round the houses.  There were arty-
looking houses, another of those sham-Tudor colonies like the one
I'd seen the first day at the top of Chamford Hill, only more so.
What a fool I'd been to imagine that these woods were still the
same!  I saw how it was.  There was just the one tiny bit of copse,
half a dozen acres perhaps, that hadn't been cut down, and it was
pure chance that I'd walked through it on my way here.  Upper
Binfield, which had been merely a name in the old days, had grown
into a decent-sized town.  In fact it was merely an outlying chunk
of Lower Binfield.

I wandered up to the edge of the pool.  The kids were splashing
about and making the devil of a noise.  There seemed to be swarms
of them.  The water looked kind of dead.  No fish in it now.  There
was a chap standing watching the kids.  He was an oldish chap with
a bald head and a few tufts of white hair, and pince-nez and very
sunburnt face.  There was something vaguely queer about his
appearance.  He was wearing shorts and sandals and one of those
celanese shirts open at the neck, I noticed, but what really struck
me was the look in his eye.  He had very blue eyes that kind of
twinkled at you from behind his spectacles.  I could see that he
was one of those old men who've never grown up.  They're always
either health-food cranks or else they have something to do with
the Boy Scouts--in either case they're great ones for Nature and
the open air.  He was looking at me as if he'd like to speak.

'Upper Binfield's grown a great deal,' I said.

He twinkled at me.

'Grown!  My dear sir, we never allow Upper Binfield to grow.  We
pride ourselves on being rather exceptional people up here, you
know.  Just a little colony of us all by ourselves.  No
interlopers--te-hee!'

'I mean compared with before the war,' I said.  'I used to live
here as a boy.'

'Oh-ah.  No doubt.  That was before my time, of course.  But the
Upper Binfield Estate is something rather special in the way of
building estates, you know.  Quite a little world of its own.  All
designed by young Edward Watkin, the architect.  You've heard of
him, of course.  We live in the midst of Nature up here.  No
connexion with the town down there'--he waved a hand in the
direction of Lower Binfield--'the dark satanic mills--te-hee!'

He had a benevolent old chuckle, and a way of wrinkling his face
up, like a rabbit.  Immediately, as though I'd asked him, he began
telling me all about the Upper Binfield Estate and young Edward
Watkin, the architect, who had such a feeling for the Tudor, and
was such a wonderful fellow at finding genuine Elizabethan beams in
old farmhouses and buying them at ridiculous prices.  And such an
interesting young fellow, quite the life and soul of the nudist
parties.  He repeated a number of times that they were very
exceptional people in Upper Binfield, quite different from Lower
Binfield, they were determined to enrich the countryside instead of
defiling it (I'm using his own phrase), and there weren't any
public houses on the estate.

'They talk of their Garden Cities.  But we call Upper Binfield the
Woodland City--te-hee!  Nature!'  He waved a hand at what was left
of the trees.  'The primeval forest brooding round us.  Our young
people grow up amid surroundings of natural beauty.  We are nearly
all of us enlightened people, of course.  Would you credit that
three-quarters of us up here are vegetarians?  The local butchers
don't like us at all--te-hee!  And some quite eminent people live
here.  Miss Helena Thurloe, the novelist--you've heard of her, of
course.  And Professor Woad, the psychic research worker.  Such a
poetic character!  He goes wandering out into the woods and the
family can't find him at mealtimes.  He says he's walking among the
fairies.  Do you believe in fairies?  I admit--te-hee!--I am just a
wee bit sceptical.  But his photographs are most convincing.'

I began to wonder whether he was someone who'd escaped from
Binfield House.  But no, he was sane enough, after a fashion.  I
knew the type.  Vegetarianism, simple life, poetry, nature-worship,
roll in the dew before breakfast.  I'd met a few of them years ago
in Ealing.  He began to show me round the estate.  There was
nothing left of the woods.  It was all houses, houses--and what
houses!  Do you know these faked-up Tudor houses with the curly
roofs and the buttresses that don't buttress anything, and the
rock-gardens with concrete bird-baths and those red plaster elves
you can buy at the florists'?  You could see in your mind's eye the
awful gang of food-cranks and spook-hunters and simple-lifers with
1,000 pounds a year that lived there.  Even the pavements were
crazy.  I didn't let him take me far.  Some of the houses made me
wish I'd got a hand-grenade in my pocket.  I tried to damp him down
by asking whether people didn't object to living so near the
lunatic asylum, but it didn't have much effect.  Finally I stopped
and said:

'There used to be another pool, besides the big one.  It can't be
far from here.'

'Another pool?  Oh, surely not.  I don't think there was ever
another pool.'

'They may have drained it off,' I said.  'It was a pretty deep
pool.  It would leave a big pit behind.'

For the first time he looked a bit uneasy.  He rubbed his nose.

'Oh-ah.  Of course, you must understand our life up here is in some
ways primitive.  The simple life, you know.  We prefer it so.  But
being so far from the town has its inconveniences, of course.  Some
of our sanitary arrangements are not altogether satisfactory.  The
dust-cart only calls once a month, I believe.'

'You mean they've turned the pool into a rubbish-dump?'

'Well, there IS something in the nature of a--' he shied at the
word rubbish-dump.  'We have to dispose of tins and so forth, of
course.  Over there, behind that clump of trees.'

We went across there.  They'd left a few trees to hid it.  But yes,
there it was.  It was my pool, all right.  They'd drained the water
off.  It made a great round hole, like an enormous well, twenty or
thirty feet deep.  Already it was half full of tin cans.

I stood looking at the tin cans.

'It's a pity they drained it,' I said.  'There used to be some big
fish in that pool.'

'Fish?  Oh, I never heard anything about that.  Of course we could
hardly have a pool of water here among the houses.  The mosquitoes,
you know.  But it was before my time.'

'I suppose these houses have been built a good long time?' I said.

'Oh--ten or fifteen years, I think.'

'I used to know this place before the war,' I said.  'It was all
woods then.  There weren't any houses except Binfield House.  But
that little bit of copse over there hasn't changed.  I walked
through it on my way here.'

'Ah, that!  That is sacrosanct.  We have decided never to build in
it.  It is sacred to the young people.  Nature, you know.'  He
twinkled at me, a kind of roguish look, as if he was letting me
into a little secret:  'We call it the Pixy Glen.'

The Pixy Glen.  I got rid of him, went back to the car and drove
down to Lower Binfield.  The Pixy Glen.  And they'd filled my pool
up with tin cans.  God rot them and bust them!  Say what you like--
call it silly, childish, anything--but doesn't it make you puke
sometimes to see what they're doing to England, with their bird-
baths and their plaster gnomes, and their pixies and tin cans,
where the beech woods used to be?

Sentimental, you say?  Anti-social?  Oughtn't to prefer trees to
men?  I say it depends what trees and what men.  Not that there's
anything one can do about it, except to wish them the pox in their
guts.

One thing, I thought as I drove down the hill, I'm finished with
this notion of getting back into the past.  What's the good of
trying to revisit the scenes of your boyhood?  They don't exist.
Coming up for air!  But there isn't any air.  The dustbin that
we're in reaches up to the stratosphere.  All the same, I didn't
particularly care.  After all, I thought, I've still got three days
left.  I'd have a bit of peace and quiet, and stop bothering about
what they'd done to Lower Binfield.  As for my idea of going
fishing--that was off, of course.  Fishing, indeed!  At my age!
Really, Hilda was right.

I dumped the car in the garage of the George and walked into the
lounge.  It was six o'clock.  Somebody had switched on the wireless
and the news-broadcast was beginning.  I came through the door just
in time to hear the last few words of an S.O.S.  And it gave me a
bit of a jolt, I admit.  For the words I heard were:

'--where his wife, Hilda Bowling, is seriously ill.'

The next instant the plummy voice went on:  'Here is another S.O.S.
Will Percival Chute, who was last heard of--', but I didn't wait to
hear any more.  I just walked straight on.  What made me feel
rather proud, when I thought it over afterwards, was that when I
heard those words come out of the loudspeaker I never turned an
eyelash.  Not even a pause in my step to let anyone know that I was
George Bowling, whose wife Hilda Bowling was seriously ill.  The
landlord's wife was in the lounge, and she knew my name was
Bowling, at any rate she'd seen it in the register.  Otherwise
there was nobody there except a couple of chaps who were staying at
the George and who didn't know me from Adam.  But I kept my head.
Not a sign to anyone.  I merely walked on into the private bar,
which had just opened, and ordered my pint as usual.

I had to think it over.  By the time I'd drunk about half the pint
I began to get the bearings of the situation.  In the first place,
Hilda WASN'T ill, seriously or otherwise.  I knew that.  She'd been
perfectly well when I came away, and it wasn't the time of the year
for 'flu or anything of that kind.  She was shamming.  Why?

Obviously it was just another of her dodges.  I saw how it was.
She'd got wind somehow--trust Hilda!--that I wasn't really at
Birmingham, and this was just her way of getting me home.  Couldn't
bear to think of me any longer with that other woman.  Because of
course she'd take it for granted that I was with a woman.  Can't
imagine any other motive.  And naturally she assumed that I'd come
rushing home as soon as I heard she was ill.

But that's just where you've got it wrong, I thought to myself as
I finished off the pint.  I'm too cute to be caught that way.  I
remembered the dodges she'd pulled before, and the extraordinary
trouble she'll take to catch me out.  I've even known her, when I'd
been on some journey she was suspicious about, check it all up with
a Bradshaw and a road-map, just to see whether I was telling the
truth about my movements.  And then there was that time when she
followed me all the way to Colchester and suddenly burst in on me
at the Temperance Hotel.  And that time, unfortunately, she
happened to be right--at least, she wasn't, but there were
circumstances which made it look as if she was.  I hadn't the
slightest belief that she was ill.  In fact, I knew she wasn't,
although I couldn't say exactly how.

I had another pint and things looked better.  Of course there was
a row coming when I got home, but there'd have been a row anyway.
I've got three good days ahead of me, I thought.  Curiously enough,
now that the things I'd come to look for had turned out not to
exist, the idea of having a bit of holiday appealed to me all the
more.  Being away from home--that was the great thing.  Peace
perfect peace with loved ones far away, as the hymn puts it.  And
suddenly I decided that I WOULD have a woman if I felt like it.  It
would serve Hilda right for being so dirty-minded, and besides,
where's the sense of being suspected if it isn't true?

But as the second pint worked inside me, the thing began to amuse
me.  I hadn't fallen for it, but it was damned ingenious all the
same.  I wondered how she'd managed about the S.O.S.  I've no idea
what the procedure is.  Do you have to have a doctor's certificate,
or do you just send your name in?  I felt pretty sure it was the
Wheeler woman who'd put her up to it.  It seemed to me to have the
Wheeler touch.

But all the same, the cheek of it!  The lengths that women will go!
Sometimes you can't help kind of admiring them.



6


After breakfast I strolled out into the market-place.  It was a
lovely morning, kind of cool and still, with a pale yellow light
like white wine playing over everything.  The fresh smell of the
morning was mixed up with the smell of my cigar.  But there was a
zooming noise from behind the houses, and suddenly a fleet of great
black bombers came whizzing over.  I looked up at them.  They
seemed to be bang overhead.

The next moment I heard something.  And at the same moment, if
you'd happened to be there, you'd have seen an interesting instance
of what I believe is called conditioned reflex.  Because what I'd
heard--there wasn't any question of mistake--was the whistle of a
bomb.  I hadn't heard such a thing for twenty years, but I didn't
need to be told what it was.  And without taking any kind of
thought I did the right thing.  I flung myself on my face.

After all I'm glad you didn't see me.  I don't suppose I looked
dignified.  I was flattened out on the pavement like a rat when it
squeezes under a door.  Nobody else had been half as prompt.  I'd
acted so quickly that in the split second while the bomb was
whistling down I even had time to be afraid that it was all a
mistake and I'd made a fool of myself for nothing.

But the next moment--ah!

BOOM-BRRRRR!

A noise like the Day of Judgment, and then a noise like a ton of
coal falling on to a sheet of tin.  That was falling bricks.  I
seemed to kind of melt into the pavement.  'It's started,' I
thought.  'I knew it!  Old Hitler didn't wait.  Just sent his
bombers across without warning.'

And yet here's a peculiar thing.  Even in the echo of that awful,
deafening crash, which seemed to freeze me up from top to toe, I
had time to think that there's something grand about the bursting
of a big projectile.  What does it sound like?  It's hard to say,
because what you hear is mixed up with what you're frightened of.
Mainly it gives you a vision of bursting metal.  You seem to see
great sheets of iron bursting open.  But the peculiar thing is the
feeling it gives you of being suddenly shoved up against reality.
It's like being woken up by somebody shying a bucket of water over
you.  You're suddenly dragged out of your dreams by a clang of
bursting metal, and it's terrible, and it's real.

There was a sound of screams and yells, and also of car brakes
being suddenly jammed on.  The second bomb which I was waiting for
didn't fall.  I raised my head a little.  On every side people
seemed to be rushing round and screaming.  A car was skidding
diagonally across the road, I could hear a woman's voice shrieking,
'The Germans!  The Germans!'  To the right I had a vague impression
of a man's round white face, rather like a wrinkled paper bag,
looking down at me.  He was kind of dithering:

'What is it?  What's happened?  What are they doing?'

'It's started,' I said.  'That was a bomb.  Lie down.'

But still the second bomb didn't fall.  Another quarter of a minute
or so, and I raised my head again.  Some of the people were still
rushing about, others were standing as if they'd been glued to the
ground.  From somewhere behind the houses a huge haze of dust had
risen up, and through it a black jet of smoke was streaming
upwards.  And then I saw an extraordinary sight.  At the other end
of the market-place the High Street rises a little.  And down this
little hill a herd of pigs was galloping, a sort of huge flood of
pig-faces.  The next moment, of course, I saw what it was.  It
wasn't pigs at all, it was only the schoolchildren in their gas-
masks.  I suppose they were bolting for some cellar where they'd
been told to take cover in case of air-raids.  At the back of them
I could even make out a taller pig who was probably Miss Todgers.
But I tell you for a moment they looked exactly like a herd of
pigs.

I picked myself up and walked across the market-place.  People were
calming down already, and quite a little crowd had begun to flock
towards the place where the bomb had dropped.

Oh, yes, you're right, of course.  It wasn't a German aeroplane
after all.  The war hadn't broken out.  It was only an accident.
The planes were flying over to do a bit of bombing practice--at any
rate they were carrying bombs--and somebody had put his hands on
the lever by mistake.  I expect he got a good ticking off for it.
By the time that the postmaster had rung up London to ask whether
there was a war on, and been told that there wasn't, everyone had
grasped that it was an accident.  But there'd been a space of time,
something between a minute and five minutes, when several thousand
people believed we were at war.  A good job it didn't last any
longer.  Another quarter of an hour and we'd have been lynching our
first spy.

I followed the crowd.  The bomb had dropped in a little side-street
off the High Street, the one where Uncle Ezekiel used to have his
shop.  It wasn't fifty yards from where the shop used to be.  As I
came round the corner I could hear voices murmuring 'Oo-oo!'--a
kind of awed noise, as if they were frightened and getting a big
kick out of it.  Luckily I got there a few minutes before the
ambulance and the fire-engine, and in spite of the fifty people or
so that had already collected I saw everything.

At first sight it looked as if the sky had been raining bricks and
vegetables.  There were cabbage leaves everywhere.  The bomb had
blown a greengrocer's shop out of existence.  The house to the
right of it had part of its roof blown off, and the roof beams were
on fire, and all the houses round had been more or less damaged and
had their windows smashed.  But what everyone was looking at was
the house on the left.  Its wall, the one that joined the
greengrocer's shop, was ripped off as neatly as if someone had done
it with a knife.  And what was extraordinary was that in the
upstairs rooms nothing had been touched.  It was just like looking
into a doll's house.  Chests-of-drawers, bedroom chairs, faded
wallpaper, a bed not yet made, and a jerry under the bed--all
exactly as it had been lived in, except that one wall was gone.
But the lower rooms had caught the force of the explosion.  There
was a frightful smashed-up mess of bricks, plaster, chair-legs,
bits of a varnished dresser, rags of tablecloth, piles of broken
plates, and chunks of a scullery sink.  A jar of marmalade had
rolled across the floor, leaving a long streak of marmalade behind,
and running side by side with it there was a ribbon of blood.  But
in among the broken crockery there was lying a leg.  Just a leg,
with the trouser still on it and a black boot with a Wood-Milne
rubber heel.  This was what people were oo-ing and ah-ing at.

I had a good look at it and took it in.  The blood was beginning to
get mixed up with the marmalade.  When the fire-engine arrived I
cleared off to the George to pack my bag.

This finishes me with Lower Binfield, I thought.  I'm going home.
But as a matter of fact I didn't shake the dust off my shoes and
leave immediately.  One never does.  When anything like that
happens, people always stand about and discuss it for hours.  There
wasn't much work done in the old part of Lower Binfield that day,
everyone was too busy talking about the bomb, what it sounded like
and what they thought when they heard it.  The barmaid at the
George said it fair gave her the shudders.  She said she'd never
sleep sound in her bed again, and what did you expect, it just
showed that with these here bombs you never knew.  A woman had
bitten off part of her tongue owing to the jump the explosion gave
her.  It turned out that whereas at our end of the town everyone
had imagined it was a German air-raid, everyone at the other end
had taken it for granted that it was an explosion at the stocking
factory.  Afterwards (I got this out of the newspaper) the Air
Ministry sent a chap to inspect the damage, and issued a report
saying that the effects of the bomb were 'disappointing'.  As a
matter of fact it only killed three people, the greengrocer,
Perrott his name was, and an old couple who lived next door.  The
woman wasn't much smashed about, and they identified the old man by
his boots, but they never found a trace of Perrott.  Not even a
trouser-button to read the burial service over.

In the afternoon I paid my bill and hooked it.  I didn't have much
more than three quid left after I'd paid the bill.  They know how
to cut it out of you these dolled-up country hotels, and what with
drinks and other odds and ends I'd been shying money about pretty
freely.  I left my new rod and the rest of the fishing tackle in my
bedroom.  Let 'em keep it.  No use to me.  It was merely a quid
that I'd chucked down the drain to teach myself a lesson.  And I'd
learnt the lesson all right.  Fat men of forty-five can't go
fishing.  That kind of thing doesn't happen any longer, it's just
a dream, there'll be no more fishing this side of the grave.

It's funny how things sink into you by degrees.  What had I really
felt when the bomb exploded?  At the actual moment, of course, it
scared the wits out of me, and when I saw the smashed-up house and
the old man's leg I'd had the kind of mild kick that you get from
seeing a street-accident.  Disgusting, of course.  Quite enough to
make me fed-up with this so-called holiday.  But it hadn't really
made much impression.

But as I got clear of the outskirts of Lower Binfield and turned
the car eastward, it all came back to me.  You know how it is when
you're in a car alone.  There's something either in the hedges
flying past you, or in the throb of the engine, that gets your
thoughts running in a certain rhythm.  You have the same feeling
sometimes when you're in the train.  It's a feeling of being able
to see things in better perspective than usual.  All kinds of
things that I'd been doubtful about I felt certain about now.  To
begin with, I'd come to Lower Binfield with a question in my mind.
What's ahead of us?  Is the game really up?  Can we get back to the
life we used to live, or is it gone for ever?  Well, I'd had my
answer.  The old life's finished, and to go back to Lower Binfield,
you can't put Jonah back into the whale.  I KNEW, though I don't
expect you to follow my train of thought.  And it was a queer thing
I'd done coming here.  All those years Lower Binfield had been
tucked away somewhere or other in my mind, a sort of quiet corner
that I could step back into when I felt like it, and finally I'd
stepped back into it and found that it didn't exist.  I'd chucked a
pineapple into my dreams, and lest there should be any mistake the
Royal Air Force had followed up with five hundred pounds of T.N.T.

War is coming.  1941, they say.  And there'll be plenty of broken
crockery, and little houses ripped open like packing-cases, and the
guts of the chartered accountant's clerk plastered over the piano
that he's buying on the never-never.  But what does that kind of
thing matter, anyway?  I'll tell you what my stay in Lower Binfield
had taught me, and it was this.  IT'S ALL GOING TO HAPPEN.  All the
things you've got at the back of your mind, the things you're
terrified of, the things that you tell yourself are just a
nightmare or only happen in foreign countries.  The bombs, the
food-queues, the rubber truncheons, the barbed wire, the coloured
shirts, the slogans, the enormous faces, the machine-guns squirting
out of bedroom windows.  It's all going to happen.  I know it--at
any rate, I knew it then.  There's no escape.  Fight against it if
you like, or look the other way and pretend not to notice, or grab
your spanner and rush out to do a bit of face-smashing along with
the others.  But there's no way out.  It's just something that's
got to happen.

I trod on the gas, and the old car whizzed up and down the little
hills, and the cows and elm trees and fields of wheat rushed past
till the engine was pretty nearly red-hot.  I felt in much the same
mood as I'd felt that day in January when I was coming down the
Strand, the day I got my new false teeth.  It was as though the
power of prophecy had been given me.  It seemed to me that I could
see the whole of England, and all the people in it, and all the
things that'll happen to all of them.  Sometimes, of course, even
then, I had a doubt or two.  The world is very large, that's a
thing you notice when you're driving about in a car, and in a way
it's reassuring.  Think of the enormous stretches of land you pass
over when you cross a corner of a single English county.  It's like
Siberia.  And the fields and beech spinneys and farmhouses and
churches, and the villages with their little grocers' shops and the
parish hall and the ducks walking across the green.  Surely it's
too big to be changed?  Bound to remain more or less the same.  And
presently I struck into outer London and followed the Uxbridge Road
as far as Southall.  Miles and miles of ugly houses, with people
living dull decent lives inside them.  And beyond it London
stretching on and on, streets, squares, back-alleys, tenements,
blocks of flats, pubs, fried-fish shops, picture-houses, on and on
for twenty miles, and all the eight million people with their
little private lives which they don't want to have altered.  The
bombs aren't made that could smash it out of existence.  And the
chaos of it!  The privateness of all those lives!  John Smith
cutting out the football coupons, Bill Williams swapping stories in
the barber's.  Mrs Jones coming home with the supper beer.  Eight
million of them!  Surely they'll manage somehow, bombs or no bombs,
to keep on with the life that they've been used to?

Illusion!  Baloney!  It doesn't matter how many of them there are,
they're all for it.  The bad times are coming, and the streamlined
men are coming too.  What's coming afterwards I don't know, it
hardly even interests me.  I only know that if there's anything you
care a curse about, better say good-bye to it now, because
everything you've ever known is going down, down, into the muck,
with the machine-guns rattling all the time.

But when I got back to the suburb my mood suddenly changed.

It suddenly struck me--and it hadn't even crossed my mind till that
moment--that Hilda might really be ill after all.

That's the effect of environment, you see.  In Lower Binfield I'd
taken it absolutely for granted that she wasn't ill and was merely
shamming in order to get me home.  It had seemed natural at the
time, I don't know why.  But as I drove into West Bletchley and the
Hesperides Estate closed round me like a kind of red-brick prison,
which is what it is, the ordinary habits of thought came back.  I
had this kind of Monday morning feeling when everything seems bleak
and sensible.  I saw what bloody rot it was, this business that I'd
wasted the last five days on.  Sneaking off to Lower Binfield to
try and recover the past, and then, in the car coming home,
thinking a lot of prophetic baloney about the future.  The future!
What's the future got to do with chaps like you and me?  Holding
down our jobs--that's our future.  As for Hilda, even when the
bombs are dropping she'll be still thinking about the price of
butter.

And suddenly I saw what a fool I'd been to think she'd do a thing
like that.  Of course the S.O.S. wasn't a fake!  As though she'd
have the imagination!  It was just the plain cold truth.  She
wasn't shamming at all, she was really ill.  And Gosh! at this
moment she might be lying somewhere in ghastly pain, or even dead,
for all I knew.  The thought sent a most horrible pang of fright
through me, a sort of dreadful cold feeling in my guts.  I whizzed
down Ellesmere Road at nearly forty miles an hour, and instead of
taking the car to the lock-up garage as usual I stopped outside the
house and jumped out.

So I'm fond of Hilda after all, you say!  I don't know exactly what
you mean by fond.  Are you fond of your own face?  Probably not,
but you can't imagine yourself without it.  It's part of you.
Well, that's how I felt about Hilda.  When things are going well I
can't stick the sight of her, but the thought that she might be
dead or even in pain sent the shivers through me.

I fumbled with the key, got the door open, and the familiar smell
of old mackintoshes hit me.

'Hilda!' I yelled.  'Hilda!'

No answer.  For a moment I was yelling 'Hilda!  Hilda!' into utter
silence, and some cold sweat started out on my backbone.  Maybe
they carted her away to hospital already--maybe there was a corpse
lying upstairs in the empty house.

I started to dash up the stairs, but at the same moment the two
kids, in their pyjamas, came out of their rooms on either side of
the landing.  It was eight or nine o'clock, I suppose--at any rate
the light was just beginning to fail.  Lorna hung over the
banisters.

'Oo, Daddy!  Oo, it's Daddy!  Why have you come back today?  Mummy
said you weren't coming till Friday.'

'Where's your mother?' I said.

'Mummy's out.  She went out with Mrs Wheeler.  Why have you come
home today, Daddy?'

'Then your mother hasn't been ill?'

'No.  Who said she'd been ill?  Daddy!  Have you been in Birmingham?'

'Yes.  Get back to bed, now.  You'll be catching cold.'

'But where's our presents, Daddy?'

'What presents?'

'The presents you've bought us from Birmingham.'

'You'll see them in the morning,' I said.

'Oo, Daddy!  Can't we see them tonight?'

'No.  Dry up.  Get back to bed or I'll wallop the pair of you.'

So she wasn't ill after all.  She HAD been shamming.  And really I
hardly knew whether to be glad or sorry.  I turned back to the
front door, which I'd left open, and there, as large as life, was
Hilda coming up the garden path.

I looked at her as she came towards me in the last of the evening
light.  It was queer to think that less than three minutes earlier
I'd been in the devil of a stew, with actual cold sweat on my
backbone, at the thought that she might be dead.  Well, she wasn't
dead, she was just as usual.  Old Hilda with her thin shoulders and
her anxious face, and the gas bill and the school-fees, and the
mackintoshy smell and the office on Monday--all the bedrock facts
that you invariably come back to, the eternal verities as old
Porteous calls them.  I could see that Hilda wasn't in too good a
temper.  She darted me a little quick look, like she does sometimes
when she's got something on her mind, the kind of look some little
thin animal, a weasel for instance, might give you.  She didn't
seem surprised to see me back, however.

'Oh, so you're back already, are you?' she said.

It seemed pretty obvious that I was back, and I didn't answer.  She
didn't make any move to kiss me.

'There's nothing for your supper,' she went on promptly.  That's
Hilda all over.  Always manages to say something depressing the
instant you set foot inside the house.  'I wasn't expecting you.
You'll just have to have bread and cheese--but I don't think we've
got any cheese.'

I followed her indoors, into the smell of mackintoshes.  We went
into the sitting-room.  I shut the door and switched on the light.
I meant to get my say in first, and I knew it would make things
better if I took a strong line from the start.

'Now', I said, 'what the bloody hell do you mean by playing that
trick on me?'

She'd just laid her bag down on top of the radio, and for a moment
she looked genuinely surprised.

'What trick?  What do you mean?'

'Sending out that S.O.S.!'

'What S.O.S.?  What are you TALKING about, George?'

'Are you trying to tell me you didn't get them to send out an
S.O.S. saying you were seriously ill?'

'Of course I didn't!  How could I?  I wasn't ill.  What would I do
a thing like that for?'

I began to explain, but almost before I began I saw what had
happened.  It was all a mistake.  I'd only heard the last few words
of the S.O.S. and obviously it was some other Hilda Bowling.  I
suppose there'd be scores of Hilda Bowlings if you looked the name
up in the directory.  It just was the kind of dull stupid mistake
that's always happening.  Hilda hadn't even showed that little bit
of imagination I'd credited her with.  The sole interest in the
whole affair had been the five minutes or so when I thought she was
dead, and found that I cared after all.  But that was over and done
with.  While I explained she was watching me, and I could see in
her eye that there was trouble of some kind coming.  And then she
began questioning me in what I call her third-degree voice, which
isn't, as you might expect, angry and nagging, but quiet and kind
of watchful.

'So you heard this S.O.S. in the hotel at Birmingham?'

'Yes.  Last night, on the National Broadcast.'

'When did you leave Birmingham, then?'

'This morning, of course.'  (I'd planned out the journey in my
mind, just in case there should be any need to lie my way out of
it.  Left at ten, lunch at Coventry, tea at Bedford--I'd got it all
mapped out.)

'So you thought last night I was seriously ill, and you didn't even
leave till this morning?'

'But I tell you I didn't think you were ill.  Haven't I explained?
I thought it was just another of your tricks.  It sounded a damn
sight more likely.'

'Then I'm rather surprised you left at all!' she said with so much
vinegar in her voice that I knew there was something more coming.
But she went on more quietly:  'So you left this morning, did you?'

'Yes.  I left about ten.  I had lunch at Coventry--'

'Then how do you account for THIS?' she suddenly shot out at me,
and in the same instant she ripped her bag open, took out a piece
of paper, and held it out as if it had been a forged cheque, or
something.

I felt as if someone had hit me a sock in the wind.  I might have
known it!  She'd caught me after all.  And there was the evidence,
the dossier of the case.  I didn't even know what it was, except
that it was something that proved I'd been off with a woman.  All
the stuffing went out of me.  A moment earlier I'd been kind of
bullying her, making out to be angry because I'd been dragged back
from Birmingham for nothing, and now she'd suddenly turned the
tables on me.  You don't have to tell me what I look like at that
moment.  I know.  Guilt written all over me in big letters--I know.
And I wasn't even guilty!  But it's a matter of habit.  I'm used to
being in the wrong.  For a hundred quid I couldn't have kept the
guilt out of my voice as I answered:

'What do you mean?  What's that thing you've got there?'

'You read it and you'll see what it is.'

I took it.  It was a letter from what seemed to be a firm of
solicitors, and it was addressed from the same street as
Rowbottom's Hotel, I noticed.

'Dear Madam,' I read, 'With reference to your letter of the 18th
inst., we think there must be some mistake.  Rowbottom's Hotel was
closed down two years ago and has been converted into a block of
offices.  No one answering the description of your husband has been
here.  Possibly--'

I didn't read any further.  Of course I saw it all in a flash.  I'd
been a little bit too clever and put my foot in it.  There was just
one faint ray of hope--young Saunders might have forgotten to post
the letter I'd addressed from Rowbottom's, in which case it was
just possible I could brazen it out.  But Hilda soon put the lid on
that idea.

'Well, George, you see what the letter says?  The day you left here
I wrote to Rowbottom's Hotel--oh, just a little note, asking them
whether you'd arrived there.  And you see the answer I got!  There
isn't even any such place as Rowbottom's Hotel.  And the same day,
the very same post, I got your letter saying you were at the hotel.
You got someone to post it for you, I suppose.  THAT was your
business in Birmingham!'

'But look here, Hilda!  You've got all this wrong.  It isn't what
you think at all.  You don't understand.'

'Oh, yes, I do, George.  I understand PERFECTLY.'

'But look here, Hilda--'

Wasn't any use, of course.  It was a fair cop.  I couldn't even
meet her eye.  I turned and tried to make for the door.

'I'll have to take the car round to the garage,' I said.

'Oh, no George!  You don't get out of it like that.  You'll stay
here and listen to what I've got to say, please.'

'But, damn it!  I've got to switch the lights on, haven't I?  It's
past lighting-up time.  You don't want us to get fined?'

At that she let me go, and I went out and switched the car lights
on, but when I came back she was still standing there like a figure
of doom, with the two letters, mine and the solicitor's on the
table in front of her.  I'd got a little of my nerve back, and I
had another try:

'Listen, Hilda.  You've got hold of the wrong end of the stick
about this business.  I can explain the whole thing.'

'I'm sure YOU could explain anything, George.  The question is
whether I'd believe you.'

'But you're just jumping to conclusions!  What made you write to
these hotel people, anyway?'

'It was Mrs Wheeler's idea.  And a very good idea too, as it turned
out.'

'Oh, Mrs Wheeler, was it?  So you don't mind letting that blasted
woman into our private affairs?'

'She didn't need any letting in.  It was she who warned me what you
were up to this week.  Something seemed to tell her, she said.  And
she was right, you see.  She knows all about you, George.  She used
to have a husband JUST like you.'

'But, Hilda--'

I looked at her.  Her face had gone a kind of white under the
surface, the way it does when she thinks of me with another woman.
A woman.  If only it had been true!

And Gosh! what I could see ahead of me!  You know what it's like.
The weeks on end of ghastly nagging and sulking, and the catty
remarks after you think peace has been signed, and the meals always
late, and the kids wanting to know what it's all about.  But what
really got me down was the kind of mental squalor, the kind of
mental atmosphere in which the real reason why I'd gone to Lower
Binfield wouldn't even be conceivable.  That was what chiefly
struck me at the moment.  If I spent a week explaining to Hilda WHY
I'd been to Lower Binfield, she'd never understand.  And who WOULD
understand, here in Ellesmere Road?  Gosh! did I even understand
myself?  The whole thing seemed to be fading out of my mind.  Why
had I gone to Lower Binfield?  HAD I gone there?  In this
atmosphere it just seemed meaningless.  Nothing's real in Ellesmere
Road except gas bills, school-fees, boiled cabbage, and the office
on Monday.

One more try:

'But look here, Hilda!  I know what you think.  But you're
absolutely wrong.  I swear to you you're wrong.'

'Oh, no, George.  If I was wrong why did you have to tell all those
lies?'

No getting away from that, of course.

I took a pace or two up and down.  The smell of old mackintoshes
was very strong.  Why had I run away like that?  Why had I bothered
about the future and the past, seeing that the future and the past
don't matter?  Whatever motives I might have had, I could hardly
remember them now.  The old life in Lower Binfield, the war and the
after-war, Hitler, Stalin, bombs, machine-guns, food-queues, rubber
truncheons--it was fading out, all fading out.  Nothing remained
except a vulgar low-down row in a smell of old mackintoshes.

One last try:

'Hilda!  Just listen to me a minute.  Look here, you don't know
where I've been all this week, do you?'

'I don't want to know where you've been.  I know WHAT you've been
doing.  That's quite enough for me.'

'But dash it--'

Quite useless, of course.  She'd found me guilty and now she was
going to tell me what she thought of me.  That might take a couple
of hours.  And after that there was further trouble looming up,
because presently it would occur to her to wonder where I'd got the
money for this trip, and then she'd discover that I'd been holding
out on her about the seventeen quid.  Really there was no reason
why this row shouldn't go on till three in the morning.  No use
playing injured innocence any longer.  All I wanted was the line of
least resistance.  And in my mind I ran over the three possibilities,
which were:

A.  To tell her what I'd really been doing and somehow make her
believe me.

B.  To pull the old gag about losing my memory.

C.  To let her go on thinking it was a woman, and take my medicine.

But, damn it!  I knew which it would have to be.

THE END

Project Gutenberg Australia

Title:      Animal Farm
Author:     George Orwell (pseudonym of Eric Blair) (1903-1950)

Chapter I

Mr. Jones, of the Manor Farm, had locked the hen-houses for the night, but
was too drunk to remember to shut the pop-holes. With the ring of light
from his lantern dancing from side to side, he lurched across the yard,
kicked off his boots at the back door, drew himself a last glass of beer
from the barrel in the scullery, and made his way up to bed, where
Mrs. Jones was already snoring.

As soon as the light in the bedroom went out there was a stirring and a
fluttering all through the farm buildings. Word had gone round during the
day that old Major, the prize Middle White boar, had had a strange dream
on the previous night and wished to communicate it to the other animals.
It had been agreed that they should all meet in the big barn as soon as
Mr. Jones was safely out of the way. Old Major (so he was always called,
though the name under which he had been exhibited was Willingdon Beauty)
was so highly regarded on the farm that everyone was quite ready to lose
an hour's sleep in order to hear what he had to say.

At one end of the big barn, on a sort of raised platform, Major was
already ensconced on his bed of straw, under a lantern which hung from a
beam. He was twelve years old and had lately grown rather stout, but he
was still a majestic-looking pig, with a wise and benevolent appearance in
spite of the fact that his tushes had never been cut. Before long the
other animals began to arrive and make themselves comfortable after their
different fashions. First came the three dogs, Bluebell, Jessie, and
Pincher, and then the pigs, who settled down in the straw immediately in
front of the platform. The hens perched themselves on the window-sills,
the pigeons fluttered up to the rafters, the sheep and cows lay down
behind the pigs and began to chew the cud. The two cart-horses, Boxer and
Clover, came in together, walking very slowly and setting down their vast
hairy hoofs with great care lest there should be some small animal
concealed in the straw. Clover was a stout motherly mare approaching
middle life, who had never quite got her figure back after her fourth foal.
Boxer was an enormous beast, nearly eighteen hands high, and as strong as
any two ordinary horses put together. A white stripe down his nose gave
him a somewhat stupid appearance, and in fact he was not of first-rate
intelligence, but he was universally respected for his steadiness of
character and tremendous powers of work. After the horses came Muriel,
the white goat, and Benjamin, the donkey. Benjamin was the oldest animal
on the farm, and the worst tempered. He seldom talked, and when he did, it
was usually to make some cynical remark--for instance, he would say that
God had given him a tail to keep the flies off, but that he would sooner
have had no tail and no flies. Alone among the animals on the farm he
never laughed. If asked why, he would say that he saw nothing to laugh at.
Nevertheless, without openly admitting it, he was devoted to Boxer; the
two of them usually spent their Sundays together in the small paddock
beyond the orchard, grazing side by side and never speaking.

The two horses had just lain down when a brood of ducklings, which had
lost their mother, filed into the barn, cheeping feebly and wandering from
side to side to find some place where they would not be trodden on. Clover
made a sort of wall round them with her great foreleg, and the ducklings
nestled down inside it and promptly fell asleep. At the last moment
Mollie, the foolish, pretty white mare who drew Mr. Jones's trap, came
mincing daintily in, chewing at a lump of sugar. She took a place near the
front and began flirting her white mane, hoping to draw attention to the
red ribbons it was plaited with. Last of all came the cat, who looked
round, as usual, for the warmest place, and finally squeezed herself in
between Boxer and Clover; there she purred contentedly throughout Major's
speech without listening to a word of what he was saying.

All the animals were now present except Moses, the tame raven, who slept
on a perch behind the back door. When Major saw that they had all made
themselves comfortable and were waiting attentively, he cleared his throat
and began:

"Comrades, you have heard already about the strange dream that I had last
night. But I will come to the dream later. I have something else to say
first. I do not think, comrades, that I shall be with you for many months
longer, and before I die, I feel it my duty to pass on to you such wisdom
as I have acquired. I have had a long life, I have had much time for
thought as I lay alone in my stall, and I think I may say that I
understand the nature of life on this earth as well as any animal now
living. It is about this that I wish to speak to you.

"Now, comrades, what is the nature of this life of ours? Let us face it:
our lives are miserable, laborious, and short. We are born, we are given
just so much food as will keep the breath in our bodies, and those of us
who are capable of it are forced to work to the last atom of our strength;
and the very instant that our usefulness has come to an end we are
slaughtered with hideous cruelty. No animal in England knows the meaning
of happiness or leisure after he is a year old. No animal in England is
free. The life of an animal is misery and slavery: that is the plain truth.

"But is this simply part of the order of nature? Is it because this land
of ours is so poor that it cannot afford a decent life to those who dwell
upon it? No, comrades, a thousand times no! The soil of England is
fertile, its climate is good, it is capable of affording food in abundance
to an enormously greater number of animals than now inhabit it. This
single farm of ours would support a dozen horses, twenty cows, hundreds of
sheep--and all of them living in a comfort and a dignity that are now
almost beyond our imagining. Why then do we continue in this miserable
condition? Because nearly the whole of the produce of our labour is stolen
from us by human beings. There, comrades, is the answer to all our
problems. It is summed up in a single word--Man. Man is the only real
enemy we have. Remove Man from the scene, and the root cause of hunger and
overwork is abolished for ever.

"Man is the only creature that consumes without producing. He does not
give milk, he does not lay eggs, he is too weak to pull the plough, he
cannot run fast enough to catch rabbits. Yet he is lord of all the
animals. He sets them to work, he gives back to them the bare minimum that
will prevent them from starving, and the rest he keeps for himself. Our
labour tills the soil, our dung fertilises it, and yet there is not one of
us that owns more than his bare skin. You cows that I see before me, how
many thousands of gallons of milk have you given during this last year?
And what has happened to that milk which should have been breeding up
sturdy calves? Every drop of it has gone down the throats of our enemies.
And you hens, how many eggs have you laid in this last year, and how many
of those eggs ever hatched into chickens? The rest have all gone to market
to bring in money for Jones and his men. And you, Clover, where are those
four foals you bore, who should have been the support and pleasure of your
old age? Each was sold at a year old--you will never see one of them
again. In return for your four confinements and all your labour in the
fields, what have you ever had except your bare rations and a stall?

"And even the miserable lives we lead are not allowed to reach their
natural span. For myself I do not grumble, for I am one of the lucky ones.
I am twelve years old and have had over four hundred children. Such is the
natural life of a pig. But no animal escapes the cruel knife in the end.
You young porkers who are sitting in front of me, every one of you will
scream your lives out at the block within a year. To that horror we all
must come--cows, pigs, hens, sheep, everyone. Even the horses and the dogs
have no better fate. You, Boxer, the very day that those great muscles of
yours lose their power, Jones will sell you to the knacker, who will cut
your throat and boil you down for the foxhounds. As for the dogs, when
they grow old and toothless, Jones ties a brick round their necks and
drowns them in the nearest pond.

"Is it not crystal clear, then, comrades, that all the evils of this life
of ours spring from the tyranny of human beings? Only get rid of Man, and
the produce of our labour would be our own. Almost overnight we could
become rich and free. What then must we do? Why, work night and day, body
and soul, for the overthrow of the human race! That is my message to you,
comrades: Rebellion! I do not know when that Rebellion will come, it might
be in a week or in a hundred years, but I know, as surely as I see this
straw beneath my feet, that sooner or later justice will be done. Fix your
eyes on that, comrades, throughout the short remainder of your lives! And
above all, pass on this message of mine to those who come after you, so
that future generations shall carry on the struggle until it is victorious.

"And remember, comrades, your resolution must never falter. No argument
must lead you astray. Never listen when they tell you that Man and the
animals have a common interest, that the prosperity of the one is the
prosperity of the others. It is all lies. Man serves the interests of no
creature except himself. And among us animals let there be perfect unity,
perfect comradeship in the struggle. All men are enemies. All animals are
comrades."

At this moment there was a tremendous uproar. While Major was speaking
four large rats had crept out of their holes and were sitting on their
hindquarters, listening to him. The dogs had suddenly caught sight of
them, and it was only by a swift dash for their holes that the rats saved
their lives. Major raised his trotter for silence.

"Comrades," he said, "here is a point that must be settled. The wild
creatures, such as rats and rabbits--are they our friends or our enemies?
Let us put it to the vote. I propose this question to the meeting: Are
rats comrades?"

The vote was taken at once, and it was agreed by an overwhelming majority
that rats were comrades. There were only four dissentients, the three dogs
and the cat, who was afterwards discovered to have voted on both sides.
Major continued:

"I have little more to say. I merely repeat, remember always your duty of
enmity towards Man and all his ways. Whatever goes upon two legs is an
enemy. Whatever goes upon four legs, or has wings, is a friend. And
remember also that in fighting against Man, we must not come to resemble
him. Even when you have conquered him, do not adopt his vices. No animal
must ever live in a house, or sleep in a bed, or wear clothes, or drink
alcohol, or smoke tobacco, or touch money, or engage in trade. All the
habits of Man are evil. And, above all, no animal must ever tyrannise over
his own kind. Weak or strong, clever or simple, we are all brothers. No
animal must ever kill any other animal. All animals are equal.

"And now, comrades, I will tell you about my dream of last night. I cannot
describe that dream to you. It was a dream of the earth as it will be when
Man has vanished. But it reminded me of something that I had long
forgotten. Many years ago, when I was a little pig, my mother and the
other sows used to sing an old song of which they knew only the tune and
the first three words. I had known that tune in my infancy, but it had
long since passed out of my mind. Last night, however, it came back to me
in my dream. And what is more, the words of the song also came back-words,
I am certain, which were sung by the animals of long ago and have been
lost to memory for generations. I will sing you that song now, comrades.
I am old and my voice is hoarse, but when I have taught you the tune, you
can sing it better for yourselves. It is called 'Beasts of England'."

Old Major cleared his throat and began to sing. As he had said, his voice
was hoarse, but he sang well enough, and it was a stirring tune, something
between 'Clementine' and 'La Cucaracha'. The words ran:

Beasts of England, beasts of Ireland,
Beasts of every land and clime,
Hearken to my joyful tidings
Of the golden future time.

Soon or late the day is coming,
Tyrant Man shall be o'erthrown,
And the fruitful fields of England
Shall be trod by beasts alone.

Rings shall vanish from our noses,
And the harness from our back,
Bit and spur shall rust forever,
Cruel whips no more shall crack.

Riches more than mind can picture,
Wheat and barley, oats and hay,
Clover, beans, and mangel-wurzels
Shall be ours upon that day.

Bright will shine the fields of England,
Purer shall its waters be,
Sweeter yet shall blow its breezes
On the day that sets us free.

For that day we all must labour,
Though we die before it break;
Cows and horses, geese and turkeys,
All must toil for freedom's sake.

Beasts of England, beasts of Ireland,
Beasts of every land and clime,
Hearken well and spread my tidings
Of the golden future time.


The singing of this song threw the animals into the wildest excitement.
Almost before Major had reached the end, they had begun singing it for
themselves. Even the stupidest of them had already picked up the tune and
a few of the words, and as for the clever ones, such as the pigs and dogs,
they had the entire song by heart within a few minutes. And then, after a
few preliminary tries, the whole farm burst out into 'Beasts of England' in
tremendous unison. The cows lowed it, the dogs whined it, the sheep
bleated it, the horses whinnied it, the ducks quacked it. They were so
delighted with the song that they sang it right through five times in
succession, and might have continued singing it all night if they had not
been interrupted.

Unfortunately, the uproar awoke Mr. Jones, who sprang out of bed, making
sure that there was a fox in the yard. He seized the gun which always
stood in a corner of his bedroom, and let fly a charge of number 6 shot
into the darkness. The pellets buried themselves in the wall of the barn
and the meeting broke up hurriedly. Everyone fled to his own
sleeping-place. The birds jumped on to their perches, the animals settled
down in the straw, and the whole farm was asleep in a moment.




Chapter II



Three nights later old Major died peacefully in his sleep. His body was
buried at the foot of the orchard.

This was early in March. During the next three months there was much
secret activity. Major's speech had given to the more intelligent animals
on the farm a completely new outlook on life. They did not know when the
Rebellion predicted by Major would take place, they had no reason for
thinking that it would be within their own lifetime, but they saw clearly
that it was their duty to prepare for it. The work of teaching and
organising the others fell naturally upon the pigs, who were generally
recognised as being the cleverest of the animals. Pre-eminent among the
pigs were two young boars named Snowball and Napoleon, whom Mr. Jones was
breeding up for sale. Napoleon was a large, rather fierce-looking
Berkshire boar, the only Berkshire on the farm, not much of a talker, but
with a reputation for getting his own way. Snowball was a more vivacious
pig than Napoleon, quicker in speech and more inventive, but was not
considered to have the same depth of character. All the other male pigs on
the farm were porkers. The best known among them was a small fat pig named
Squealer, with very round cheeks, twinkling eyes, nimble movements, and a
shrill voice. He was a brilliant talker, and when he was arguing some
difficult point he had a way of skipping from side to side and whisking
his tail which was somehow very persuasive. The others said of Squealer
that he could turn black into white.

These three had elaborated old Major's teachings into a complete system of
thought, to which they gave the name of Animalism. Several nights a week,
after Mr. Jones was asleep, they held secret meetings in the barn and
expounded the principles of Animalism to the others. At the beginning they
met with much stupidity and apathy. Some of the animals talked of the duty
of loyalty to Mr. Jones, whom they referred to as "Master," or made
elementary remarks such as "Mr. Jones feeds us. If he were gone, we should
starve to death." Others asked such questions as "Why should we care what
happens after we are dead?" or "If this Rebellion is to happen anyway,
what difference does it make whether we work for it or not?", and the pigs
had great difficulty in making them see that this was contrary to the
spirit of Animalism. The stupidest questions of all were asked by Mollie,
the white mare. The very first question she asked Snowball was: "Will
there still be sugar after the Rebellion?"

"No," said Snowball firmly. "We have no means of making sugar on this
farm. Besides, you do not need sugar. You will have all the oats and hay
you want."

"And shall I still be allowed to wear ribbons in my mane?" asked Mollie.

"Comrade," said Snowball, "those ribbons that you are so devoted to are
the badge of slavery. Can you not understand that liberty is worth more
than ribbons?"

Mollie agreed, but she did not sound very convinced.

The pigs had an even harder struggle to counteract the lies put about by
Moses, the tame raven. Moses, who was Mr. Jones's especial pet, was a spy
and a tale-bearer, but he was also a clever talker. He claimed to know of
the existence of a mysterious country called Sugarcandy Mountain, to which
all animals went when they died. It was situated somewhere up in the sky,
a little distance beyond the clouds, Moses said. In Sugarcandy Mountain it
was Sunday seven days a week, clover was in season all the year round, and
lump sugar and linseed cake grew on the hedges. The animals hated Moses
because he told tales and did no work, but some of them believed in
Sugarcandy Mountain, and the pigs had to argue very hard to persuade them
that there was no such place.

Their most faithful disciples were the two cart-horses, Boxer and Clover.
These two had great difficulty in thinking anything out for themselves,
but having once accepted the pigs as their teachers, they absorbed
everything that they were told, and passed it on to the other animals by
simple arguments. They were unfailing in their attendance at the secret
meetings in the barn, and led the singing of 'Beasts of England', with
which the meetings always ended.

Now, as it turned out, the Rebellion was achieved much earlier and more
easily than anyone had expected. In past years Mr. Jones, although a hard
master, had been a capable farmer, but of late he had fallen on evil days.
He had become much disheartened after losing money in a lawsuit, and had
taken to drinking more than was good for him. For whole days at a time he
would lounge in his Windsor chair in the kitchen, reading the newspapers,
drinking, and occasionally feeding Moses on crusts of bread soaked in
beer. His men were idle and dishonest, the fields were full of weeds, the
buildings wanted roofing, the hedges were neglected, and the animals were
underfed.

June came and the hay was almost ready for cutting. On Midsummer's Eve,
which was a Saturday, Mr. Jones went into Willingdon and got so drunk at
the Red Lion that he did not come back till midday on Sunday. The men had
milked the cows in the early morning and then had gone out rabbiting,
without bothering to feed the animals. When Mr. Jones got back he
immediately went to sleep on the drawing-room sofa with the News of the
World over his face, so that when evening came, the animals were still
unfed. At last they could stand it no longer. One of the cows broke in the
door of the store-shed with her horn and all the animals began to help
themselves from the bins. It was just then that Mr. Jones woke up. The
next moment he and his four men were in the store-shed with whips in their
hands, lashing out in all directions. This was more than the hungry
animals could bear. With one accord, though nothing of the kind had been
planned beforehand, they flung themselves upon their tormentors. Jones and
his men suddenly found themselves being butted and kicked from all sides.
The situation was quite out of their control. They had never seen animals
behave like this before, and this sudden uprising of creatures whom they
were used to thrashing and maltreating just as they chose, frightened them
almost out of their wits. After only a moment or two they gave up trying
to defend themselves and took to their heels. A minute later all five of
them were in full flight down the cart-track that led to the main road,
with the animals pursuing them in triumph.

Mrs. Jones looked out of the bedroom window, saw what was happening,
hurriedly flung a few possessions into a carpet bag, and slipped out of
the farm by another way. Moses sprang off his perch and flapped after her,
croaking loudly. Meanwhile the animals had chased Jones and his men out on
to the road and slammed the five-barred gate behind them. And so, almost
before they knew what was happening, the Rebellion had been successfully
carried through: Jones was expelled, and the Manor Farm was theirs.

For the first few minutes the animals could hardly believe in their good
fortune. Their first act was to gallop in a body right round the
boundaries of the farm, as though to make quite sure that no human being
was hiding anywhere upon it; then they raced back to the farm buildings to
wipe out the last traces of Jones's hated reign. The harness-room at the
end of the stables was broken open; the bits, the nose-rings, the
dog-chains, the cruel knives with which Mr. Jones had been used to
castrate the pigs and lambs, were all flung down the well. The reins, the
halters, the blinkers, the degrading nosebags, were thrown on to the
rubbish fire which was burning in the yard. So were the whips. All the
animals capered with joy when they saw the whips going up in flames.
Snowball also threw on to the fire the ribbons with which the horses'
manes and tails had usually been decorated on market days.

"Ribbons," he said, "should be considered as clothes, which are the mark
of a human being. All animals should go naked."

When Boxer heard this he fetched the small straw hat which he wore in
summer to keep the flies out of his ears, and flung it on to the fire with
the rest.

In a very little while the animals had destroyed everything that reminded
them of Mr. Jones. Napoleon then led them back to the store-shed and
served out a double ration of corn to everybody, with two biscuits for
each dog. Then they sang 'Beasts of England' from end to end seven times
running, and after that they settled down for the night and slept as they
had never slept before.

But they woke at dawn as usual, and suddenly remembering the glorious
thing that had happened, they all raced out into the pasture together. A
little way down the pasture there was a knoll that commanded a view of
most of the farm. The animals rushed to the top of it and gazed round them
in the clear morning light. Yes, it was theirs--everything that they could
see was theirs! In the ecstasy of that thought they gambolled round and
round, they hurled themselves into the air in great leaps of excitement.
They rolled in the dew, they cropped mouthfuls of the sweet summer grass,
they kicked up clods of the black earth and snuffed its rich scent. Then
they made a tour of inspection of the whole farm and surveyed with
speechless admiration the ploughland, the hayfield, the orchard, the pool,
the spinney. It was as though they had never seen these things before, and
even now they could hardly believe that it was all their own.

Then they filed back to the farm buildings and halted in silence outside
the door of the farmhouse. That was theirs too, but they were frightened
to go inside. After a moment, however, Snowball and Napoleon butted the
door open with their shoulders and the animals entered in single file,
walking with the utmost care for fear of disturbing anything. They tiptoed
from room to room, afraid to speak above a whisper and gazing with a kind
of awe at the unbelievable luxury, at the beds with their feather
mattresses, the looking-glasses, the horsehair sofa, the Brussels carpet,
the lithograph of Queen Victoria over the drawing-room mantelpiece. They
were just coming down the stairs when Mollie was discovered to be missing.
Going back, the others found that she had remained behind in the best
bedroom. She had taken a piece of blue ribbon from Mrs. Jones's
dressing-table, and was holding it against her shoulder and admiring
herself in the glass in a very foolish manner. The others reproached her
sharply, and they went outside. Some hams hanging in the kitchen were
taken out for burial, and the barrel of beer in the scullery was stove in
with a kick from Boxer's hoof, otherwise nothing in the house was touched.
A unanimous resolution was passed on the spot that the farmhouse should be
preserved as a museum. All were agreed that no animal must ever live there.

The animals had their breakfast, and then Snowball and Napoleon called
them together again.

"Comrades," said Snowball, "it is half-past six and we have a long day
before us. Today we begin the hay harvest. But there is another matter
that must be attended to first."

The pigs now revealed that during the past three months they had taught
themselves to read and write from an old spelling book which had belonged
to Mr. Jones's children and which had been thrown on the rubbish heap.
Napoleon sent for pots of black and white paint and led the way down to
the five-barred gate that gave on to the main road. Then Snowball (for it
was Snowball who was best at writing) took a brush between the two
knuckles of his trotter, painted out MANOR FARM from the top bar of the
gate and in its place painted ANIMAL FARM. This was to be the name of the
farm from now onwards. After this they went back to the farm buildings,
where Snowball and Napoleon sent for a ladder which they caused to be set
against the end wall of the big barn. They explained that by their studies
of the past three months the pigs had succeeded in reducing the principles
of Animalism to Seven Commandments. These Seven Commandments would now be
inscribed on the wall; they would form an unalterable law by which all the
animals on Animal Farm must live for ever after. With some difficulty
(for it is not easy for a pig to balance himself on a ladder) Snowball
climbed up and set to work, with Squealer a few rungs below him holding
the paint-pot. The Commandments were written on the tarred wall in great
white letters that could be read thirty yards away. They ran thus:


THE SEVEN COMMANDMENTS

1. Whatever goes upon two legs is an enemy.
2. Whatever goes upon four legs, or has wings, is a friend.
3. No animal shall wear clothes.
4. No animal shall sleep in a bed.
5. No animal shall drink alcohol.
6. No animal shall kill any other animal.
7. All animals are equal.


It was very neatly written, and except that "friend" was written "freind"
and one of the "S's" was the wrong way round, the spelling was correct all
the way through. Snowball read it aloud for the benefit of the others. All
the animals nodded in complete agreement, and the cleverer ones at once
began to learn the Commandments by heart.

"Now, comrades," cried Snowball, throwing down the paint-brush, "to the
hayfield! Let us make it a point of honour to get in the harvest more
quickly than Jones and his men could do."

But at this moment the three cows, who had seemed uneasy for some time
past, set up a loud lowing. They had not been milked for twenty-four
hours, and their udders were almost bursting. After a little thought, the
pigs sent for buckets and milked the cows fairly successfully, their
trotters being well adapted to this task. Soon there were five buckets of
frothing creamy milk at which many of the animals looked with considerable
interest.

"What is going to happen to all that milk?" said someone.

"Jones used sometimes to mix some of it in our mash," said one of the hens.

"Never mind the milk, comrades!" cried Napoleon, placing himself in front
of the buckets. "That will be attended to. The harvest is more important.
Comrade Snowball will lead the way. I shall follow in a few minutes.
Forward, comrades! The hay is waiting."

So the animals trooped down to the hayfield to begin the harvest, and when
they came back in the evening it was noticed that the milk had disappeared.




Chapter III



How they toiled and sweated to get the hay in! But their efforts were
rewarded, for the harvest was an even bigger success than they had hoped.

Sometimes the work was hard; the implements had been designed for human
beings and not for animals, and it was a great drawback that no animal was
able to use any tool that involved standing on his hind legs. But the pigs
were so clever that they could think of a way round every difficulty. As
for the horses, they knew every inch of the field, and in fact understood
the business of mowing and raking far better than Jones and his men had
ever done. The pigs did not actually work, but directed and supervised the
others. With their superior knowledge it was natural that they should
assume the leadership. Boxer and Clover would harness themselves to the
cutter or the horse-rake (no bits or reins were needed in these days, of
course) and tramp steadily round and round the field with a pig walking
behind and calling out "Gee up, comrade!" or "Whoa back, comrade!" as the
case might be. And every animal down to the humblest worked at turning the
hay and gathering it. Even the ducks and hens toiled to and fro all day in
the sun, carrying tiny wisps of hay in their beaks. In the end they
finished the harvest in two days' less time than it had usually taken
Jones and his men. Moreover, it was the biggest harvest that the farm had
ever seen. There was no wastage whatever; the hens and ducks with their
sharp eyes had gathered up the very last stalk. And not an animal on the
farm had stolen so much as a mouthful.

All through that summer the work of the farm went like clockwork. The
animals were happy as they had never conceived it possible to be. Every
mouthful of food was an acute positive pleasure, now that it was truly
their own food, produced by themselves and for themselves, not doled out
to them by a grudging master. With the worthless parasitical human beings
gone, there was more for everyone to eat. There was more leisure too,
inexperienced though the animals were. They met with many difficulties--for
instance, later in the year, when they harvested the corn, they had to
tread it out in the ancient style and blow away the chaff with their
breath, since the farm possessed no threshing machine--but the pigs with
their cleverness and Boxer with his tremendous muscles always pulled them
through. Boxer was the admiration of everybody. He had been a hard worker
even in Jones's time, but now he seemed more like three horses than one;
there were days when the entire work of the farm seemed to rest on his
mighty shoulders. From morning to night he was pushing and pulling, always
at the spot where the work was hardest. He had made an arrangement with
one of the cockerels to call him in the mornings half an hour earlier than
anyone else, and would put in some volunteer labour at whatever seemed to
be most needed, before the regular day's work began. His answer to every
problem, every setback, was "I will work harder!"--which he had adopted as
his personal motto.

But everyone worked according to his capacity. The hens and ducks, for
instance, saved five bushels of corn at the harvest by gathering up the
stray grains. Nobody stole, nobody grumbled over his rations, the
quarrelling and biting and jealousy which had been normal features of life
in the old days had almost disappeared. Nobody shirked--or almost nobody.
Mollie, it was true, was not good at getting up in the mornings, and had a
way of leaving work early on the ground that there was a stone in her
hoof. And the behaviour of the cat was somewhat peculiar. It was soon
noticed that when there was work to be done the cat could never be found.
She would vanish for hours on end, and then reappear at meal-times, or in
the evening after work was over, as though nothing had happened. But she
always made such excellent excuses, and purred so affectionately, that it
was impossible not to believe in her good intentions. Old Benjamin, the
donkey, seemed quite unchanged since the Rebellion. He did his work in the
same slow obstinate way as he had done it in Jones's time, never shirking
and never volunteering for extra work either. About the Rebellion and its
results he would express no opinion. When asked whether he was not happier
now that Jones was gone, he would say only "Donkeys live a long time. None
of you has ever seen a dead donkey," and the others had to be content with
this cryptic answer.

On Sundays there was no work. Breakfast was an hour later than usual, and
after breakfast there was a ceremony which was observed every week without
fail. First came the hoisting of the flag. Snowball had found in the
harness-room an old green tablecloth of Mrs. Jones's and had painted on it
a hoof and a horn in white. This was run up the flagstaff in the farmhouse
garden every Sunday morning. The flag was green, Snowball explained, to
represent the green fields of England, while the hoof and horn signified
the future Republic of the Animals which would arise when the human race
had been finally overthrown. After the hoisting of the flag all the
animals trooped into the big barn for a general assembly which was known
as the Meeting. Here the work of the coming week was planned out and
resolutions were put forward and debated. It was always the pigs who put
forward the resolutions. The other animals understood how to vote, but
could never think of any resolutions of their own. Snowball and Napoleon
were by far the most active in the debates. But it was noticed that these
two were never in agreement: whatever suggestion either of them made, the
other could be counted on to oppose it. Even when it was resolved--a thing
no one could object to in itself--to set aside the small paddock behind
the orchard as a home of rest for animals who were past work, there was a
stormy debate over the correct retiring age for each class of animal. The
Meeting always ended with the singing of 'Beasts of England', and the
afternoon was given up to recreation.

The pigs had set aside the harness-room as a headquarters for themselves.
Here, in the evenings, they studied blacksmithing, carpentering, and other
necessary arts from books which they had brought out of the farmhouse.
Snowball also busied himself with organising the other animals into what
he called Animal Committees. He was indefatigable at this. He formed the
Egg Production Committee for the hens, the Clean Tails League for the
cows, the Wild Comrades' Re-education Committee (the object of this was to
tame the rats and rabbits), the Whiter Wool Movement for the sheep, and
various others, besides instituting classes in reading and writing. On the
whole, these projects were a failure. The attempt to tame the wild
creatures, for instance, broke down almost immediately. They continued to
behave very much as before, and when treated with generosity, simply took
advantage of it. The cat joined the Re-education Committee and was very
active in it for some days. She was seen one day sitting on a roof and
talking to some sparrows who were just out of her reach. She was telling
them that all animals were now comrades and that any sparrow who chose
could come and perch on her paw; but the sparrows kept their distance.

The reading and writing classes, however, were a great success. By the
autumn almost every animal on the farm was literate in some degree.

As for the pigs, they could already read and write perfectly. The dogs
learned to read fairly well, but were not interested in reading anything
except the Seven Commandments. Muriel, the goat, could read somewhat
better than the dogs, and sometimes used to read to the others in the
evenings from scraps of newspaper which she found on the rubbish heap.
Benjamin could read as well as any pig, but never exercised his faculty.
So far as he knew, he said, there was nothing worth reading. Clover learnt
the whole alphabet, but could not put words together. Boxer could not get
beyond the letter D. He would trace out A, B, C, D, in the dust with his
great hoof, and then would stand staring at the letters with his ears
back, sometimes shaking his forelock, trying with all his might to
remember what came next and never succeeding. On several occasions,
indeed, he did learn E, F, G, H, but by the time he knew them, it was
always discovered that he had forgotten A, B, C, and D. Finally he decided
to be content with the first four letters, and used to write them out once
or twice every day to refresh his memory. Mollie refused to learn any but
the six letters which spelt her own name. She would form these very neatly
out of pieces of twig, and would then decorate them with a flower or two
and walk round them admiring them.

None of the other animals on the farm could get further than the letter A.
It was also found that the stupider animals, such as the sheep, hens, and
ducks, were unable to learn the Seven Commandments by heart. After much
thought Snowball declared that the Seven Commandments could in effect be
reduced to a single maxim, namely: "Four legs good, two legs bad." This,
he said, contained the essential principle of Animalism. Whoever had
thoroughly grasped it would be safe from human influences. The birds at
first objected, since it seemed to them that they also had two legs, but
Snowball proved to them that this was not so.

"A bird's wing, comrades," he said, "is an organ of propulsion and not of
manipulation. It should therefore be regarded as a leg. The distinguishing
mark of man is the HAND, the instrument with which he does all his
mischief."

The birds did not understand Snowball's long words, but they accepted his
explanation, and all the humbler animals set to work to learn the new
maxim by heart. FOUR LEGS GOOD, TWO LEGS BAD, was inscribed on the end
wall of the barn, above the Seven Commandments and in bigger letters. When
they had once got it by heart, the sheep developed a great liking for this
maxim, and often as they lay in the field they would all start bleating
"Four legs good, two legs bad! Four legs good, two legs bad!" and keep it
up for hours on end, never growing tired of it.

Napoleon took no interest in Snowball's committees. He said that the
education of the young was more important than anything that could be done
for those who were already grown up. It happened that Jessie and Bluebell
had both whelped soon after the hay harvest, giving birth between them to
nine sturdy puppies. As soon as they were weaned, Napoleon took them away
from their mothers, saying that he would make himself responsible for
their education. He took them up into a loft which could only be reached
by a ladder from the harness-room, and there kept them in such seclusion
that the rest of the farm soon forgot their existence.

The mystery of where the milk went to was soon cleared up. It was mixed
every day into the pigs' mash. The early apples were now ripening, and the
grass of the orchard was littered with windfalls. The animals had assumed
as a matter of course that these would be shared out equally; one day,
however, the order went forth that all the windfalls were to be collected
and brought to the harness-room for the use of the pigs. At this some of
the other animals murmured, but it was no use. All the pigs were in full
agreement on this point, even Snowball and Napoleon. Squealer was sent to
make the necessary explanations to the others.

"Comrades!" he cried. "You do not imagine, I hope, that we pigs are doing
this in a spirit of selfishness and privilege? Many of us actually dislike
milk and apples. I dislike them myself. Our sole object in taking these
things is to preserve our health. Milk and apples (this has been proved by
Science, comrades) contain substances absolutely necessary to the
well-being of a pig. We pigs are brainworkers. The whole management and
organisation of this farm depend on us. Day and night we are watching over
your welfare. It is for YOUR sake that we drink that milk and eat those
apples. Do you know what would happen if we pigs failed in our duty? Jones
would come back! Yes, Jones would come back! Surely, comrades," cried
Squealer almost pleadingly, skipping from side to side and whisking his
tail, "surely there is no one among you who wants to see Jones come back?"

Now if there was one thing that the animals were completely certain of, it
was that they did not want Jones back. When it was put to them in this
light, they had no more to say. The importance of keeping the pigs in good
health was all too obvious. So it was agreed without further argument that
the milk and the windfall apples (and also the main crop of apples when
they ripened) should be reserved for the pigs alone.




Chapter IV



By the late summer the news of what had happened on Animal Farm had spread
across half the county. Every day Snowball and Napoleon sent out flights
of pigeons whose instructions were to mingle with the animals on
neighbouring farms, tell them the story of the Rebellion, and teach them
the tune of 'Beasts of England'.

Most of this time Mr. Jones had spent sitting in the taproom of the Red
Lion at Willingdon, complaining to anyone who would listen of the
monstrous injustice he had suffered in being turned out of his property by
a pack of good-for-nothing animals. The other farmers sympathised in
principle, but they did not at first give him much help. At heart, each of
them was secretly wondering whether he could not somehow turn Jones's
misfortune to his own advantage. It was lucky that the owners of the two
farms which adjoined Animal Farm were on permanently bad terms. One of
them, which was named Foxwood, was a large, neglected, old-fashioned farm,
much overgrown by woodland, with all its pastures worn out and its hedges
in a disgraceful condition. Its owner, Mr. Pilkington, was an easy-going
gentleman farmer who spent most of his time in fishing or hunting
according to the season. The other farm, which was called Pinchfield, was
smaller and better kept. Its owner was a Mr. Frederick, a tough, shrewd
man, perpetually involved in lawsuits and with a name for driving hard
bargains. These two disliked each other so much that it was difficult for
them to come to any agreement, even in defence of their own interests.

Nevertheless, they were both thoroughly frightened by the rebellion on
Animal Farm, and very anxious to prevent their own animals from learning
too much about it. At first they pretended to laugh to scorn the idea of
animals managing a farm for themselves. The whole thing would be over in a
fortnight, they said. They put it about that the animals on the Manor Farm
(they insisted on calling it the Manor Farm; they would not tolerate the
name "Animal Farm") were perpetually fighting among themselves and were
also rapidly starving to death. When time passed and the animals had
evidently not starved to death, Frederick and Pilkington changed their
tune and began to talk of the terrible wickedness that now flourished on
Animal Farm. It was given out that the animals there practised cannibalism,
tortured one another with red-hot horseshoes, and had their females in
common. This was what came of rebelling against the laws of Nature,
Frederick and Pilkington said.

However, these stories were never fully believed. Rumours of a wonderful
farm, where the human beings had been turned out and the animals managed
their own affairs, continued to circulate in vague and distorted forms,
and throughout that year a wave of rebelliousness ran through the
countryside. Bulls which had always been tractable suddenly turned savage,
sheep broke down hedges and devoured the clover, cows kicked the pail
over, hunters refused their fences and shot their riders on to the other
side. Above all, the tune and even the words of 'Beasts of England' were
known everywhere. It had spread with astonishing speed. The human beings
could not contain their rage when they heard this song, though they
pretended to think it merely ridiculous. They could not understand, they
said, how even animals could bring themselves to sing such contemptible
rubbish. Any animal caught singing it was given a flogging on the spot.
And yet the song was irrepressible. The blackbirds whistled it in the
hedges, the pigeons cooed it in the elms, it got into the din of the
smithies and the tune of the church bells. And when the human beings
listened to it, they secretly trembled, hearing in it a prophecy of their
future doom.

Early in October, when the corn was cut and stacked and some of it was
already threshed, a flight of pigeons came whirling through the air and
alighted in the yard of Animal Farm in the wildest excitement. Jones and
all his men, with half a dozen others from Foxwood and Pinchfield, had
entered the five-barred gate and were coming up the cart-track that led to
the farm. They were all carrying sticks, except Jones, who was marching
ahead with a gun in his hands. Obviously they were going to attempt the
recapture of the farm.

This had long been expected, and all preparations had been made. Snowball,
who had studied an old book of Julius Caesar's campaigns which he had
found in the farmhouse, was in charge of the defensive operations. He gave
his orders quickly, and in a couple of minutes every animal was at his
post.

As the human beings approached the farm buildings, Snowball launched his
first attack. All the pigeons, to the number of thirty-five, flew to and
fro over the men's heads and muted upon them from mid-air; and while the
men were dealing with this, the geese, who had been hiding behind the
hedge, rushed out and pecked viciously at the calves of their legs.
However, this was only a light skirmishing manoeuvre, intended to create a
little disorder, and the men easily drove the geese off with their sticks.
Snowball now launched his second line of attack. Muriel, Benjamin, and all
the sheep, with Snowball at the head of them, rushed forward and prodded
and butted the men from every side, while Benjamin turned around and
lashed at them with his small hoofs. But once again the men, with their
sticks and their hobnailed boots, were too strong for them; and suddenly,
at a squeal from Snowball, which was the signal for retreat, all the
animals turned and fled through the gateway into the yard.

The men gave a shout of triumph. They saw, as they imagined, their enemies
in flight, and they rushed after them in disorder. This was just what
Snowball had intended. As soon as they were well inside the yard, the
three horses, the three cows, and the rest of the pigs, who had been lying
in ambush in the cowshed, suddenly emerged in their rear, cutting them
off. Snowball now gave the signal for the charge. He himself dashed
straight for Jones. Jones saw him coming, raised his gun and fired. The
pellets scored bloody streaks along Snowball's back, and a sheep dropped
dead. Without halting for an instant, Snowball flung his fifteen stone
against Jones's legs. Jones was hurled into a pile of dung and his gun
flew out of his hands. But the most terrifying spectacle of all was Boxer,
rearing up on his hind legs and striking out with his great iron-shod
hoofs like a stallion. His very first blow took a stable-lad from Foxwood
on the skull and stretched him lifeless in the mud. At the sight, several
men dropped their sticks and tried to run. Panic overtook them, and the
next moment all the animals together were chasing them round and round the
yard. They were gored, kicked, bitten, trampled on. There was not an
animal on the farm that did not take vengeance on them after his own
fashion. Even the cat suddenly leapt off a roof onto a cowman's shoulders
and sank her claws in his neck, at which he yelled horribly. At a moment
when the opening was clear, the men were glad enough to rush out of the
yard and make a bolt for the main road. And so within five minutes of
their invasion they were in ignominious retreat by the same way as they
had come, with a flock of geese hissing after them and pecking at their
calves all the way.

All the men were gone except one. Back in the yard Boxer was pawing with
his hoof at the stable-lad who lay face down in the mud, trying to turn
him over. The boy did not stir.

"He is dead," said Boxer sorrowfully. "I had no intention of doing that.
I forgot that I was wearing iron shoes. Who will believe that I did not do
this on purpose?"

"No sentimentality, comrade!" cried Snowball from whose wounds the blood
was still dripping. "War is war. The only good human being is a dead one."

"I have no wish to take life, not even human life," repeated Boxer, and
his eyes were full of tears.

"Where is Mollie?" exclaimed somebody.

Mollie in fact was missing. For a moment there was great alarm; it was
feared that the men might have harmed her in some way, or even carried her
off with them. In the end, however, she was found hiding in her stall with
her head buried among the hay in the manger. She had taken to flight as
soon as the gun went off. And when the others came back from looking for
her, it was to find that the stable-lad, who in fact was only stunned, had
already recovered and made off.

The animals had now reassembled in the wildest excitement, each recounting
his own exploits in the battle at the top of his voice. An impromptu
celebration of the victory was held immediately. The flag was run up and
'Beasts of England' was sung a number of times, then the sheep who had been
killed was given a solemn funeral, a hawthorn bush being planted on her
grave. At the graveside Snowball made a little speech, emphasising the
need for all animals to be ready to die for Animal Farm if need be.

The animals decided unanimously to create a military decoration, "Animal
Hero, First Class," which was conferred there and then on Snowball and
Boxer. It consisted of a brass medal (they were really some old
horse-brasses which had been found in the harness-room), to be worn on
Sundays and holidays. There was also "Animal Hero, Second Class," which
was conferred posthumously on the dead sheep.

There was much discussion as to what the battle should be called. In the
end, it was named the Battle of the Cowshed, since that was where the
ambush had been sprung. Mr. Jones's gun had been found lying in the mud,
and it was known that there was a supply of cartridges in the farmhouse.
It was decided to set the gun up at the foot of the Flagstaff, like a
piece of artillery, and to fire it twice a year--once on October the
twelfth, the anniversary of the Battle of the Cowshed, and once on
Midsummer Day, the anniversary of the Rebellion.




Chapter V



As winter drew on, Mollie became more and more troublesome. She was late
for work every morning and excused herself by saying that she had
overslept, and she complained of mysterious pains, although her appetite
was excellent. On every kind of pretext she would run away from work and
go to the drinking pool, where she would stand foolishly gazing at her own
reflection in the water. But there were also rumours of something more
serious. One day, as Mollie strolled blithely into the yard, flirting her
long tail and chewing at a stalk of hay, Clover took her aside.

"Mollie," she said, "I have something very serious to say to you. This
morning I saw you looking over the hedge that divides Animal Farm from
Foxwood. One of Mr. Pilkington's men was standing on the other side of the
hedge. And--I was a long way away, but I am almost certain I saw this--he
was talking to you and you were allowing him to stroke your nose. What
does that mean, Mollie?"

"He didn't! I wasn't! It isn't true!" cried Mollie, beginning to prance
about and paw the ground.

"Mollie! Look me in the face. Do you give me your word of honour that that
man was not stroking your nose?"

"It isn't true!" repeated Mollie, but she could not look Clover in the
face, and the next moment she took to her heels and galloped away into the
field.

A thought struck Clover. Without saying anything to the others, she went
to Mollie's stall and turned over the straw with her hoof. Hidden under
the straw was a little pile of lump sugar and several bunches of ribbon of
different colours.

Three days later Mollie disappeared. For some weeks nothing was known of
her whereabouts, then the pigeons reported that they had seen her on the
other side of Willingdon. She was between the shafts of a smart dogcart
painted red and black, which was standing outside a public-house. A fat
red-faced man in check breeches and gaiters, who looked like a publican,
was stroking her nose and feeding her with sugar. Her coat was newly
clipped and she wore a scarlet ribbon round her forelock. She appeared to
be enjoying herself, so the pigeons said. None of the animals ever
mentioned Mollie again.

In January there came bitterly hard weather. The earth was like iron, and
nothing could be done in the fields. Many meetings were held in the big
barn, and the pigs occupied themselves with planning out the work of the
coming season. It had come to be accepted that the pigs, who were
manifestly cleverer than the other animals, should decide all questions of
farm policy, though their decisions had to be ratified by a majority vote.
This arrangement would have worked well enough if it had not been for the
disputes between Snowball and Napoleon. These two disagreed at every point
where disagreement was possible. If one of them suggested sowing a bigger
acreage with barley, the other was certain to demand a bigger acreage of
oats, and if one of them said that such and such a field was just right
for cabbages, the other would declare that it was useless for anything
except roots. Each had his own following, and there were some violent
debates. At the Meetings Snowball often won over the majority by his
brilliant speeches, but Napoleon was better at canvassing support for
himself in between times. He was especially successful with the sheep. Of
late the sheep had taken to bleating "Four legs good, two legs bad" both
in and out of season, and they often interrupted the Meeting with this. It
was noticed that they were especially liable to break into "Four legs
good, two legs bad" at crucial moments in Snowball's speeches. Snowball
had made a close study of some back numbers of the 'Farmer and
Stockbreeder' which he had found in the farmhouse, and was full of plans
for innovations and improvements. He talked learnedly about field drains,
silage, and basic slag, and had worked out a complicated scheme for all
the animals to drop their dung directly in the fields, at a different spot
every day, to save the labour of cartage. Napoleon produced no schemes of
his own, but said quietly that Snowball's would come to nothing, and
seemed to be biding his time. But of all their controversies, none was so
bitter as the one that took place over the windmill.

In the long pasture, not far from the farm buildings, there was a small
knoll which was the highest point on the farm. After surveying the ground,
Snowball declared that this was just the place for a windmill, which could
be made to operate a dynamo and supply the farm with electrical power.
This would light the stalls and warm them in winter, and would also run a
circular saw, a chaff-cutter, a mangel-slicer, and an electric milking
machine. The animals had never heard of anything of this kind before
(for the farm was an old-fashioned one and had only the most primitive
machinery), and they listened in astonishment while Snowball conjured up
pictures of fantastic machines which would do their work for them while
they grazed at their ease in the fields or improved their minds with
reading and conversation.

Within a few weeks Snowball's plans for the windmill were fully worked
out. The mechanical details came mostly from three books which had
belonged to Mr. Jones--'One Thousand Useful Things to Do About the House',
'Every Man His Own Bricklayer', and 'Electricity for Beginners'. Snowball
used as his study a shed which had once been used for incubators and had a
smooth wooden floor, suitable for drawing on. He was closeted there for
hours at a time. With his books held open by a stone, and with a piece of
chalk gripped between the knuckles of his trotter, he would move rapidly
to and fro, drawing in line after line and uttering little whimpers of
excitement. Gradually the plans grew into a complicated mass of cranks and
cog-wheels, covering more than half the floor, which the other animals
found completely unintelligible but very impressive. All of them came to
look at Snowball's drawings at least once a day. Even the hens and ducks
came, and were at pains not to tread on the chalk marks. Only Napoleon
held aloof. He had declared himself against the windmill from the start.
One day, however, he arrived unexpectedly to examine the plans. He walked
heavily round the shed, looked closely at every detail of the plans and
snuffed at them once or twice, then stood for a little while contemplating
them out of the corner of his eye; then suddenly he lifted his leg,
urinated over the plans, and walked out without uttering a word.

The whole farm was deeply divided on the subject of the windmill. Snowball
did not deny that to build it would be a difficult business. Stone would
have to be carried and built up into walls, then the sails would have to
be made and after that there would be need for dynamos and cables. (How
these were to be procured, Snowball did not say.) But he maintained that
it could all be done in a year. And thereafter, he declared, so much
labour would be saved that the animals would only need to work three days
a week. Napoleon, on the other hand, argued that the great need of the
moment was to increase food production, and that if they wasted time on
the windmill they would all starve to death. The animals formed themselves
into two factions under the slogan, "Vote for Snowball and the three-day
week" and "Vote for Napoleon and the full manger." Benjamin was the only
animal who did not side with either faction. He refused to believe either
that food would become more plentiful or that the windmill would save
work. Windmill or no windmill, he said, life would go on as it had always
gone on--that is, badly.

Apart from the disputes over the windmill, there was the question of the
defence of the farm. It was fully realised that though the human beings
had been defeated in the Battle of the Cowshed they might make another and
more determined attempt to recapture the farm and reinstate Mr. Jones.
They had all the more reason for doing so because the news of their defeat
had spread across the countryside and made the animals on the neighbouring
farms more restive than ever. As usual, Snowball and Napoleon were in
disagreement. According to Napoleon, what the animals must do was to
procure firearms and train themselves in the use of them. According to
Snowball, they must send out more and more pigeons and stir up rebellion
among the animals on the other farms. The one argued that if they could
not defend themselves they were bound to be conquered, the other argued
that if rebellions happened everywhere they would have no need to defend
themselves. The animals listened first to Napoleon, then to Snowball, and
could not make up their minds which was right; indeed, they always found
themselves in agreement with the one who was speaking at the moment.

At last the day came when Snowball's plans were completed. At the Meeting
on the following Sunday the question of whether or not to begin work on
the windmill was to be put to the vote. When the animals had assembled in
the big barn, Snowball stood up and, though occasionally interrupted by
bleating from the sheep, set forth his reasons for advocating the building
of the windmill. Then Napoleon stood up to reply. He said very quietly
that the windmill was nonsense and that he advised nobody to vote for it,
and promptly sat down again; he had spoken for barely thirty seconds, and
seemed almost indifferent as to the effect he produced. At this Snowball
sprang to his feet, and shouting down the sheep, who had begun bleating
again, broke into a passionate appeal in favour of the windmill. Until now
the animals had been about equally divided in their sympathies, but in a
moment Snowball's eloquence had carried them away. In glowing sentences he
painted a picture of Animal Farm as it might be when sordid labour was
lifted from the animals' backs. His imagination had now run far beyond
chaff-cutters and turnip-slicers. Electricity, he said, could operate
threshing machines, ploughs, harrows, rollers, and reapers and binders,
besides supplying every stall with its own electric light, hot and cold
water, and an electric heater. By the time he had finished speaking, there
was no doubt as to which way the vote would go. But just at this moment
Napoleon stood up and, casting a peculiar sidelong look at Snowball,
uttered a high-pitched whimper of a kind no one had ever heard him utter
before.

At this there was a terrible baying sound outside, and nine enormous dogs
wearing brass-studded collars came bounding into the barn. They dashed
straight for Snowball, who only sprang from his place just in time to
escape their snapping jaws. In a moment he was out of the door and they
were after him. Too amazed and frightened to speak, all the animals
crowded through the door to watch the chase. Snowball was racing across
the long pasture that led to the road. He was running as only a pig can
run, but the dogs were close on his heels. Suddenly he slipped and it
seemed certain that they had him. Then he was up again, running faster
than ever, then the dogs were gaining on him again. One of them all but
closed his jaws on Snowball's tail, but Snowball whisked it free just in
time. Then he put on an extra spurt and, with a few inches to spare,
slipped through a hole in the hedge and was seen no more.

Silent and terrified, the animals crept back into the barn. In a moment
the dogs came bounding back. At first no one had been able to imagine
where these creatures came from, but the problem was soon solved: they
were the puppies whom Napoleon had taken away from their mothers and
reared privately. Though not yet full-grown, they were huge dogs, and as
fierce-looking as wolves. They kept close to Napoleon. It was noticed that
they wagged their tails to him in the same way as the other dogs had been
used to do to Mr. Jones.

Napoleon, with the dogs following him, now mounted on to the raised
portion of the floor where Major had previously stood to deliver his
speech. He announced that from now on the Sunday-morning Meetings would
come to an end. They were unnecessary, he said, and wasted time. In future
all questions relating to the working of the farm would be settled by a
special committee of pigs, presided over by himself. These would meet in
private and afterwards communicate their decisions to the others. The
animals would still assemble on Sunday mornings to salute the flag, sing
'Beasts of England', and receive their orders for the week; but there would
be no more debates.

In spite of the shock that Snowball's expulsion had given them, the
animals were dismayed by this announcement. Several of them would have
protested if they could have found the right arguments. Even Boxer was
vaguely troubled. He set his ears back, shook his forelock several times,
and tried hard to marshal his thoughts; but in the end he could not think
of anything to say. Some of the pigs themselves, however, were more
articulate. Four young porkers in the front row uttered shrill squeals of
disapproval, and all four of them sprang to their feet and began speaking
at once. But suddenly the dogs sitting round Napoleon let out deep,
menacing growls, and the pigs fell silent and sat down again. Then the
sheep broke out into a tremendous bleating of "Four legs good, two legs
bad!" which went on for nearly a quarter of an hour and put an end to any
chance of discussion.

Afterwards Squealer was sent round the farm to explain the new arrangement
to the others.

"Comrades," he said, "I trust that every animal here appreciates the
sacrifice that Comrade Napoleon has made in taking this extra labour upon
himself. Do not imagine, comrades, that leadership is a pleasure! On the
contrary, it is a deep and heavy responsibility. No one believes more
firmly than Comrade Napoleon that all animals are equal. He would be only
too happy to let you make your decisions for yourselves. But sometimes you
might make the wrong decisions, comrades, and then where should we be?
Suppose you had decided to follow Snowball, with his moonshine of
windmills--Snowball, who, as we now know, was no better than a criminal?"

"He fought bravely at the Battle of the Cowshed," said somebody.

"Bravery is not enough," said Squealer. "Loyalty and obedience are more
important. And as to the Battle of the Cowshed, I believe the time will
come when we shall find that Snowball's part in it was much exaggerated.
Discipline, comrades, iron discipline! That is the watchword for today.
One false step, and our enemies would be upon us. Surely, comrades, you do
not want Jones back?"

Once again this argument was unanswerable. Certainly the animals did not
want Jones back; if the holding of debates on Sunday mornings was liable
to bring him back, then the debates must stop. Boxer, who had now had time
to think things over, voiced the general feeling by saying: "If Comrade
Napoleon says it, it must be right." And from then on he adopted the
maxim, "Napoleon is always right," in addition to his private motto of "I
will work harder."

By this time the weather had broken and the spring ploughing had begun.
The shed where Snowball had drawn his plans of the windmill had been shut
up and it was assumed that the plans had been rubbed off the floor. Every
Sunday morning at ten o'clock the animals assembled in the big barn to
receive their orders for the week. The skull of old Major, now clean of
flesh, had been disinterred from the orchard and set up on a stump at the
foot of the flagstaff, beside the gun. After the hoisting of the flag, the
animals were required to file past the skull in a reverent manner before
entering the barn. Nowadays they did not sit all together as they had done
in the past. Napoleon, with Squealer and another pig named Minimus, who
had a remarkable gift for composing songs and poems, sat on the front of
the raised platform, with the nine young dogs forming a semicircle round
them, and the other pigs sitting behind. The rest of the animals sat
facing them in the main body of the barn. Napoleon read out the orders for
the week in a gruff soldierly style, and after a single singing of 'Beasts
of England', all the animals dispersed.

On the third Sunday after Snowball's expulsion, the animals were somewhat
surprised to hear Napoleon announce that the windmill was to be built
after all. He did not give any reason for having changed his mind, but
merely warned the animals that this extra task would mean very hard work,
it might even be necessary to reduce their rations. The plans, however,
had all been prepared, down to the last detail. A special committee of
pigs had been at work upon them for the past three weeks. The building of
the windmill, with various other improvements, was expected to take two
years.

That evening Squealer explained privately to the other animals that
Napoleon had never in reality been opposed to the windmill. On the
contrary, it was he who had advocated it in the beginning, and the plan
which Snowball had drawn on the floor of the incubator shed had actually
been stolen from among Napoleon's papers. The windmill was, in fact,
Napoleon's own creation. Why, then, asked somebody, had he spoken so
strongly against it? Here Squealer looked very sly. That, he said, was
Comrade Napoleon's cunning. He had SEEMED to oppose the windmill, simply
as a manoeuvre to get rid of Snowball, who was a dangerous character and a
bad influence. Now that Snowball was out of the way, the plan could go
forward without his interference. This, said Squealer, was something
called tactics. He repeated a number of times, "Tactics, comrades,
tactics!" skipping round and whisking his tail with a merry laugh. The
animals were not certain what the word meant, but Squealer spoke so
persuasively, and the three dogs who happened to be with him growled so
threateningly, that they accepted his explanation without further
questions.




Chapter VI



All that year the animals worked like slaves. But they were happy in their
work; they grudged no effort or sacrifice, well aware that everything that
they did was for the benefit of themselves and those of their kind who
would come after them, and not for a pack of idle, thieving human beings.

Throughout the spring and summer they worked a sixty-hour week, and in
August Napoleon announced that there would be work on Sunday afternoons
as well. This work was strictly voluntary, but any animal who absented
himself from it would have his rations reduced by half. Even so, it was
found necessary to leave certain tasks undone. The harvest was a little
less successful than in the previous year, and two fields which should
have been sown with roots in the early summer were not sown because the
ploughing had not been completed early enough. It was possible to foresee
that the coming winter would be a hard one.

The windmill presented unexpected difficulties. There was a good quarry of
limestone on the farm, and plenty of sand and cement had been found in one
of the outhouses, so that all the materials for building were at hand. But
the problem the animals could not at first solve was how to break up the
stone into pieces of suitable size. There seemed no way of doing this
except with picks and crowbars, which no animal could use, because no
animal could stand on his hind legs. Only after weeks of vain effort did
the right idea occur to somebody-namely, to utilise the force of gravity.
Huge boulders, far too big to be used as they were, were lying all over
the bed of the quarry. The animals lashed ropes round these, and then all
together, cows, horses, sheep, any animal that could lay hold of the
rope--even the pigs sometimes joined in at critical moments--they dragged
them with desperate slowness up the slope to the top of the quarry, where
they were toppled over the edge, to shatter to pieces below. Transporting
the stone when it was once broken was comparatively simple. The horses
carried it off in cart-loads, the sheep dragged single blocks, even Muriel
and Benjamin yoked themselves into an old governess-cart and did their
share. By late summer a sufficient store of stone had accumulated, and
then the building began, under the superintendence of the pigs.

But it was a slow, laborious process. Frequently it took a whole day of
exhausting effort to drag a single boulder to the top of the quarry, and
sometimes when it was pushed over the edge it failed to break. Nothing
could have been achieved without Boxer, whose strength seemed equal to
that of all the rest of the animals put together. When the boulder began
to slip and the animals cried out in despair at finding themselves dragged
down the hill, it was always Boxer who strained himself against the rope
and brought the boulder to a stop. To see him toiling up the slope inch by
inch, his breath coming fast, the tips of his hoofs clawing at the ground,
and his great sides matted with sweat, filled everyone with admiration.
Clover warned him sometimes to be careful not to overstrain himself, but
Boxer would never listen to her. His two slogans, "I will work harder"
and "Napoleon is always right," seemed to him a sufficient answer to all
problems. He had made arrangements with the cockerel to call him
three-quarters of an hour earlier in the mornings instead of half an hour.
And in his spare moments, of which there were not many nowadays, he would
go alone to the quarry, collect a load of broken stone, and drag it down
to the site of the windmill unassisted.

The animals were not badly off throughout that summer, in spite of the
hardness of their work. If they had no more food than they had had in
Jones's day, at least they did not have less. The advantage of only having
to feed themselves, and not having to support five extravagant human
beings as well, was so great that it would have taken a lot of failures to
outweigh it. And in many ways the animal method of doing things was more
efficient and saved labour. Such jobs as weeding, for instance, could be
done with a thoroughness impossible to human beings. And again, since no
animal now stole, it was unnecessary to fence off pasture from arable
land, which saved a lot of labour on the upkeep of hedges and gates.
Nevertheless, as the summer wore on, various unforeseen shortages began to
make them selves felt. There was need of paraffin oil, nails, string, dog
biscuits, and iron for the horses' shoes, none of which could be produced
on the farm. Later there would also be need for seeds and artificial
manures, besides various tools and, finally, the machinery for the
windmill. How these were to be procured, no one was able to imagine.

One Sunday morning, when the animals assembled to receive their orders,
Napoleon announced that he had decided upon a new policy. From now onwards
Animal Farm would engage in trade with the neighbouring farms: not, of
course, for any commercial purpose, but simply in order to obtain certain
materials which were urgently necessary. The needs of the windmill must
override everything else, he said. He was therefore making arrangements to
sell a stack of hay and part of the current year's wheat crop, and later
on, if more money were needed, it would have to be made up by the sale of
eggs, for which there was always a market in Willingdon. The hens, said
Napoleon, should welcome this sacrifice as their own special contribution
towards the building of the windmill.

Once again the animals were conscious of a vague uneasiness. Never to have
any dealings with human beings, never to engage in trade, never to make
use of money--had not these been among the earliest resolutions passed at
that first triumphant Meeting after Jones was expelled? All the animals
remembered passing such resolutions: or at least they thought that they
remembered it. The four young pigs who had protested when Napoleon
abolished the Meetings raised their voices timidly, but they were promptly
silenced by a tremendous growling from the dogs. Then, as usual, the sheep
broke into "Four legs good, two legs bad!" and the momentary awkwardness
was smoothed over. Finally Napoleon raised his trotter for silence and
announced that he had already made all the arrangements. There would be no
need for any of the animals to come in contact with human beings, which
would clearly be most undesirable. He intended to take the whole burden
upon his own shoulders. A Mr. Whymper, a solicitor living in Willingdon,
had agreed to act as intermediary between Animal Farm and the outside
world, and would visit the farm every Monday morning to receive his
instructions. Napoleon ended his speech with his usual cry of "Long live
Animal Farm!" and after the singing of 'Beasts of England' the animals
were dismissed.

Afterwards Squealer made a round of the farm and set the animals' minds at
rest. He assured them that the resolution against engaging in trade and
using money had never been passed, or even suggested. It was pure
imagination, probably traceable in the beginning to lies circulated by
Snowball. A few animals still felt faintly doubtful, but Squealer asked
them shrewdly, "Are you certain that this is not something that you have
dreamed, comrades? Have you any record of such a resolution? Is it written
down anywhere?" And since it was certainly true that nothing of the kind
existed in writing, the animals were satisfied that they had been mistaken.

Every Monday Mr. Whymper visited the farm as had been arranged. He was a
sly-looking little man with side whiskers, a solicitor in a very small way
of business, but sharp enough to have realised earlier than anyone else
that Animal Farm would need a broker and that the commissions would be
worth having. The animals watched his coming and going with a kind of
dread, and avoided him as much as possible. Nevertheless, the sight of
Napoleon, on all fours, delivering orders to Whymper, who stood on two
legs, roused their pride and partly reconciled them to the new
arrangement. Their relations with the human race were now not quite the
same as they had been before. The human beings did not hate Animal Farm
any less now that it was prospering; indeed, they hated it more than ever.
Every human being held it as an article of faith that the farm would go
bankrupt sooner or later, and, above all, that the windmill would be a
failure. They would meet in the public-houses and prove to one another by
means of diagrams that the windmill was bound to fall down, or that if it
did stand up, then that it would never work. And yet, against their will,
they had developed a certain respect for the efficiency with which the
animals were managing their own affairs. One symptom of this was that they
had begun to call Animal Farm by its proper name and ceased to pretend
that it was called the Manor Farm. They had also dropped their championship
of Jones, who had given up hope of getting his farm back and gone to live
in another part of the county. Except through Whymper, there was as yet no
contact between Animal Farm and the outside world, but there were constant
rumours that Napoleon was about to enter into a definite business agreement
either with Mr. Pilkington of Foxwood or with Mr. Frederick of
Pinchfield--but never, it was noticed, with both simultaneously.

It was about this time that the pigs suddenly moved into the farmhouse and
took up their residence there. Again the animals seemed to remember that a
resolution against this had been passed in the early days, and again
Squealer was able to convince them that this was not the case. It was
absolutely necessary, he said, that the pigs, who were the brains of the
farm, should have a quiet place to work in. It was also more suited to the
dignity of the Leader (for of late he had taken to speaking of Napoleon
under the title of "Leader") to live in a house than in a mere sty.
Nevertheless, some of the animals were disturbed when they heard that the
pigs not only took their meals in the kitchen and used the drawing-room
as a recreation room, but also slept in the beds. Boxer passed it off as
usual with "Napoleon is always right!", but Clover, who thought she
remembered a definite ruling against beds, went to the end of the barn and
tried to puzzle out the Seven Commandments which were inscribed there.
Finding herself unable to read more than individual letters, she fetched
Muriel.

"Muriel," she said, "read me the Fourth Commandment. Does it not say
something about never sleeping in a bed?"

With some difficulty Muriel spelt it out.

"It says, 'No animal shall sleep in a bed with sheets,"' she announced
finally.

Curiously enough, Clover had not remembered that the Fourth Commandment
mentioned sheets; but as it was there on the wall, it must have done so.
And Squealer, who happened to be passing at this moment, attended by two
or three dogs, was able to put the whole matter in its proper perspective.

"You have heard then, comrades," he said, "that we pigs now sleep in the
beds of the farmhouse? And why not? You did not suppose, surely, that
there was ever a ruling against beds? A bed merely means a place to sleep
in. A pile of straw in a stall is a bed, properly regarded. The rule was
against sheets, which are a human invention. We have removed the sheets
from the farmhouse beds, and sleep between blankets. And very comfortable
beds they are too! But not more comfortable than we need, I can tell you,
comrades, with all the brainwork we have to do nowadays. You would not rob
us of our repose, would you, comrades? You would not have us too tired to
carry out our duties? Surely none of you wishes to see Jones back?"

The animals reassured him on this point immediately, and no more was said
about the pigs sleeping in the farmhouse beds. And when, some days
afterwards, it was announced that from now on the pigs would get up an
hour later in the mornings than the other animals, no complaint was made
about that either.

By the autumn the animals were tired but happy. They had had a hard year,
and after the sale of part of the hay and corn, the stores of food for the
winter were none too plentiful, but the windmill compensated for
everything. It was almost half built now. After the harvest there was a
stretch of clear dry weather, and the animals toiled harder than ever,
thinking it well worth while to plod to and fro all day with blocks of
stone if by doing so they could raise the walls another foot. Boxer would
even come out at nights and work for an hour or two on his own by the
light of the harvest moon. In their spare moments the animals would walk
round and round the half-finished mill, admiring the strength and
perpendicularity of its walls and marvelling that they should ever have
been able to build anything so imposing. Only old Benjamin refused to grow
enthusiastic about the windmill, though, as usual, he would utter nothing
beyond the cryptic remark that donkeys live a long time.

November came, with raging south-west winds. Building had to stop because
it was now too wet to mix the cement. Finally there came a night when the
gale was so violent that the farm buildings rocked on their foundations
and several tiles were blown off the roof of the barn. The hens woke up
squawking with terror because they had all dreamed simultaneously of
hearing a gun go off in the distance. In the morning the animals came out
of their stalls to find that the flagstaff had been blown down and an elm
tree at the foot of the orchard had been plucked up like a radish. They
had just noticed this when a cry of despair broke from every animal's
throat. A terrible sight had met their eyes. The windmill was in ruins.

With one accord they dashed down to the spot. Napoleon, who seldom moved
out of a walk, raced ahead of them all. Yes, there it lay, the fruit of
all their struggles, levelled to its foundations, the stones they had
broken and carried so laboriously scattered all around. Unable at first to
speak, they stood gazing mournfully at the litter of fallen stone. Napoleon
paced to and fro in silence, occasionally snuffing at the ground. His tail
had grown rigid and twitched sharply from side to side, a sign in him of
intense mental activity. Suddenly he halted as though his mind were
made up.

"Comrades," he said quietly, "do you know who is responsible for this? Do
you know the enemy who has come in the night and overthrown our windmill?
SNOWBALL!" he suddenly roared in a voice of thunder. "Snowball has done
this thing! In sheer malignity, thinking to set back our plans and avenge
himself for his ignominious expulsion, this traitor has crept here under
cover of night and destroyed our work of nearly a year. Comrades, here
and now I pronounce the death sentence upon Snowball. 'Animal Hero, Second
Class,' and half a bushel of apples to any animal who brings him to
justice. A full bushel to anyone who captures him alive!"

The animals were shocked beyond measure to learn that even Snowball could
be guilty of such an action. There was a cry of indignation, and everyone
began thinking out ways of catching Snowball if he should ever come back.
Almost immediately the footprints of a pig were discovered in the grass at
a little distance from the knoll. They could only be traced for a few
yards, but appeared to lead to a hole in the hedge. Napoleon snuffed
deeply at them and pronounced them to be Snowball's. He gave it as his
opinion that Snowball had probably come from the direction of Foxwood Farm.

"No more delays, comrades!" cried Napoleon when the footprints had been
examined. "There is work to be done. This very morning we begin rebuilding
the windmill, and we will build all through the winter, rain or shine. We
will teach this miserable traitor that he cannot undo our work so easily.
Remember, comrades, there must be no alteration in our plans: they shall
be carried out to the day. Forward, comrades! Long live the windmill! Long
live Animal Farm!"




Chapter VII



It was a bitter winter. The stormy weather was followed by sleet and snow,
and then by a hard frost which did not break till well into February. The
animals carried on as best they could with the rebuilding of the windmill,
well knowing that the outside world was watching them and that the envious
human beings would rejoice and triumph if the mill were not finished
on time.

Out of spite, the human beings pretended not to believe that it was
Snowball who had destroyed the windmill: they said that it had fallen down
because the walls were too thin. The animals knew that this was not the
case. Still, it had been decided to build the walls three feet thick this
time instead of eighteen inches as before, which meant collecting much
larger quantities of stone. For a long time the quarry was full of
snowdrifts and nothing could be done. Some progress was made in the dry
frosty weather that followed, but it was cruel work, and the animals could
not feel so hopeful about it as they had felt before. They were always
cold, and usually hungry as well. Only Boxer and Clover never lost heart.
Squealer made excellent speeches on the joy of service and the dignity of
labour, but the other animals found more inspiration in Boxer's strength
and his never-failing cry of "I will work harder!"

In January food fell short. The corn ration was drastically reduced, and
it was announced that an extra potato ration would be issued to make up
for it. Then it was discovered that the greater part of the potato crop
had been frosted in the clamps, which had not been covered thickly enough.
The potatoes had become soft and discoloured, and only a few were edible.
For days at a time the animals had nothing to eat but chaff and mangels.
Starvation seemed to stare them in the face.

It was vitally necessary to conceal this fact from the outside world.
Emboldened by the collapse of the windmill, the human beings were
inventing fresh lies about Animal Farm. Once again it was being put about
that all the animals were dying of famine and disease, and that they were
continually fighting among themselves and had resorted to cannibalism and
infanticide. Napoleon was well aware of the bad results that might follow
if the real facts of the food situation were known, and he decided to make
use of Mr. Whymper to spread a contrary impression. Hitherto the animals
had had little or no contact with Whymper on his weekly visits: now,
however, a few selected animals, mostly sheep, were instructed to remark
casually in his hearing that rations had been increased. In addition,
Napoleon ordered the almost empty bins in the store-shed to be filled
nearly to the brim with sand, which was then covered up with what remained
of the grain and meal. On some suitable pretext Whymper was led through
the store-shed and allowed to catch a glimpse of the bins. He was
deceived, and continued to report to the outside world that there was no
food shortage on Animal Farm.

Nevertheless, towards the end of January it became obvious that it would
be necessary to procure some more grain from somewhere. In these days
Napoleon rarely appeared in public, but spent all his time in the
farmhouse, which was guarded at each door by fierce-looking dogs. When he
did emerge, it was in a ceremonial manner, with an escort of six dogs who
closely surrounded him and growled if anyone came too near. Frequently he
did not even appear on Sunday mornings, but issued his orders through one
of the other pigs, usually Squealer.

One Sunday morning Squealer announced that the hens, who had just come in
to lay again, must surrender their eggs. Napoleon had accepted, through
Whymper, a contract for four hundred eggs a week. The price of these would
pay for enough grain and meal to keep the farm going till summer came on
and conditions were easier.

When the hens heard this, they raised a terrible outcry. They had been
warned earlier that this sacrifice might be necessary, but had not
believed that it would really happen. They were just getting their
clutches ready for the spring sitting, and they protested that to take the
eggs away now was murder. For the first time since the expulsion of Jones,
there was something resembling a rebellion. Led by three young Black
Minorca pullets, the hens made a determined effort to thwart Napoleon's
wishes. Their method was to fly up to the rafters and there lay their
eggs, which smashed to pieces on the floor. Napoleon acted swiftly and
ruthlessly. He ordered the hens' rations to be stopped, and decreed that
any animal giving so much as a grain of corn to a hen should be punished
by death. The dogs saw to it that these orders were carried out. For five
days the hens held out, then they capitulated and went back to their
nesting boxes. Nine hens had died in the meantime. Their bodies were
buried in the orchard, and it was given out that they had died of
coccidiosis. Whymper heard nothing of this affair, and the eggs were duly
delivered, a grocer's van driving up to the farm once a week to take them
away.

All this while no more had been seen of Snowball. He was rumoured to be
hiding on one of the neighbouring farms, either Foxwood or Pinchfield.
Napoleon was by this time on slightly better terms with the other farmers
than before. It happened that there was in the yard a pile of timber which
had been stacked there ten years earlier when a beech spinney was cleared.
It was well seasoned, and Whymper had advised Napoleon to sell it; both
Mr. Pilkington and Mr. Frederick were anxious to buy it. Napoleon was
hesitating between the two, unable to make up his mind. It was noticed
that whenever he seemed on the point of coming to an agreement with
Frederick, Snowball was declared to be in hiding at Foxwood, while, when
he inclined toward Pilkington, Snowball was said to be at Pinchfield.

Suddenly, early in the spring, an alarming thing was discovered. Snowball
was secretly frequenting the farm by night! The animals were so disturbed
that they could hardly sleep in their stalls. Every night, it was said, he
came creeping in under cover of darkness and performed all kinds of
mischief. He stole the corn, he upset the milk-pails, he broke the eggs,
he trampled the seedbeds, he gnawed the bark off the fruit trees. Whenever
anything went wrong it became usual to attribute it to Snowball. If a
window was broken or a drain was blocked up, someone was certain to say
that Snowball had come in the night and done it, and when the key of the
store-shed was lost, the whole farm was convinced that Snowball had thrown
it down the well. Curiously enough, they went on believing this even after
the mislaid key was found under a sack of meal. The cows declared
unanimously that Snowball crept into their stalls and milked them in their
sleep. The rats, which had been troublesome that winter, were also said to
be in league with Snowball.

Napoleon decreed that there should be a full investigation into Snowball's
activities. With his dogs in attendance he set out and made a careful tour
of inspection of the farm buildings, the other animals following at a
respectful distance. At every few steps Napoleon stopped and snuffed the
ground for traces of Snowball's footsteps, which, he said, he could detect
by the smell. He snuffed in every corner, in the barn, in the cow-shed,
in the henhouses, in the vegetable garden, and found traces of Snowball
almost everywhere. He would put his snout to the ground, give several deep
sniffs, ad exclaim in a terrible voice, "Snowball! He has been here! I can
smell him distinctly!" and at the word "Snowball" all the dogs let out
blood-curdling growls and showed their side teeth.

The animals were thoroughly frightened. It seemed to them as though
Snowball were some kind of invisible influence, pervading the air about
them and menacing them with all kinds of dangers. In the evening Squealer
called them together, and with an alarmed expression on his face told
them that he had some serious news to report.

"Comrades!" cried Squealer, making little nervous skips, "a most terrible
thing has been discovered. Snowball has sold himself to Frederick of
Pinchfield Farm, who is even now plotting to attack us and take our farm
away from us! Snowball is to act as his guide when the attack begins. But
there is worse than that. We had thought that Snowball's rebellion was
caused simply by his vanity and ambition. But we were wrong, comrades. Do
you know what the real reason was? Snowball was in league with Jones from
the very start! He was Jones's secret agent all the time. It has all been
proved by documents which he left behind him and which we have only just
discovered. To my mind this explains a great deal, comrades. Did we not
see for ourselves how he attempted--fortunately without success--to get us
defeated and destroyed at the Battle of the Cowshed?"

The animals were stupefied. This was a wickedness far outdoing Snowball's
destruction of the windmill. But it was some minutes before they could
fully take it in. They all remembered, or thought they remembered, how
they had seen Snowball charging ahead of them at the Battle of the
Cowshed, how he had rallied and encouraged them at every turn, and how he
had not paused for an instant even when the pellets from Jones's gun had
wounded his back. At first it was a little difficult to see how this
fitted in with his being on Jones's side. Even Boxer, who seldom asked
questions, was puzzled. He lay down, tucked his fore hoofs beneath him,
shut his eyes, and with a hard effort managed to formulate his thoughts.

"I do not believe that," he said. "Snowball fought bravely at the Battle
of the Cowshed. I saw him myself. Did we not give him 'Animal Hero, first
Class,' immediately afterwards?"

"That was our mistake, comrade. For we know now--it is all written down in
the secret documents that we have found--that in reality he was trying to
lure us to our doom."

"But he was wounded," said Boxer. "We all saw him running with blood."

"That was part of the arrangement!" cried Squealer. "Jones's shot only
grazed him. I could show you this in his own writing, if you were able to
read it. The plot was for Snowball, at the critical moment, to give the
signal for flight and leave the field to the enemy. And he very nearly
succeeded--I will even say, comrades, he WOULD have succeeded if it had
not been for our heroic Leader, Comrade Napoleon. Do you not remember how,
just at the moment when Jones and his men had got inside the yard,
Snowball suddenly turned and fled, and many animals followed him? And do
you not remember, too, that it was just at that moment, when panic was
spreading and all seemed lost, that Comrade Napoleon sprang forward with a
cry of 'Death to Humanity!' and sank his teeth in Jones's leg? Surely you
remember THAT, comrades?" exclaimed Squealer, frisking from side to side.

Now when Squealer described the scene so graphically, it seemed to the
animals that they did remember it. At any rate, they remembered that at
the critical moment of the battle Snowball had turned to flee. But Boxer
was still a little uneasy.

"I do not believe that Snowball was a traitor at the beginning," he said
finally. "What he has done since is different. But I believe that at the
Battle of the Cowshed he was a good comrade."

"Our Leader, Comrade Napoleon," announced Squealer, speaking very slowly
and firmly, "has stated categorically--categorically, comrade--that
Snowball was Jones's agent from the very beginning--yes, and from long
before the Rebellion was ever thought of."

"Ah, that is different!" said Boxer. "If Comrade Napoleon says it, it must
be right."

"That is the true spirit, comrade!" cried Squealer, but it was noticed he
cast a very ugly look at Boxer with his little twinkling eyes. He turned
to go, then paused and added impressively: "I warn every animal on this
farm to keep his eyes very wide open. For we have reason to think that
some of Snowball's secret agents are lurking among us at this moment!"

Four days later, in the late afternoon, Napoleon ordered all the animals
to assemble in the yard. When they were all gathered together, Napoleon
emerged from the farmhouse, wearing both his medals (for he had recently
awarded himself "Animal Hero, First Class", and "Animal Hero, Second
Class"), with his nine huge dogs frisking round him and uttering growls
that sent shivers down all the animals' spines. They all cowered silently
in their places, seeming to know in advance that some terrible thing was
about to happen.

Napoleon stood sternly surveying his audience; then he uttered a
high-pitched whimper. Immediately the dogs bounded forward, seized four of
the pigs by the ear and dragged them, squealing with pain and terror, to
Napoleon's feet. The pigs' ears were bleeding, the dogs had tasted blood,
and for a few moments they appeared to go quite mad. To the amazement of
everybody, three of them flung themselves upon Boxer. Boxer saw them
coming and put out his great hoof, caught a dog in mid-air, and pinned
him to the ground. The dog shrieked for mercy and the other two fled with
their tails between their legs. Boxer looked at Napoleon to know whether
he should crush the dog to death or let it go. Napoleon appeared to change
countenance, and sharply ordered Boxer to let the dog go, whereat Boxer
lifted his hoof, and the dog slunk away, bruised and howling.

Presently the tumult died down. The four pigs waited, trembling, with
guilt written on every line of their countenances. Napoleon now called
upon them to confess their crimes. They were the same four pigs as had
protested when Napoleon abolished the Sunday Meetings. Without any further
prompting they confessed that they had been secretly in touch with
Snowball ever since his expulsion, that they had collaborated with him in
destroying the windmill, and that they had entered into an agreement with
him to hand over Animal Farm to Mr. Frederick. They added that Snowball
had privately admitted to them that he had been Jones's secret agent for
years past. When they had finished their confession, the dogs promptly
tore their throats out, and in a terrible voice Napoleon demanded whether
any other animal had anything to confess.

The three hens who had been the ringleaders in the attempted rebellion
over the eggs now came forward and stated that Snowball had appeared to
them in a dream and incited them to disobey Napoleon's orders. They, too,
were slaughtered. Then a goose came forward and confessed to having
secreted six ears of corn during the last year's harvest and eaten them in
the night. Then a sheep confessed to having urinated in the drinking
pool--urged to do this, so she said, by Snowball--and two other sheep
confessed to having murdered an old ram, an especially devoted follower of
Napoleon, by chasing him round and round a bonfire when he was suffering
from a cough. They were all slain on the spot. And so the tale of
confessions and executions went on, until there was a pile of corpses
lying before Napoleon's feet and the air was heavy with the smell of
blood, which had been unknown there since the expulsion of Jones.

When it was all over, the remaining animals, except for the pigs and dogs,
crept away in a body. They were shaken and miserable. They did not know
which was more shocking--the treachery of the animals who had leagued
themselves with Snowball, or the cruel retribution they had just
witnessed. In the old days there had often been scenes of bloodshed
equally terrible, but it seemed to all of them that it was far worse now
that it was happening among themselves. Since Jones had left the farm,
until today, no animal had killed another animal. Not even a rat had been
killed. They had made their way on to the little knoll where the
half-finished windmill stood, and with one accord they all lay down as
though huddling together for warmth--Clover, Muriel, Benjamin, the cows,
the sheep, and a whole flock of geese and hens--everyone, indeed, except
the cat, who had suddenly disappeared just before Napoleon ordered the
animals to assemble. For some time nobody spoke. Only Boxer remained on
his feet. He fidgeted to and fro, swishing his long black tail against his
sides and occasionally uttering a little whinny of surprise. Finally he
said:

"I do not understand it. I would not have believed that such things could
happen on our farm. It must be due to some fault in ourselves. The
solution, as I see it, is to work harder. From now onwards I shall get up
a full hour earlier in the mornings."

And he moved off at his lumbering trot and made for the quarry. Having got
there, he collected two successive loads of stone and dragged them down to
the windmill before retiring for the night.

The animals huddled about Clover, not speaking. The knoll where they were
lying gave them a wide prospect across the countryside. Most of Animal
Farm was within their view--the long pasture stretching down to the main
road, the hayfield, the spinney, the drinking pool, the ploughed fields
where the young wheat was thick and green, and the red roofs of the farm
buildings with the smoke curling from the chimneys. It was a clear spring
evening. The grass and the bursting hedges were gilded by the level rays
of the sun. Never had the farm--and with a kind of surprise they
remembered that it was their own farm, every inch of it their own
property--appeared to the animals so desirable a place. As Clover looked
down the hillside her eyes filled with tears. If she could have spoken her
thoughts, it would have been to say that this was not what they had aimed
at when they had set themselves years ago to work for the overthrow of the
human race. These scenes of terror and slaughter were not what they had
looked forward to on that night when old Major first stirred them to
rebellion. If she herself had had any picture of the future, it had been
of a society of animals set free from hunger and the whip, all equal, each
working according to his capacity, the strong protecting the weak, as she
had protected the lost brood of ducklings with her foreleg on the night of
Major's speech. Instead--she did not know why--they had come to a time
when no one dared speak his mind, when fierce, growling dogs roamed
everywhere, and when you had to watch your comrades torn to pieces after
confessing to shocking crimes. There was no thought of rebellion or
disobedience in her mind. She knew that, even as things were, they were
far better off than they had been in the days of Jones, and that before
all else it was needful to prevent the return of the human beings.
Whatever happened she would remain faithful, work hard, carry out the
orders that were given to her, and accept the leadership of Napoleon. But
still, it was not for this that she and all the other animals had hoped
and toiled. It was not for this that they had built the windmill and faced
the bullets of Jones's gun. Such were her thoughts, though she lacked the
words to express them.

At last, feeling this to be in some way a substitute for the words she was
unable to find, she began to sing 'Beasts of England'. The other animals
sitting round her took it up, and they sang it three times over--very
tunefully, but slowly and mournfully, in a way they had never sung it
before.

They had just finished singing it for the third time when Squealer,
attended by two dogs, approached them with the air of having something
important to say. He announced that, by a special decree of Comrade
Napoleon, 'Beasts of England' had been abolished. From now onwards it was
forbidden to sing it.

The animals were taken aback.

"Why?" cried Muriel.

"It's no longer needed, comrade," said Squealer stiffly. "'Beasts of
England' was the song of the Rebellion. But the Rebellion is now
completed. The execution of the traitors this afternoon was the final act.
The enemy both external and internal has been defeated. In 'Beasts of
England' we expressed our longing for a better society in days to come.
But that society has now been established. Clearly this song has no longer
any purpose."

Frightened though they were, some of the animals might possibly have
protested, but at this moment the sheep set up their usual bleating of
"Four legs good, two legs bad," which went on for several minutes and put
an end to the discussion.

So 'Beasts of England' was heard no more. In its place Minimus, the poet,
had composed another song which began:


Animal Farm, Animal Farm,
Never through me shalt thou come to harm!


and this was sung every Sunday morning after the hoisting of the flag.
But somehow neither the words nor the tune ever seemed to the animals to
come up to 'Beasts of England'.




Chapter VIII



A few days later, when the terror caused by the executions had died down,
some of the animals remembered--or thought they remembered--that the Sixth
Commandment decreed "No animal shall kill any other animal." And though no
one cared to mention it in the hearing of the pigs or the dogs, it was
felt that the killings which had taken place did not square with this.
Clover asked Benjamin to read her the Sixth Commandment, and when
Benjamin, as usual, said that he refused to meddle in such matters, she
fetched Muriel. Muriel read the Commandment for her. It ran: "No animal
shall kill any other animal WITHOUT CAUSE." Somehow or other, the last two
words had slipped out of the animals' memory. But they saw now that the
Commandment had not been violated; for clearly there was good reason for
killing the traitors who had leagued themselves with Snowball.

Throughout the year the animals worked even harder than they had worked in
the previous year. To rebuild the windmill, with walls twice as thick as
before, and to finish it by the appointed date, together with the regular
work of the farm, was a tremendous labour. There were times when it seemed
to the animals that they worked longer hours and fed no better than they
had done in Jones's day. On Sunday mornings Squealer, holding down a long
strip of paper with his trotter, would read out to them lists of figures
proving that the production of every class of foodstuff had increased by
two hundred per cent, three hundred per cent, or five hundred per cent,
as the case might be. The animals saw no reason to disbelieve him,
especially as they could no longer remember very clearly what conditions
had been like before the Rebellion. All the same, there were days when
they felt that they would sooner have had less figures and more food.

All orders were now issued through Squealer or one of the other pigs.
Napoleon himself was not seen in public as often as once in a fortnight.
When he did appear, he was attended not only by his retinue of dogs but by
a black cockerel who marched in front of him and acted as a kind of
trumpeter, letting out a loud "cock-a-doodle-doo" before Napoleon spoke.
Even in the farmhouse, it was said, Napoleon inhabited separate apartments
from the others. He took his meals alone, with two dogs to wait upon him,
and always ate from the Crown Derby dinner service which had been in the
glass cupboard in the drawing-room. It was also announced that the gun
would be fired every year on Napoleon's birthday, as well as on the other
two anniversaries.

Napoleon was now never spoken of simply as "Napoleon." He was always
referred to in formal style as "our Leader, Comrade Napoleon," and this
pigs liked to invent for him such titles as Father of All Animals, Terror
of Mankind, Protector of the Sheep-fold, Ducklings' Friend, and the like.
In his speeches, Squealer would talk with the tears rolling down his
cheeks of Napoleon's wisdom the goodness of his heart, and the deep love
he bore to all animals everywhere, even and especially the unhappy animals
who still lived in ignorance and slavery on other farms. It had become
usual to give Napoleon the credit for every successful achievement and
every stroke of good fortune. You would often hear one hen remark to
another, "Under the guidance of our Leader, Comrade Napoleon, I have laid
five eggs in six days"; or two cows, enjoying a drink at the pool, would
exclaim, "Thanks to the leadership of Comrade Napoleon, how excellent this
water tastes!" The general feeling on the farm was well expressed in a
poem entitled Comrade Napoleon, which was composed by Minimus and which
ran as follows:


Friend of fatherless!
Fountain of happiness!
Lord of the swill-bucket! Oh, how my soul is on
Fire when I gaze at thy
Calm and commanding eye,
Like the sun in the sky,
Comrade Napoleon!

Thou are the giver of
All that thy creatures love,
Full belly twice a day, clean straw to roll upon;
Every beast great or small
Sleeps at peace in his stall,
Thou watchest over all,
Comrade Napoleon!

Had I a sucking-pig,
Ere he had grown as big
Even as a pint bottle or as a rolling-pin,
He should have learned to be
Faithful and true to thee,
Yes, his first squeak should be
"Comrade Napoleon!"


Napoleon approved of this poem and caused it to be inscribed on the wall
of the big barn, at the opposite end from the Seven Commandments. It was
surmounted by a portrait of Napoleon, in profile, executed by Squealer in
white paint.

Meanwhile, through the agency of Whymper, Napoleon was engaged in
complicated negotiations with Frederick and Pilkington. The pile of timber
was still unsold. Of the two, Frederick was the more anxious to get hold
of it, but he would not offer a reasonable price. At the same time there
were renewed rumours that Frederick and his men were plotting to attack
Animal Farm and to destroy the windmill, the building of which had aroused
furious jealousy in him. Snowball was known to be still skulking on
Pinchfield Farm. In the middle of the summer the animals were alarmed to
hear that three hens had come forward and confessed that, inspired by
Snowball, they had entered into a plot to murder Napoleon. They were
executed immediately, and fresh precautions for Napoleon's safety were
taken. Four dogs guarded his bed at night, one at each corner, and a young
pig named Pinkeye was given the task of tasting all his food before he ate
it, lest it should be poisoned.

At about the same time it was given out that Napoleon had arranged to sell
the pile of timber to Mr. Pilkington; he was also going to enter into a
regular agreement for the exchange of certain products between Animal Farm
and Foxwood. The relations between Napoleon and Pilkington, though they
were only conducted through Whymper, were now almost friendly. The animals
distrusted Pilkington, as a human being, but greatly preferred him to
Frederick, whom they both feared and hated. As the summer wore on, and the
windmill neared completion, the rumours of an impending treacherous attack
grew stronger and stronger. Frederick, it was said, intended to bring
against them twenty men all armed with guns, and he had already bribed the
magistrates and police, so that if he could once get hold of the
title-deeds of Animal Farm they would ask no questions. Moreover, terrible
stories were leaking out from Pinchfield about the cruelties that
Frederick practised upon his animals. He had flogged an old horse to
death, he starved his cows, he had killed a dog by throwing it into the
furnace, he amused himself in the evenings by making cocks fight with
splinters of razor-blade tied to their spurs. The animals' blood boiled
with rage when they heard of these things being done to their comrades,
and sometimes they clamoured to be allowed to go out in a body and attack
Pinchfield Farm, drive out the humans, and set the animals free. But
Squealer counselled them to avoid rash actions and trust in Comrade
Napoleon's strategy.

Nevertheless, feeling against Frederick continued to run high. One Sunday
morning Napoleon appeared in the barn and explained that he had never at
any time contemplated selling the pile of timber to Frederick; he
considered it beneath his dignity, he said, to have dealings with
scoundrels of that description. The pigeons who were still sent out to
spread tidings of the Rebellion were forbidden to set foot anywhere on
Foxwood, and were also ordered to drop their former slogan of "Death to
Humanity" in favour of "Death to Frederick." In the late summer yet
another of Snowball's machinations was laid bare. The wheat crop was full
of weeds, and it was discovered that on one of his nocturnal visits
Snowball had mixed weed seeds with the seed corn. A gander who had been
privy to the plot had confessed his guilt to Squealer and immediately
committed suicide by swallowing deadly nightshade berries. The animals
now also learned that Snowball had never--as many of them had believed
hitherto--received the order of "Animal Hero, First Class." This was
merely a legend which had been spread some time after the Battle of the
Cowshed by Snowball himself. So far from being decorated, he had been
censured for showing cowardice in the battle. Once again some of the
animals heard this with a certain bewilderment, but Squealer was soon able
to convince them that their memories had been at fault.

In the autumn, by a tremendous, exhausting effort--for the harvest had to
be gathered at almost the same time--the windmill was finished. The
machinery had still to be installed, and Whymper was negotiating the
purchase of it, but the structure was completed. In the teeth of every
difficulty, in spite of inexperience, of primitive implements, of bad luck
and of Snowball's treachery, the work had been finished punctually to the
very day! Tired out but proud, the animals walked round and round their
masterpiece, which appeared even more beautiful in their eyes than when it
had been built the first time. Moreover, the walls were twice as thick as
before. Nothing short of explosives would lay them low this time! And when
they thought of how they had laboured, what discouragements they had
overcome, and the enormous difference that would be made in their lives
when the sails were turning and the dynamos running--when they thought of
all this, their tiredness forsook them and they gambolled round and round
the windmill, uttering cries of triumph. Napoleon himself, attended by his
dogs and his cockerel, came down to inspect the completed work; he
personally congratulated the animals on their achievement, and announced
that the mill would be named Napoleon Mill.

Two days later the animals were called together for a special meeting in
the barn. They were struck dumb with surprise when Napoleon announced that
he had sold the pile of timber to Frederick. Tomorrow Frederick's wagons
would arrive and begin carting it away. Throughout the whole period of his
seeming friendship with Pilkington, Napoleon had really been in secret
agreement with Frederick.

All relations with Foxwood had been broken off; insulting messages had
been sent to Pilkington. The pigeons had been told to avoid Pinchfield
Farm and to alter their slogan from "Death to Frederick" to "Death to
Pilkington." At the same time Napoleon assured the animals that the
stories of an impending attack on Animal Farm were completely untrue, and
that the tales about Frederick's cruelty to his own animals had been
greatly exaggerated. All these rumours had probably originated with
Snowball and his agents. It now appeared that Snowball was not, after all,
hiding on Pinchfield Farm, and in fact had never been there in his life:
he was living--in considerable luxury, so it was said--at Foxwood, and had
in reality been a pensioner of Pilkington for years past.

The pigs were in ecstasies over Napoleon's cunning. By seeming to be
friendly with Pilkington he had forced Frederick to raise his price by
twelve pounds. But the superior quality of Napoleon's mind, said Squealer,
was shown in the fact that he trusted nobody, not even Frederick.
Frederick had wanted to pay for the timber with something called a cheque,
which, it seemed, was a piece of paper with a promise to pay written upon
it. But Napoleon was too clever for him. He had demanded payment in real
five-pound notes, which were to be handed over before the timber was
removed. Already Frederick had paid up; and the sum he had paid was just
enough to buy the machinery for the windmill.

Meanwhile the timber was being carted away at high speed. When it was all
gone, another special meeting was held in the barn for the animals to
inspect Frederick's bank-notes. Smiling beatifically, and wearing both his
decorations, Napoleon reposed on a bed of straw on the platform, with the
money at his side, neatly piled on a china dish from the farmhouse
kitchen. The animals filed slowly past, and each gazed his fill. And Boxer
put out his nose to sniff at the bank-notes, and the flimsy white things
stirred and rustled in his breath.

Three days later there was a terrible hullabaloo. Whymper, his face deadly
pale, came racing up the path on his bicycle, flung it down in the yard
and rushed straight into the farmhouse. The next moment a choking roar of
rage sounded from Napoleon's apartments. The news of what had happened
sped round the farm like wildfire. The banknotes were forgeries! Frederick
had got the timber for nothing!

Napoleon called the animals together immediately and in a terrible voice
pronounced the death sentence upon Frederick. When captured, he said,
Frederick should be boiled alive. At the same time he warned them that
after this treacherous deed the worst was to be expected. Frederick and
his men might make their long-expected attack at any moment. Sentinels
were placed at all the approaches to the farm. In addition, four pigeons
were sent to Foxwood with a conciliatory message, which it was hoped might
re-establish good relations with Pilkington.

The very next morning the attack came. The animals were at breakfast when
the look-outs came racing in with the news that Frederick and his
followers had already come through the five-barred gate. Boldly enough the
animals sallied forth to meet them, but this time they did not have the
easy victory that they had had in the Battle of the Cowshed. There were
fifteen men, with half a dozen guns between them, and they opened fire as
soon as they got within fifty yards. The animals could not face the
terrible explosions and the stinging pellets, and in spite of the efforts
of Napoleon and Boxer to rally them, they were soon driven back. A number
of them were already wounded. They took refuge in the farm buildings and
peeped cautiously out from chinks and knot-holes. The whole of the big
pasture, including the windmill, was in the hands of the enemy. For the
moment even Napoleon seemed at a loss. He paced up and down without a
word, his tail rigid and twitching. Wistful glances were sent in the
direction of Foxwood. If Pilkington and his men would help them, the day
might yet be won. But at this moment the four pigeons, who had been sent
out on the day before, returned, one of them bearing a scrap of paper from
Pilkington. On it was pencilled the words: "Serves you right."

Meanwhile Frederick and his men had halted about the windmill. The animals
watched them, and a murmur of dismay went round. Two of the men had
produced a crowbar and a sledge hammer. They were going to knock the
windmill down.

"Impossible!" cried Napoleon. "We have built the walls far too thick for
that. They could not knock it down in a week. Courage, comrades!"

But Benjamin was watching the movements of the men intently. The two with
the hammer and the crowbar were drilling a hole near the base of the
windmill. Slowly, and with an air almost of amusement, Benjamin nodded his
long muzzle.

"I thought so," he said. "Do you not see what they are doing? In another
moment they are going to pack blasting powder into that hole."

Terrified, the animals waited. It was impossible now to venture out of the
shelter of the buildings. After a few minutes the men were seen to be
running in all directions. Then there was a deafening roar. The pigeons
swirled into the air, and all the animals, except Napoleon, flung
themselves flat on their bellies and hid their faces. When they got up
again, a huge cloud of black smoke was hanging where the windmill had
been. Slowly the breeze drifted it away. The windmill had ceased to exist!

At this sight the animals' courage returned to them. The fear and despair
they had felt a moment earlier were drowned in their rage against this
vile, contemptible act. A mighty cry for vengeance went up, and without
waiting for further orders they charged forth in a body and made straight
for the enemy. This time they did not heed the cruel pellets that swept
over them like hail. It was a savage, bitter battle. The men fired again
and again, and, when the animals got to close quarters, lashed out with
their sticks and their heavy boots. A cow, three sheep, and two geese were
killed, and nearly everyone was wounded. Even Napoleon, who was directing
operations from the rear, had the tip of his tail chipped by a pellet. But
the men did not go unscathed either. Three of them had their heads broken
by blows from Boxer's hoofs; another was gored in the belly by a cow's
horn; another had his trousers nearly torn off by Jessie and Bluebell. And
when the nine dogs of Napoleon's own bodyguard, whom he had instructed to
make a detour under cover of the hedge, suddenly appeared on the men's
flank, baying ferociously, panic overtook them. They saw that they were in
danger of being surrounded. Frederick shouted to his men to get out while
the going was good, and the next moment the cowardly enemy was running for
dear life. The animals chased them right down to the bottom of the field,
and got in some last kicks at them as they forced their way through the
thorn hedge.

They had won, but they were weary and bleeding. Slowly they began to limp
back towards the farm. The sight of their dead comrades stretched upon the
grass moved some of them to tears. And for a little while they halted in
sorrowful silence at the place where the windmill had once stood. Yes, it
was gone; almost the last trace of their labour was gone! Even the
foundations were partially destroyed. And in rebuilding it they could not
this time, as before, make use of the fallen stones. This time the stones
had vanished too. The force of the explosion had flung them to distances
of hundreds of yards. It was as though the windmill had never been.

As they approached the farm Squealer, who had unaccountably been absent
during the fighting, came skipping towards them, whisking his tail and
beaming with satisfaction. And the animals heard, from the direction of
the farm buildings, the solemn booming of a gun.

"What is that gun firing for?" said Boxer.

"To celebrate our victory!" cried Squealer.

"What victory?" said Boxer. His knees were bleeding, he had lost a shoe
and split his hoof, and a dozen pellets had lodged themselves in his hind
leg.

"What victory, comrade? Have we not driven the enemy off our soil--the
sacred soil of Animal Farm?"

"But they have destroyed the windmill. And we had worked on it for two
years!"

"What matter? We will build another windmill. We will build six windmills
if we feel like it. You do not appreciate, comrade, the mighty thing that
we have done. The enemy was in occupation of this very ground that we
stand upon. And now--thanks to the leadership of Comrade Napoleon--we have
won every inch of it back again!"

"Then we have won back what we had before," said Boxer.

"That is our victory," said Squealer.

They limped into the yard. The pellets under the skin of Boxer's leg
smarted painfully. He saw ahead of him the heavy labour of rebuilding the
windmill from the foundations, and already in imagination he braced
himself for the task. But for the first time it occurred to him that he
was eleven years old and that perhaps his great muscles were not quite
what they had once been.

But when the animals saw the green flag flying, and heard the gun firing
again--seven times it was fired in all--and heard the speech that Napoleon
made, congratulating them on their conduct, it did seem to them after all
that they had won a great victory. The animals slain in the battle were
given a solemn funeral. Boxer and Clover pulled the wagon which served as
a hearse, and Napoleon himself walked at the head of the procession. Two
whole days were given over to celebrations. There were songs, speeches,
and more firing of the gun, and a special gift of an apple was bestowed on
every animal, with two ounces of corn for each bird and three biscuits for
each dog. It was announced that the battle would be called the Battle of
the Windmill, and that Napoleon had created a new decoration, the Order
of the Green Banner, which he had conferred upon himself. In the general
rejoicings the unfortunate affair of the banknotes was forgotten.

It was a few days later than this that the pigs came upon a case of whisky
in the cellars of the farmhouse. It had been overlooked at the time when
the house was first occupied. That night there came from the farmhouse the
sound of loud singing, in which, to everyone's surprise, the strains of
'Beasts of England' were mixed up. At about half past nine Napoleon,
wearing an old bowler hat of Mr. Jones's, was distinctly seen to emerge
from the back door, gallop rapidly round the yard, and disappear indoors
again. But in the morning a deep silence hung over the farmhouse. Not a
pig appeared to be stirring. It was nearly nine o'clock when Squealer made
his appearance, walking slowly and dejectedly, his eyes dull, his tail
hanging limply behind him, and with every appearance of being seriously
ill. He called the animals together and told them that he had a terrible
piece of news to impart. Comrade Napoleon was dying!

A cry of lamentation went up. Straw was laid down outside the doors of the
farmhouse, and the animals walked on tiptoe. With tears in their eyes they
asked one another what they should do if their Leader were taken away from
them. A rumour went round that Snowball had after all contrived to
introduce poison into Napoleon's food. At eleven o'clock Squealer came
out to make another announcement. As his last act upon earth, Comrade
Napoleon had pronounced a solemn decree: the drinking of alcohol was to be
punished by death.

By the evening, however, Napoleon appeared to be somewhat better, and the
following morning Squealer was able to tell them that he was well on the
way to recovery. By the evening of that day Napoleon was back at work, and
on the next day it was learned that he had instructed Whymper to purchase
in Willingdon some booklets on brewing and distilling. A week later
Napoleon gave orders that the small paddock beyond the orchard, which it
had previously been intended to set aside as a grazing-ground for animals
who were past work, was to be ploughed up. It was given out that the
pasture was exhausted and needed re-seeding; but it soon became known that
Napoleon intended to sow it with barley.

About this time there occurred a strange incident which hardly anyone was
able to understand. One night at about twelve o'clock there was a loud
crash in the yard, and the animals rushed out of their stalls. It was a
moonlit night. At the foot of the end wall of the big barn, where the
Seven Commandments were written, there lay a ladder broken in two pieces.
Squealer, temporarily stunned, was sprawling beside it, and near at hand
there lay a lantern, a paint-brush, and an overturned pot of white paint.
The dogs immediately made a ring round Squealer, and escorted him back to
the farmhouse as soon as he was able to walk. None of the animals could
form any idea as to what this meant, except old Benjamin, who nodded his
muzzle with a knowing air, and seemed to understand, but would say nothing.

But a few days later Muriel, reading over the Seven Commandments to
herself, noticed that there was yet another of them which the animals had
remembered wrong. They had thought the Fifth Commandment was "No animal
shall drink alcohol," but there were two words that they had forgotten.
Actually the Commandment read: "No animal shall drink alcohol TO EXCESS."




Chapter IX



Boxer's split hoof was a long time in healing. They had started the
rebuilding of the windmill the day after the victory celebrations were
ended. Boxer refused to take even a day off work, and made it a point of
honour not to let it be seen that he was in pain. In the evenings he would
admit privately to Clover that the hoof troubled him a great deal. Clover
treated the hoof with poultices of herbs which she prepared by chewing
them, and both she and Benjamin urged Boxer to work less hard. "A horse's
lungs do not last for ever," she said to him. But Boxer would not listen.
He had, he said, only one real ambition left--to see the windmill well
under way before he reached the age for retirement.

At the beginning, when the laws of Animal Farm were first formulated,
the retiring age had been fixed for horses and pigs at twelve, for cows at
fourteen, for dogs at nine, for sheep at seven, and for hens and geese at
five. Liberal old-age pensions had been agreed upon. As yet no animal had
actually retired on pension, but of late the subject had been discussed
more and more. Now that the small field beyond the orchard had been set
aside for barley, it was rumoured that a corner of the large pasture was
to be fenced off and turned into a grazing-ground for superannuated
animals. For a horse, it was said, the pension would be five pounds of
corn a day and, in winter, fifteen pounds of hay, with a carrot or
possibly an apple on public holidays. Boxer's twelfth birthday was due in
the late summer of the following year.

Meanwhile life was hard. The winter was as cold as the last one had been,
and food was even shorter. Once again all rations were reduced, except
those of the pigs and the dogs. A too rigid equality in rations, Squealer
explained, would have been contrary to the principles of Animalism. In any
case he had no difficulty in proving to the other animals that they were
NOT in reality short of food, whatever the appearances might be. For the
time being, certainly, it had been found necessary to make a readjustment
of rations (Squealer always spoke of it as a "readjustment," never as a
"reduction"), but in comparison with the days of Jones, the improvement
was enormous. Reading out the figures in a shrill, rapid voice, he proved
to them in detail that they had more oats, more hay, more turnips than
they had had in Jones's day, that they worked shorter hours, that their
drinking water was of better quality, that they lived longer, that a
larger proportion of their young ones survived infancy, and that they had
more straw in their stalls and suffered less from fleas. The animals
believed every word of it. Truth to tell, Jones and all he stood for had
almost faded out of their memories. They knew that life nowadays was harsh
and bare, that they were often hungry and often cold, and that they were
usually working when they were not asleep. But doubtless it had been worse
in the old days. They were glad to believe so. Besides, in those days they
had been slaves and now they were free, and that made all the difference,
as Squealer did not fail to point out.

There were many more mouths to feed now. In the autumn the four sows had
all littered about simultaneously, producing thirty-one young pigs between
them. The young pigs were piebald, and as Napoleon was the only boar on
the farm, it was possible to guess at their parentage. It was announced
that later, when bricks and timber had been purchased, a schoolroom would
be built in the farmhouse garden. For the time being, the young pigs were
given their instruction by Napoleon himself in the farmhouse kitchen. They
took their exercise in the garden, and were discouraged from playing with
the other young animals. About this time, too, it was laid down as a rule
that when a pig and any other animal met on the path, the other animal
must stand aside: and also that all pigs, of whatever degree, were to have
the privilege of wearing green ribbons on their tails on Sundays.

The farm had had a fairly successful year, but was still short of money.
There were the bricks, sand, and lime for the schoolroom to be purchased,
and it would also be necessary to begin saving up again for the machinery
for the windmill. Then there were lamp oil and candles for the house,
sugar for Napoleon's own table (he forbade this to the other pigs, on the
ground that it made them fat), and all the usual replacements such as
tools, nails, string, coal, wire, scrap-iron, and dog biscuits. A stump of
hay and part of the potato crop were sold off, and the contract for eggs
was increased to six hundred a week, so that that year the hens barely
hatched enough chicks to keep their numbers at the same level. Rations,
reduced in December, were reduced again in February, and lanterns in the
stalls were forbidden to save oil. But the pigs seemed comfortable enough,
and in fact were putting on weight if anything. One afternoon in late
February a warm, rich, appetising scent, such as the animals had never
smelt before, wafted itself across the yard from the little brew-house,
which had been disused in Jones's time, and which stood beyond the
kitchen. Someone said it was the smell of cooking barley. The animals
sniffed the air hungrily and wondered whether a warm mash was being
prepared for their supper. But no warm mash appeared, and on the following
Sunday it was announced that from now onwards all barley would be reserved
for the pigs. The field beyond the orchard had already been sown with
barley. And the news soon leaked out that every pig was now receiving a
ration of a pint of beer daily, with half a gallon for Napoleon himself,
which was always served to him in the Crown Derby soup tureen.

But if there were hardships to be borne, they were partly offset by the
fact that life nowadays had a greater dignity than it had had before.
There were more songs, more speeches, more processions. Napoleon had
commanded that once a week there should be held something called a
Spontaneous Demonstration, the object of which was to celebrate the
struggles and triumphs of Animal Farm. At the appointed time the animals
would leave their work and march round the precincts of the farm in
military formation, with the pigs leading, then the horses, then the cows,
then the sheep, and then the poultry. The dogs flanked the procession and
at the head of all marched Napoleon's black cockerel. Boxer and Clover
always carried between them a green banner marked with the hoof and the
horn and the caption, "Long live Comrade Napoleon!" Afterwards there were
recitations of poems composed in Napoleon's honour, and a speech by
Squealer giving particulars of the latest increases in the production of
foodstuffs, and on occasion a shot was fired from the gun. The sheep were
the greatest devotees of the Spontaneous Demonstration, and if anyone
complained (as a few animals sometimes did, when no pigs or dogs were near)
that they wasted time and meant a lot of standing about in the cold, the
sheep were sure to silence him with a tremendous bleating of "Four legs
good, two legs bad!" But by and large the animals enjoyed these
celebrations. They found it comforting to be reminded that, after all,
they were truly their own masters and that the work they did was for their
own benefit. So that, what with the songs, the processions, Squealer's
lists of figures, the thunder of the gun, the crowing of the cockerel,
and the fluttering of the flag, they were able to forget that their
bellies were empty, at least part of the time.

In April, Animal Farm was proclaimed a Republic, and it became necessary
to elect a President. There was only one candidate, Napoleon, who was
elected unanimously. On the same day it was given out that fresh documents
had been discovered which revealed further details about Snowball's
complicity with Jones. It now appeared that Snowball had not, as the
animals had previously imagined, merely attempted to lose the Battle of
the Cowshed by means of a stratagem, but had been openly fighting on
Jones's side. In fact, it was he who had actually been the leader of the
human forces, and had charged into battle with the words "Long live
Humanity!" on his lips. The wounds on Snowball's back, which a few of the
animals still remembered to have seen, had been inflicted by Napoleon's
teeth.

In the middle of the summer Moses the raven suddenly reappeared on the
farm, after an absence of several years. He was quite unchanged, still did
no work, and talked in the same strain as ever about Sugarcandy Mountain.
He would perch on a stump, flap his black wings, and talk by the hour to
anyone who would listen. "Up there, comrades," he would say solemnly,
pointing to the sky with his large beak--"up there, just on the other side
of that dark cloud that you can see--there it lies, Sugarcandy Mountain,
that happy country where we poor animals shall rest for ever from our
labours!" He even claimed to have been there on one of his higher flights,
and to have seen the everlasting fields of clover and the linseed cake and
lump sugar growing on the hedges. Many of the animals believed him. Their
lives now, they reasoned, were hungry and laborious; was it not right and
just that a better world should exist somewhere else? A thing that was
difficult to determine was the attitude of the pigs towards Moses. They
all declared contemptuously that his stories about Sugarcandy Mountain
were lies, and yet they allowed him to remain on the farm, not working,
with an allowance of a gill of beer a day.

After his hoof had healed up, Boxer worked harder than ever. Indeed, all
the animals worked like slaves that year. Apart from the regular work of
the farm, and the rebuilding of the windmill, there was the schoolhouse
for the young pigs, which was started in March. Sometimes the long hours
on insufficient food were hard to bear, but Boxer never faltered. In
nothing that he said or did was there any sign that his strength was not
what it had been. It was only his appearance that was a little altered;
his hide was less shiny than it had used to be, and his great haunches
seemed to have shrunken. The others said, "Boxer will pick up when the
spring grass comes on"; but the spring came and Boxer grew no fatter.
Sometimes on the slope leading to the top of the quarry, when he braced
his muscles against the weight of some vast boulder, it seemed that
nothing kept him on his feet except the will to continue. At such times
his lips were seen to form the words, "I will work harder"; he had no
voice left. Once again Clover and Benjamin warned him to take care of his
health, but Boxer paid no attention. His twelfth birthday was approaching.
He did not care what happened so long as a good store of stone was
accumulated before he went on pension.

Late one evening in the summer, a sudden rumour ran round the farm that
something had happened to Boxer. He had gone out alone to drag a load of
stone down to the windmill. And sure enough, the rumour was true. A few
minutes later two pigeons came racing in with the news; "Boxer has fallen!
He is lying on his side and can't get up!"

About half the animals on the farm rushed out to the knoll where the
windmill stood. There lay Boxer, between the shafts of the cart, his neck
stretched out, unable even to raise his head. His eyes were glazed, his
sides matted with sweat. A thin stream of blood had trickled out of his
mouth. Clover dropped to her knees at his side.

"Boxer!" she cried, "how are you?"

"It is my lung," said Boxer in a weak voice. "It does not matter. I think
you will be able to finish the windmill without me. There is a pretty good
store of stone accumulated. I had only another month to go in any case.
To tell you the truth, I had been looking forward to my retirement. And
perhaps, as Benjamin is growing old too, they will let him retire at the
same time and be a companion to me."

"We must get help at once," said Clover. "Run, somebody, and tell Squealer
what has happened."

All the other animals immediately raced back to the farmhouse to give
Squealer the news. Only Clover remained, and Benjamin who lay down at
Boxer's side, and, without speaking, kept the flies off him with his long
tail. After about a quarter of an hour Squealer appeared, full of sympathy
and concern. He said that Comrade Napoleon had learned with the very
deepest distress of this misfortune to one of the most loyal workers on
the farm, and was already making arrangements to send Boxer to be treated
in the hospital at Willingdon. The animals felt a little uneasy at this.
Except for Mollie and Snowball, no other animal had ever left the farm,
and they did not like to think of their sick comrade in the hands of human
beings. However, Squealer easily convinced them that the veterinary
surgeon in Willingdon could treat Boxer's case more satisfactorily than
could be done on the farm. And about half an hour later, when Boxer had
somewhat recovered, he was with difficulty got on to his feet, and managed
to limp back to his stall, where Clover and Benjamin had prepared a good
bed of straw for him.

For the next two days Boxer remained in his stall. The pigs had sent out a
large bottle of pink medicine which they had found in the medicine chest
in the bathroom, and Clover administered it to Boxer twice a day after
meals. In the evenings she lay in his stall and talked to him, while
Benjamin kept the flies off him. Boxer professed not to be sorry for what
had happened. If he made a good recovery, he might expect to live another
three years, and he looked forward to the peaceful days that he would
spend in the corner of the big pasture. It would be the first time that he
had had leisure to study and improve his mind. He intended, he said, to
devote the rest of his life to learning the remaining twenty-two letters
of the alphabet.

However, Benjamin and Clover could only be with Boxer after working hours,
and it was in the middle of the day when the van came to take him away.
The animals were all at work weeding turnips under the supervision of a
pig, when they were astonished to see Benjamin come galloping from the
direction of the farm buildings, braying at the top of his voice. It was
the first time that they had ever seen Benjamin excited--indeed, it was
the first time that anyone had ever seen him gallop. "Quick, quick!" he
shouted. "Come at once! They're taking Boxer away!" Without waiting for
orders from the pig, the animals broke off work and raced back to the farm
buildings. Sure enough, there in the yard was a large closed van, drawn by
two horses, with lettering on its side and a sly-looking man in a
low-crowned bowler hat sitting on the driver's seat. And Boxer's stall was
empty.

The animals crowded round the van. "Good-bye, Boxer!" they chorused,
"good-bye!"

"Fools! Fools!" shouted Benjamin, prancing round them and stamping the
earth with his small hoofs. "Fools! Do you not see what is written on the
side of that van?"

That gave the animals pause, and there was a hush. Muriel began to spell
out the words. But Benjamin pushed her aside and in the midst of a deadly
silence he read:

"'Alfred Simmonds, Horse Slaughterer and Glue Boiler, Willingdon. Dealer
in Hides and Bone-Meal. Kennels Supplied.' Do you not understand what that
means? They are taking Boxer to the knacker's!"

A cry of horror burst from all the animals. At this moment the man on the
box whipped up his horses and the van moved out of the yard at a smart
trot. All the animals followed, crying out at the tops of their voices.
Clover forced her way to the front. The van began to gather speed. Clover
tried to stir her stout limbs to a gallop, and achieved a canter. "Boxer!"
she cried. "Boxer! Boxer! Boxer!" And just at this moment, as though he
had heard the uproar outside, Boxer's face, with the white stripe down his
nose, appeared at the small window at the back of the van.

"Boxer!" cried Clover in a terrible voice. "Boxer! Get out! Get out
quickly! They're taking you to your death!"

All the animals took up the cry of "Get out, Boxer, get out!" But the van
was already gathering speed and drawing away from them. It was uncertain
whether Boxer had understood what Clover had said. But a moment later his
face disappeared from the window and there was the sound of a tremendous
drumming of hoofs inside the van. He was trying to kick his way out. The
time had been when a few kicks from Boxer's hoofs would have smashed the
van to matchwood. But alas! his strength had left him; and in a few
moments the sound of drumming hoofs grew fainter and died away. In
desperation the animals began appealing to the two horses which drew the
van to stop. "Comrades, comrades!" they shouted. "Don't take your own
brother to his death!" But the stupid brutes, too ignorant to realise
what was happening, merely set back their ears and quickened their pace.
Boxer's face did not reappear at the window. Too late, someone thought of
racing ahead and shutting the five-barred gate; but in another moment the
van was through it and rapidly disappearing down the road. Boxer was never
seen again.

Three days later it was announced that he had died in the hospital at
Willingdon, in spite of receiving every attention a horse could have.
Squealer came to announce the news to the others. He had, he said, been
present during Boxer's last hours.

"It was the most affecting sight I have ever seen!" said Squealer, lifting
his trotter and wiping away a tear. "I was at his bedside at the very
last. And at the end, almost too weak to speak, he whispered in my ear
that his sole sorrow was to have passed on before the windmill was
finished. 'Forward, comrades!' he whispered. 'Forward in the name of the
Rebellion. Long live Animal Farm! Long live Comrade Napoleon! Napoleon is
always right.' Those were his very last words, comrades."

Here Squealer's demeanour suddenly changed. He fell silent for a moment,
and his little eyes darted suspicious glances from side to side before he
proceeded.

It had come to his knowledge, he said, that a foolish and wicked rumour
had been circulated at the time of Boxer's removal. Some of the animals
had noticed that the van which took Boxer away was marked "Horse
Slaughterer," and had actually jumped to the conclusion that Boxer was
being sent to the knacker's. It was almost unbelievable, said Squealer,
that any animal could be so stupid. Surely, he cried indignantly, whisking
his tail and skipping from side to side, surely they knew their beloved
Leader, Comrade Napoleon, better than that? But the explanation was really
very simple. The van had previously been the property of the knacker, and
had been bought by the veterinary surgeon, who had not yet painted the old
name out. That was how the mistake had arisen.

The animals were enormously relieved to hear this. And when Squealer went
on to give further graphic details of Boxer's death-bed, the admirable
care he had received, and the expensive medicines for which Napoleon had
paid without a thought as to the cost, their last doubts disappeared and
the sorrow that they felt for their comrade's death was tempered by the
thought that at least he had died happy.

Napoleon himself appeared at the meeting on the following Sunday morning
and pronounced a short oration in Boxer's honour. It had not been
possible, he said, to bring back their lamented comrade's remains for
interment on the farm, but he had ordered a large wreath to be made from
the laurels in the farmhouse garden and sent down to be placed on Boxer's
grave. And in a few days' time the pigs intended to hold a memorial
banquet in Boxer's honour. Napoleon ended his speech with a reminder of
Boxer's two favourite maxims, "I will work harder" and "Comrade Napoleon
is always right"--maxims, he said, which every animal would do well to
adopt as his own.

On the day appointed for the banquet, a grocer's van drove up from
Willingdon and delivered a large wooden crate at the farmhouse. That night
there was the sound of uproarious singing, which was followed by what
sounded like a violent quarrel and ended at about eleven o'clock with a
tremendous crash of glass. No one stirred in the farmhouse before noon on
the following day, and the word went round that from somewhere or other
the pigs had acquired the money to buy themselves another case of whisky.




Chapter X



Years passed. The seasons came and went, the short animal lives fled by.
A time came when there was no one who remembered the old days before the
Rebellion, except Clover, Benjamin, Moses the raven, and a number of the
pigs.

Muriel was dead; Bluebell, Jessie, and Pincher were dead. Jones too was
dead--he had died in an inebriates' home in another part of the country.
Snowball was forgotten. Boxer was forgotten, except by the few who had
known him. Clover was an old stout mare now, stiff in the joints and with
a tendency to rheumy eyes. She was two years past the retiring age, but in
fact no animal had ever actually retired. The talk of setting aside a
corner of the pasture for superannuated animals had long since been
dropped. Napoleon was now a mature boar of twenty-four stone. Squealer was
so fat that he could with difficulty see out of his eyes. Only old
Benjamin was much the same as ever, except for being a little greyer about
the muzzle, and, since Boxer's death, more morose and taciturn than ever.

There were many more creatures on the farm now, though the increase was
not so great as had been expected in earlier years. Many animals had been
born to whom the Rebellion was only a dim tradition, passed on by word of
mouth, and others had been bought who had never heard mention of such a
thing before their arrival. The farm possessed three horses now besides
Clover. They were fine upstanding beasts, willing workers and good
comrades, but very stupid. None of them proved able to learn the alphabet
beyond the letter B. They accepted everything that they were told about
the Rebellion and the principles of Animalism, especially from Clover, for
whom they had an almost filial respect; but it was doubtful whether they
understood very much of it.

The farm was more prosperous now, and better organised: it had even been
enlarged by two fields which had been bought from Mr. Pilkington. The
windmill had been successfully completed at last, and the farm possessed a
threshing machine and a hay elevator of its own, and various new buildings
had been added to it. Whymper had bought himself a dogcart. The windmill,
however, had not after all been used for generating electrical power. It
was used for milling corn, and brought in a handsome money profit. The
animals were hard at work building yet another windmill; when that one was
finished, so it was said, the dynamos would be installed. But the luxuries
of which Snowball had once taught the animals to dream, the stalls with
electric light and hot and cold water, and the three-day week, were no
longer talked about. Napoleon had denounced such ideas as contrary to the
spirit of Animalism. The truest happiness, he said, lay in working hard
and living frugally.

Somehow it seemed as though the farm had grown richer without making the
animals themselves any richer-except, of course, for the pigs and the
dogs. Perhaps this was partly because there were so many pigs and so many
dogs. It was not that these creatures did not work, after their fashion.
There was, as Squealer was never tired of explaining, endless work in the
supervision and organisation of the farm. Much of this work was of a kind
that the other animals were too ignorant to understand. For example,
Squealer told them that the pigs had to expend enormous labours every day
upon mysterious things called "files," "reports," "minutes," and
"memoranda". These were large sheets of paper which had to be closely
covered with writing, and as soon as they were so covered, they were burnt
in the furnace. This was of the highest importance for the welfare of the
farm, Squealer said. But still, neither pigs nor dogs produced any food by
their own labour; and there were very many of them, and their appetites
were always good.

As for the others, their life, so far as they knew, was as it had always
been. They were generally hungry, they slept on straw, they drank from the
pool, they laboured in the fields; in winter they were troubled by the
cold, and in summer by the flies. Sometimes the older ones among them
racked their dim memories and tried to determine whether in the early
days of the Rebellion, when Jones's expulsion was still recent, things had
been better or worse than now. They could not remember. There was nothing
with which they could compare their present lives: they had nothing to go
upon except Squealer's lists of figures, which invariably demonstrated
that everything was getting better and better. The animals found the
problem insoluble; in any case, they had little time for speculating on
such things now. Only old Benjamin professed to remember every detail of
his long life and to know that things never had been, nor ever could be
much better or much worse--hunger, hardship, and disappointment being, so
he said, the unalterable law of life.

And yet the animals never gave up hope. More, they never lost, even for an
instant, their sense of honour and privilege in being members of Animal
Farm. They were still the only farm in the whole county--in all
England!--owned and operated by animals. Not one of them, not even the
youngest, not even the newcomers who had been brought from farms ten or
twenty miles away, ever ceased to marvel at that. And when they heard the
gun booming and saw the green flag fluttering at the masthead, their
hearts swelled with imperishable pride, and the talk turned always towards
the old heroic days, the expulsion of Jones, the writing of the Seven
Commandments, the great battles in which the human invaders had been
defeated. None of the old dreams had been abandoned. The Republic of the
Animals which Major had foretold, when the green fields of England should
be untrodden by human feet, was still believed in. Some day it was coming:
it might not be soon, it might not be with in the lifetime of any animal
now living, but still it was coming. Even the tune of 'Beasts of England'
was perhaps hummed secretly here and there: at any rate, it was a fact
that every animal on the farm knew it, though no one would have dared to
sing it aloud. It might be that their lives were hard and that not all of
their hopes had been fulfilled; but they were conscious that they were not
as other animals. If they went hungry, it was not from feeding tyrannical
human beings; if they worked hard, at least they worked for themselves.
No creature among them went upon two legs. No creature called any other
creature "Master." All animals were equal.

One day in early summer Squealer ordered the sheep to follow him, and led
them out to a piece of waste ground at the other end of the farm, which
had become overgrown with birch saplings. The sheep spent the whole day
there browsing at the leaves under Squealer's supervision. In the evening
he returned to the farmhouse himself, but, as it was warm weather, told
the sheep to stay where they were. It ended by their remaining there for a
whole week, during which time the other animals saw nothing of them.
Squealer was with them for the greater part of every day. He was, he said,
teaching them to sing a new song, for which privacy was needed.

It was just after the sheep had returned, on a pleasant evening when the
animals had finished work and were making their way back to the farm
buildings, that the terrified neighing of a horse sounded from the yard.
Startled, the animals stopped in their tracks. It was Clover's voice. She
neighed again, and all the animals broke into a gallop and rushed into the
yard. Then they saw what Clover had seen.

It was a pig walking on his hind legs.

Yes, it was Squealer. A little awkwardly, as though not quite used to
supporting his considerable bulk in that position, but with perfect
balance, he was strolling across the yard. And a moment later, out from
the door of the farmhouse came a long file of pigs, all walking on their
hind legs. Some did it better than others, one or two were even a trifle
unsteady and looked as though they would have liked the support of a
stick, but every one of them made his way right round the yard
successfully. And finally there was a tremendous baying of dogs and a
shrill crowing from the black cockerel, and out came Napoleon himself,
majestically upright, casting haughty glances from side to side, and with
his dogs gambolling round him.

He carried a whip in his trotter.

There was a deadly silence. Amazed, terrified, huddling together, the
animals watched the long line of pigs march slowly round the yard. It was
as though the world had turned upside-down. Then there came a moment when
the first shock had worn off and when, in spite of everything-in spite of
their terror of the dogs, and of the habit, developed through long years,
of never complaining, never criticising, no matter what happened--they
might have uttered some word of protest. But just at that moment, as
though at a signal, all the sheep burst out into a tremendous bleating of--

"Four legs good, two legs BETTER! Four legs good, two legs BETTER! Four
legs good, two legs BETTER!"

It went on for five minutes without stopping. And by the time the sheep
had quieted down, the chance to utter any protest had passed, for the pigs
had marched back into the farmhouse.

Benjamin felt a nose nuzzling at his shoulder. He looked round. It was
Clover. Her old eyes looked dimmer than ever. Without saying anything, she
tugged gently at his mane and led him round to the end of the big barn,
where the Seven Commandments were written. For a minute or two they stood
gazing at the tatted wall with its white lettering.

"My sight is failing," she said finally. "Even when I was young I could
not have read what was written there. But it appears to me that that wall
looks different. Are the Seven Commandments the same as they used to be,
Benjamin?"

For once Benjamin consented to break his rule, and he read out to her what
was written on the wall. There was nothing there now except a single
Commandment. It ran:

ALL ANIMALS ARE EQUAL
BUT SOME ANIMALS ARE MORE EQUAL THAN OTHERS

After that it did not seem strange when next day the pigs who were
supervising the work of the farm all carried whips in their trotters. It
did not seem strange to learn that the pigs had bought themselves a
wireless set, were arranging to install a telephone, and had taken out
subscriptions to 'John Bull', 'Tit-Bits', and the 'Daily Mirror'. It did
not seem strange when Napoleon was seen strolling in the farmhouse garden
with a pipe in his mouth--no, not even when the pigs took Mr. Jones's
clothes out of the wardrobes and put them on, Napoleon himself appearing
in a black coat, ratcatcher breeches, and leather leggings, while his
favourite sow appeared in the watered silk dress which Mrs. Jones had been
used to wearing on Sundays.

A week later, in the afternoon, a number of dog-carts drove up to the farm.
A deputation of neighbouring farmers had been invited to make a tour of
inspection. They were shown all over the farm, and expressed great
admiration for everything they saw, especially the windmill. The animals
were weeding the turnip field. They worked diligently hardly raising their
faces from the ground, and not knowing whether to be more frightened of
the pigs or of the human visitors.

That evening loud laughter and bursts of singing came from the farmhouse.
And suddenly, at the sound of the mingled voices, the animals were
stricken with curiosity. What could be happening in there, now that for
the first time animals and human beings were meeting on terms of equality?
With one accord they began to creep as quietly as possible into the
farmhouse garden.

At the gate they paused, half frightened to go on but Clover led the way
in. They tiptoed up to the house, and such animals as were tall enough
peered in at the dining-room window. There, round the long table, sat half
a dozen farmers and half a dozen of the more eminent pigs, Napoleon
himself occupying the seat of honour at the head of the table. The pigs
appeared completely at ease in their chairs. The company had been enjoying
a game of cards but had broken off for the moment, evidently in order to
drink a toast. A large jug was circulating, and the mugs were being
refilled with beer. No one noticed the wondering faces of the animals that
gazed in at the window.

Mr. Pilkington, of Foxwood, had stood up, his mug in his hand. In a
moment, he said, he would ask the present company to drink a toast. But
before doing so, there were a few words that he felt it incumbent upon him
to say.

It was a source of great satisfaction to him, he said--and, he was sure,
to all others present--to feel that a long period of mistrust and
misunderstanding had now come to an end. There had been a time--not that
he, or any of the present company, had shared such sentiments--but there
had been a time when the respected proprietors of Animal Farm had been
regarded, he would not say with hostility, but perhaps with a certain
measure of misgiving, by their human neighbours. Unfortunate incidents had
occurred, mistaken ideas had been current. It had been felt that the
existence of a farm owned and operated by pigs was somehow abnormal and
was liable to have an unsettling effect in the neighbourhood. Too many
farmers had assumed, without due enquiry, that on such a farm a spirit of
licence and indiscipline would prevail. They had been nervous about the
effects upon their own animals, or even upon their human employees. But
all such doubts were now dispelled. Today he and his friends had visited
Animal Farm and inspected every inch of it with their own eyes, and what
did they find? Not only the most up-to-date methods, but a discipline and
an orderliness which should be an example to all farmers everywhere. He
believed that he was right in saying that the lower animals on Animal Farm
did more work and received less food than any animals in the county.
Indeed, he and his fellow-visitors today had observed many features which
they intended to introduce on their own farms immediately.

He would end his remarks, he said, by emphasising once again the friendly
feelings that subsisted, and ought to subsist, between Animal Farm and its
neighbours. Between pigs and human beings there was not, and there need
not be, any clash of interests whatever. Their struggles and their
difficulties were one. Was not the labour problem the same everywhere?
Here it became apparent that Mr. Pilkington was about to spring some
carefully prepared witticism on the company, but for a moment he was too
overcome by amusement to be able to utter it. After much choking, during
which his various chins turned purple, he managed to get it out: "If you
have your lower animals to contend with," he said, "we have our lower
classes!" This BON MOT set the table in a roar; and Mr. Pilkington once
again congratulated the pigs on the low rations, the long working hours,
and the general absence of pampering which he had observed on Animal Farm.

And now, he said finally, he would ask the company to rise to their feet
and make certain that their glasses were full. "Gentlemen," concluded
Mr. Pilkington, "gentlemen, I give you a toast: To the prosperity of
Animal Farm!"

There was enthusiastic cheering and stamping of feet. Napoleon was so
gratified that he left his place and came round the table to clink his
mug against Mr. Pilkington's before emptying it. When the cheering had
died down, Napoleon, who had remained on his feet, intimated that he too
had a few words to say.

Like all of Napoleon's speeches, it was short and to the point. He too,
he said, was happy that the period of misunderstanding was at an end. For
a long time there had been rumours--circulated, he had reason to think,
by some malignant enemy--that there was something subversive and even
revolutionary in the outlook of himself and his colleagues. They had been
credited with attempting to stir up rebellion among the animals on
neighbouring farms. Nothing could be further from the truth! Their sole
wish, now and in the past, was to live at peace and in normal business
relations with their neighbours. This farm which he had the honour to
control, he added, was a co-operative enterprise. The title-deeds, which
were in his own possession, were owned by the pigs jointly.

He did not believe, he said, that any of the old suspicions still
lingered, but certain changes had been made recently in the routine of the
farm which should have the effect of promoting confidence still further.
Hitherto the animals on the farm had had a rather foolish custom of
addressing one another as "Comrade." This was to be suppressed. There had
also been a very strange custom, whose origin was unknown, of marching
every Sunday morning past a boar's skull which was nailed to a post in the
garden. This, too, would be suppressed, and the skull had already been
buried. His visitors might have observed, too, the green flag which flew
from the masthead. If so, they would perhaps have noted that the white
hoof and horn with which it had previously been marked had now been
removed. It would be a plain green flag from now onwards.

He had only one criticism, he said, to make of Mr. Pilkington's excellent
and neighbourly speech. Mr. Pilkington had referred throughout to
"Animal Farm." He could not of course know--for he, Napoleon, was only
now for the first time announcing it--that the name "Animal Farm"
had been abolished. Henceforward the farm was to be known as "The Manor
Farm"--which, he believed, was its correct and original name.

"Gentlemen," concluded Napoleon, "I will give you the same toast as
before, but in a different form. Fill your glasses to the brim. Gentlemen,
here is my toast: To the prosperity of The Manor Farm!"

There was the same hearty cheering as before, and the mugs were emptied to
the dregs. But as the animals outside gazed at the scene, it seemed to
them that some strange thing was happening. What was it that had altered
in the faces of the pigs? Clover's old dim eyes flitted from one face to
another. Some of them had five chins, some had four, some had three. But
what was it that seemed to be melting and changing? Then, the applause
having come to an end, the company took up their cards and continued the
game that had been interrupted, and the animals crept silently away.

But they had not gone twenty yards when they stopped short. An uproar of
voices was coming from the farmhouse. They rushed back and looked through
the window again. Yes, a violent quarrel was in progress. There were
shoutings, bangings on the table, sharp suspicious glances, furious
denials. The source of the trouble appeared to be that Napoleon and
Mr. Pilkington had each played an ace of spades simultaneously.

Twelve voices were shouting in anger, and they were all alike. No question,
now, what had happened to the faces of the pigs. The creatures outside
looked from pig to man, and from man to pig, and from pig to man again;
but already it was impossible to say which was which.


November 1943-February 1944

THE END